=== CASE 9738985 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:06:49.976679+00 ===

Griffin, J.
(concurring in part and dissenting in part). I concur that plaintiff’s claim is not preempted by the National Labor Relations Act. Since the majority concludes that remand is required, I join in the observation that to the extent that plaintiffs claim is based upon "legitimate expectations grounded in an employer’s written policy statements,”1 guidelines for resolution are provided by In re Certified Question, Bankey v Storer Broadcasting, 432 Mich 438; 443 NW2d 112 (1989), also decided today. However, I disagree with the majority’s conclusion that summary disposition would be premature on the basis of this record.
Plaintiffs claim of a termination-for-cause agree*511ment hangs on his assertion that at the time of hire he was orally promised "a lifetime job as long as he did not steal.”
I conclude that it simply is not reasonable to construe such an assertion as an enforceable agreement to discharge only for cause. Subjective expectancies of continued employment do not constitute a termination-for-cause contract under Toussaint, and plaintiffs claim should fail as a matter of law.
i
It is still the general rule that employment for an indefinite term is presumed to be terminable at the will of either party.
Contracts for permanent employment or for life have been construed by the courts on many occasions. In general it may be said that in the absence of distinguishing features or provisions or a consideration in addition to the services to be rendered, such contracts are indefinite hirings, terminable at the will of either party. [Lynas v Maxwell Farms, 279 Mich 684, 687; 273 NW 315 (1937).]
See also anno: Right to discharge allegedly "at-will” employee as affected by employer’s promulgation of employment policies as to discharge, 33 ALR4th 120. The underlying rationale for this rule is that "[b]ecause the parties began with complete freedom, the court will presume that they intended to obligate themselves to a relationship at will.” Toussaint v Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Michigan, 408 Mich 579, 600; 292 NW2d 880 (198Q).2 (Emphasis added.)
*512In Michigan, however, this general rule has been in danger of being swallowed up by the "narrow exception” carved out and announced by this Court in Toussaint. In that case the Court held:
(1) a provision of an employment contract providing that an employee shall not be discharged except for cause is legally enforceable although the contract is not for a definite term—the term is "indefinite,” and
(2) such a provision may become part of the contract either by express agreement, oral or written, or as a result of an employee’s legitimate expectations grounded in an employer’s policy statements. [Id. at 598.]
The Toussaint decision neither vitiated the employment-at-will presumption nor did it create new or special rights. As explained in Valentine v General American Credit, Inc, 420 Mich 256, 258-259; 362 NW2d 628 (1984),
Toussaint makes employment contracts which provide that an employee will not be dismissed except for cause enforceable in the same manner as other contracts. It did not recognize employment as a fundamental right or create a new *513"special” right. The only right held in Toussaint to be enforceable was the right that arose out of the promise not to terminate except for cause.
Employers and employees remain free to provide, or not to provide, for job security. Absent a contractual provision for job security, either the employer or the employee may ordinarily terminate an employment contract at any time for any, or no, reason. The obligation that gave rise to this action is based on the agreement of the parties; it is not an obligation imposed on the employer by law. [Emphasis added.]
At one point the Toussaint Court emphasized the limits of its ruling:
We hold only that an employer’s express agreement to terminate only for cause, or statements of company policy and procedure to that effect, can give rise to rights enforceable in contract. [Toussaint, supra, at 610. Emphasis supplied.]
However, it cannot be denied that Toussaint pushed heavily against and through the boundaries of employment contract law with such language as:
It is enough that the employer chooses, presumably in its own interest, to create an environment in which the employee believes that, whatever the personnel policies and practices, they are established and official at any given time, purport to be fair, and are applied consistently and uniformly to each employee. The employer has then created a situation "instinct with an obligation.”
We hold that employer statements of policy . . . can give rise to contractual rights in employees without evidence that the parties mutually agreed that the policy statements would create contractual rights in the employee, and, hence, although *514the statement of policy is signed by neither party, can be unilaterally amended by the employer without notice to the employee, and contains no reference to a specific employee, his job description or compensation, and although no reference was made to the policy statement in preemployment interviews and the employee does not learn of its existence until after his hiring. [Id., pp 613, 614-615.]
When mutual assent is replaced by the "expectations” of one party as the measure of contract viability, an invitation to litigate is heralded, loud and clear. We need look only at the stampede to the courts which has followed in the wake of Toussaint to realize, nine years later, that some lines of reasonable limitation must be drawn. A reasonable limit was recognized today in In re Certified Question with the holding that a termination-for-cause policy set forth in a manual may be changed, even though the employer had not expressly reserved the right to do so.
The case at hand presents a further important opportunity to provide reasonable definition for what has come to be known as the Toussaint doctrine. Plaintiff claims to have an employment contract for the rest of his life, on the basis of an oral statement allegedly made at hiring that he would "have a lifetime job as long as he did not steal.” Plaintiff contends that a jury should now be allowed to decide whether such a purported assurance gave rise to an enforceable contract terminable only for the single cause of thievery.
To be sure, in some situations lower courts and federal courts have held that rather general statements may go to the jury as the basis of a termination-for-cause contract. See, e.g., Cowdrey v AT Transport, 141 Mich App 617; 367 NW2d 433 (1985) (the employee testified that he was promised *515that he "would never have to worry” as long as he did his job), Hetes v Schefman & Miller Law Office, 152 Mich App 117, 119; 393 NW2d 577 (1986) (the employee would "[have] a job as long as [she] did a good job”), Walker v Consumers Power Co, 824 F2d 499, 503 (CA 6, 1987) (the employer promised that the employee would not be fired as long as he "performed adequately” and "did a good performance on [his] job”), and Ritchie v Michigan Consolidated Gas Co, 163 Mich App 358; 413 NW2d 796 (1987).
However, other courts have held, sensibly, that not all oral assurances merit jury consideration. In Broussard v Caci, Inc, 780 F2d 162, 163 (CA 1, 1986), the court distinguished between "puffery and promise”:
Employment negotiations resulting in employment are by definition conducted in an atmosphere of optimism and mutual hope. The air is redolent with expectation of duration on the part of the employee and of satisfactory performance by the employer. But to equate general expressions of hope for a long relationship with an express promise to discharge only for good cause would effectively eliminate [the rule] . . . that contracts for indefinite employment are, without more, terminable at will.
Yet another court has made this distinction:
Since Toussaint, the Court has been faced with a number of cases where the plaintiff has claimed a Toussaint contractual obligation arising out of the employer’s hiring agent telling plaintiff at the time of employment that plaintiff could be employed "as long as he did the job” or similar expressions such as "as long as there is work to do,” "as long as your work is satisfactory,” "as long as you want,” etc. When you examine these *516statements, each, standing alone, simply does not constitute a contract or agreement with any specific duration. Each was clearly within the policy of the Lynas case where an employment agreement for an indefinite term such as each of these was held to be an employment at will. After all Lynas as well as reality compels recognition of the fact that neither party to the beginning of an employment relationship expects it to be unsatisfactory, and both hope it will have a significant duration. This hope and noncontractual wish is expressed in terms of language such as "as long as you do the job.” Hence, the Toussaint exception to Lynas must mean more than merely this language. While it is true that as the economy and society change, we can expect employment durational rules will be altered. That was probably the basis for the specific recognition in Toussaint that the employer will be held accountable for allowing a hiree to reasonably believe that there was a specific durational term to the employment; but it must be based on more than the expression of an optimistic hope of a long relationship. [Carpenter v American Excelsior Co, 650 F Supp 933, 936, n 6 (ED Mich, 1987).]
Such an admonition is warranted. Caution should be exercised in judging the viability of a breach of contract action based solely on an alleged oral representation recalled with remarkable specificity long years after the time of hiring.
The present case presents an intriguing example. Plaintiff claims a "lifetime job ... as long as he did not steal.” If we take the employer at his word, this precatory phrase sets forth an inherently indefinite term of employment (a lifetime); yet it simultaneously provides for discharge only for a single cause (thievery). As plaintiff would have it, he could be inefficient, absent, tardy, slovenly, reckless, nonproductive and even violent —to mention only a few undesirable traits; how*517ever, he could not be terminated unless he committed the one cognizable cause for ending the relationship—stealing.
Surely, a modicum of realism and common sense is needed. An assurance such as that alleged in the instant case simply cannot be separated from the realities of the working world. It should be recognized that "lifetime” employment contracts are extraordinary and, being so, "must be expressed in clear and unequivocal terms before a court will conclude that an employer intended to enter into such a weighty obligation.” Chastain v Kelly-Springfield Tire Co, 733 F2d 1479, 1484 (CA 11, 1984). See also Naz Agency, Inc v US Fidelity & Guaranty Co, 277 F2d 640, 641 (CA 6, 1960). Otherwise stated, "A casual remark made at a meeting, a phrase plucked out of context, is too fragile a base on which to rest such a heavy obligation inherent in such a contract.” Brown v Safeway Stores, Inc, 190 F Supp 295, 299-300 (ED NY, 1960).
Whether or not Bullock carried a subjective expectancy that he would work for this employer for the rest of his life, it is difficult to believe that any reasonable person would rely on such an oral assurance as the basis of an interminable employment contract "as long as he did not steal.” I would hold that the allegations put forth in the instant case are insufficient as a matter of law to provide the basis for an employment contract that is not terminable at will.
Furthermore, the rule of construction set forth in Lynas, which is preserved by Toussaint,3 provides that a lifetime employment contract, even if agreed to, is generally construed as an indefinite hiring, terminable at the will of either party, in *518the absence of distinguishing features or special consideration in addition to the services to be rendered. I am compelled to disagree with a suggestion in the majority opinion that special consideration sufficient to satisfy Lynas might exist in the instant case. Ante, p 482, n 9. As I read the pleadings, plaintiff does not aver that any particular benefit inured to the defendant, or that any particular hardship was incurred by plaintiff, distinguishable from that expected from the normal performance of all commissioned salespersons.
Accordingly, in conformity with Lynas, the motion for summary disposition should have been granted.
n
Although the majority opinion appropriately focuses only upon plaintiff’s claim of wrongful discharge, ante, p 477, n 5, plaintiff’s complaint includes claims that reach into other areas of the employment relationship. For example, he contends that he was orally assured at hiring that he "would work as a commission salesman for Defendant and enjoy the benefits of a seven (7%) percent commission for sales . . . ,” and that "if he worked hard and built up his 'book of business,’ he would be able to earn large sums of money . . . and could enjoy his later working years . . . .”
I address these ancillary claims for the purpose of explaining why they also fail as a matter of law, and to emphasize that the Toussaint rationale has been confined by this Court to claims of wrongful discharge.
Plaintiff began his employment with defendant in 1968. Ten years later, in 1978, defendant changed the method by which it compensated sales personnel, replacing the straight seven percent *519commission with a "unit compensation plan,” whereby sales representatives were paid commissions calculated as a specified dollar amount, rather than as a percentage of the insurance premiums. This change in the method of compensation applied across the board to all of aaa’s commission sales representatives, and not just to plaintiff. Plaintiff continued to work for nearly four years thereafter, and was compensated under the new plan until he was terminated as a sales representative in 1982.
Plaintiff now complains that by modifying its method of compensation in 1978, and by instituting production standards in 1981, defendant breached an oral contract purportedly entered into when he was hired. Specifically, plaintiff alleges that defendant "breached said promises and changed its policies without advising Plaintiff when Plaintiff came into the employ of Defendant that Defendant was reserving the right to do so 99
Of course, a promise to pay commissions on sales actually made is enforceable, even when the underlying agreement is for an indefinite duration. Reed v Kurdziel, 352 Mich 287, 295; 89 NW2d 479 (1958). Depending on the terms agreed upon, commissions on sales originally procured could continue to accrue even after an employee is terminated. Accordingly, plaintiff might have a valid claim concerning defendant’s obligation to pay commissions accruing from the book of business established by the plaintiff prior to defendant’s change in the method of compensating its sales staff. However, the assertions in plaintiffs complaint do not support a claim that defendant abrogated its managerial prerogatives to modify the method of compensating its sales personnel.
An employer’s intention to give up permanently *520a right so fundamental as the ability to make changes in its method of compensation is not to be lightly inferred. In his complaint, plaintiff reveals that the assurances on which he relies were expressed in terms of a company policy "which had been in effect for many years.” There was no express statement that the policy would continue for a fixed period of time or that the policy could not be changed in the future.
Furthermore, there is no basis for an inference that the compensation method in effect at hire would forever remain unchanged. On the contrary, the fact that policies set out in distributed manuals were later modified rebuts such an inference.
Since I would conclude under part i that plaintiff was an employee at will, it logically follows that the right of an employer to terminate the relationship "necessarily includes the right to insist upon changes in the compensation arrangements as a condition of continued employment.” Green v Edward J Bettinger Co, 608 F Supp 35, 42 (ED Pa, 1984), afFd 791 F2d 917 (1986), cert den 479 US 1069 (1987). Thus, an employee in a termination-at-will relationship, once informed of a change in compensation rates, can either accept the new rates or exercise his own right to terminate the relationship. Hathaway v General Mills, Inc, 711 SW2d 227 (Tex, 1986); Facelli v Southeast Marketing Co, 327 SE2d 338 (SC, 1985). If an employee continues to work with knowledge of the changes, he impliedly accepts the modification. Hathaway, supra; Alhrant v Sterling Furniture Co, 85 Or App 272; 736 P2d 201 (1987).
Surely, where an employee continues to work under a revised compensation system for nearly *521four years, as in the case at bar, acceptance by the employee should be implied as a matter of law.4
Furthermore, In re Certified Question, supra, decided today, supports the proposition that an employer may unilaterally make such a policy change although the right to do so has not been expressly reserved. If even a just-cause termination policy can be modified or revoked, surely policies of lesser import may also be changed.
It is noteworthy that during a period of more than nine years since Toussaint, its rationale has been confined by this Court to claims of wrongful discharge. The point was reiterated in Valentine, supra, p 258, where this Court stated: "[t]he only right held in Toussaint to be enforceable was the right that arose out of the promise not to terminate except for cause.”
Our lower courts, whose experience with Toussaint-based claims is extensive, have shown understandable reluctance to extend Toussaint beyond wrongful discharge disputes. For example, see Dyer v Dep’t of State Police, 119 Mich App 121; 326 NW2d 447 (1982) (rejecting the plaintiffs’ claim that department policy and practice had given rise to a contractual right to nonduty use of state vehicles, on the basis that rights and duties of the parties relative to vehicle use were not regulated by implications), and Engquist v Livingston Co, 139 Mich App 280; 361 NW2d 794 (1984) (rejecting the plaintiffs claim that a fourteen-year history of step increases had given rise to a Toussaint-based entitlement to step increases).
Even if it can be said that policy considerations were sufficient to justify the Toussaint intervention to protect job security, it is difficult to imagine the scope of difficulties and mischief that would be *522encountered if Toussaint were to be extended beyond wrongful discharge into every facet of the employment relationship. Particularly in light of the enormous potential cost to the system that such an extension would entail, including damage to the delicate balance of the employee-employer relationship, I take this occasion to express the view that it would be prudent and wise to leave to the Legislature the public policy decision whether, or to what extent, Toussaint should be extended beyond wrongful discharge.
iii
Defendant has argued in this Court that plaintiffs claim of lifetime employment based on an oral promise should be barred as in violation of the Michigan statute of frauds.5 Because Bullock’s assertion of a "lifetime contract” is exactly the sort of promise that courts should generally decline to enforce unless it is in writing, I feel compelled to make the following observations.
It is one of the curiosities of the common law that contracts for permanent or lifetime employment have been held to fall outside the scope of the statute of frauds. On its face the statute appears to require that promises contemplating long-term commitments, such as that alleged in the instant case, be validated by written evidence in order to be enforceable:
In the following cases an agreement, contract or promise shall be void, unless that agreement, contract, or promise, or a note or memorandum thereof is in writing and signed by the party to be charged therewith, or by a person authorized by him:
*523(a) An agreement that, by its terms, is not to be performed within 1 year from the making thereof. [MCL 566.132(a); MSA 26.922(a). Emphasis supplied.]
Since enactment of the original English statute in 1676,6 however, courts have chafed under its restrictions.7 The undisputed trend of authority has been to interpret the "one year” provision as applying only to contracts that have no possibility of being completed within a year, even if the parties to the contract in fact contemplated a longer period.8 Michigan’s case law has followed that trend by applying the nonstatutory "capable of performance” exception to the one-year provision of the statute of frauds.9
Significantly, the primary reason used to explain the result in the case of an oral contract for permanent or lifetime employment is that such contracts are terminable at will. See, for example, Sax v Detroit, G H & M R Co, 125 Mich 252, 255-256; 84 NW 314 (1900). This rationale was typified in Adolph v Cookware Co of America, 283 Mich 561, 568; 278 NW 687 (1938):
Plaintiffs proofs, taken as true, showed a contract for permanent employment. Such a contract is for an indefinite period and, unless for a consid*524eration other than promise of services, the employment was terminable at the will of either party. Lynas v Maxwell Farms, 279 Mich 684, and cases there cited.
Prior to Toussaint, the implications of such an interpretation were not ominous. Although an employment contract for an indefinite period fell outside the statute of frauds, the well-established termination-at-will doctrine had the counter-balancing effect of providing protection from fraudulent allegations of oral promises.
It is not surprising that, faced with the problems of proof presented since Toussaint by erosion of the employment-at-will doctrine, some courts have begun to question the wisdom of exempting employment contracts from the requirement that they be in writing where it is clear that performance beyond a year is contemplated. See, for example, Molder v Southwestern Bell Telephone Co, 665 SW2d 175 (Tex App, 1983); Evans v Floor Distribution Co, 799 F2d 364 (CA 7, 1986); Hodge v Evans Financial, 262 US App DC 151, 163; 823 F2d 559 (1987) (MacKinnon, J., dissenting).
In Michigan, a trial court recently found that several wrongful discharge claims brought against the instant defendant, alleging promises virtually the same as Bullock’s, were barred by the statute of frauds. However, the Court of Appeals reversed, relying on the "capable of performance” exception as expressed in Adolph, supra, p 568. Dumas v Auto Club Ins Ass’n, 168 Mich App 619, 631; 425 NW2d 480 (1988).
In California, an appellate court has recognized that the statute of frauds issue can no longer be routinely avoided given recent developments in employment law:
The traditional view is that such a contract could conceivably be performed within one year by termination of the employment agreement by one *525party or the other. Since such an employment agreement has long been interpreted as being for an indefinite period, it is terminable at will by either party. . . .
Appellant alleges that respondent did not have the option of terminating him at will without good cause. . . .
Appellant cannot have it both ways. Either his employment relationship was a contract in which both parties had equal rights to terminate at will (in which case it was not in violation of the statute of frauds), or it was a contract where the employer did not have the right to terminate at will, and there was a reasonable expectation of employment for more than one year (in which case the statute of frauds does apply, barring this action). [Newfield v Ins Co of the West, 156 Cal App 3d 440, 446; 203 Cal Rptr 9 (1984). Emphasis supplied.][10]
The statute of frauds "reflects a judgment that parol evidence of certain types of agreements is so inherently suspect that it should not even be presented to a jury, an institution otherwise generally considered capable of distinguishing fact from invention.” Thompson v Stuckey, 300 SE2d 295, 298 (W Va, 1983).
The oral promise of a lifetime job alleged in this case by Bullock certainly falls within that category. As I see it, the time has come to revisit this antiquated interpretation of the statute of frauds which makes no sense in the post-Toussaint era. If this Court does not do so, it is hoped the Legislature will see the wisdom of making needed adjustments of the statute.
*526I would reverse the decision of the Appeals. Court of
Riley, C.J., concurred with Griffin, J.
Toussaint v Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Michigan, 408 Mich 579, 598; 292 NW2d 880 (1980).
Contracts at will are not the exception, but the rule, perhaps for the following reason:
*512The contract at will is also a sensible private adaptation to the problem of imperfect information over time. In sharp contrast to the purchase of standard goods, an inspection of the job before acceptance is far less likely to guarantee its quality thereafter. The future is not clearly known. More important, employees, like employers, know what they do not know. They are not faced with a bolt from the blue, with an "unknown unknown.” Rather they face a known unknown for which they can plan. The at-will contract is an essential part of that planning because it allows both sides to take a wait-and-see attitude to their relationship so that new and more accurate choices can be made on the strength of improved information. [Epstein, In defense of the contract at will, 51 U Chi L R 947, 969 (1984).]
Toussaint, supra at 596-597, 632.
Plaintiff does not contend that he was not fully compensated for services rendered.
MCL 566.132; MSA 26.922. The majority declines to address this issue since it was not raised at the trial level. Ante, p 481, n 8.
29 Car n, c 3. Comparisons between present time and the late seventeenth century should be made cautiously, if at all. Nevertheless, one scholar’s observation about the conditions which gave rise to the statute is so strikingly familiar that it demands reflection: "Litigation indeed came close to a form of sanctioned aggression, and it was an aggressive age.” Simpson, A History of the Common Law of Contract, p 599.
Farnsworth, Contracts, § 6.1, p 373.
Corbin, Contracts, § 446, pp 553-554.
The earliest Michigan case to apply the "capable of performance” exception appears to be Smalley v Mitchell, 110 Mich 650, 652; 68 NW 978 (1896). See also Toussaint, supra, p 612, n 24, and the cases cited therein.
The California Supreme Court in Foley v Interactive Data Corp, 47 Cal 3d 654; 254 Cal Rptr 211; 765 P2d 373 (1988), recently rejected the reasoning of Newfield and instead deferred to the majority approach by applying the "capable of performance” approach to the statute of frauds.

=== CASE 9739761 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:20:31.706197+00 ===

Cavanagh, C.J.
(concurring in part and dissenting in part). I concur with the majority’s conclusion that the trial court properly granted summary disposition with regard to the third-party beneficiary count. I write separately, however, because I dissent from the majority’s holding that the public works act1 imposes upon a contracting governmental unit the duty to verify the validity of payment bonds. Furthermore, I would hold that the trial judge properly granted the defendant’s motion for summary disposition with regard to the plaintiff’s negligence, unjust enrichment, and constructive trust claims.
I
The majority’s holding is contrary to the history of the public works act, the clear and unambiguous directives of the entire act, as well as federal case law interpreting similar legislation.
*192A
An early version of the public works act explicitly imposed a duty on a contracting governmental unit to require payment bonds:
When public buildings or other public works are about to be built, repaired or ornamented under contract at the expense of the State, or of any county, city, village, township or school district thereof, it shall be the duty of the board of officers or agents, contracting on behalf of the State, county, city, village, township or school district, to require sufficient security by bond for the payment by the contractor of all subcontractors and for the payment for all labor performed and materials furnished in the erection, repairing or ornamenting of such building or works. [1905 PA 187, § 1, MCL 570.101; MSA 26.321. Emphasis added.]
Accordingly, this Court held that a governmental unit is liable to subcontractors for damages incurred because of the government’s failure to require a payment bond for a public project. "[A] total failure to require such bond is such a breach of duty as authorizes an action by the party injured against members of the board or municipal body in their individual capacity.” Alpena v Title Guaranty & Surety Co, 158 Mich 678, 680; 123 NW 536 (1909). Smith v Hubbel, 142 Mich 637, 644-645; 106 NW 547 (1906).2
The statute, as presently enacted, however, does not impose a duty on a governmental unit:_
*193Before any contract, exceeding $50,000.00 for the construction, alteration, or repair of any public building or public work or improvement of the state or a county, city, village, township, school district, public educational institution, other political subdivision, public authority, or public agency hereinafter referred to as the "governmental unit,” is awarded, the proposed contractor, hereinafter referred to as the "principal contractor,” shall furnish at his or her own cost to the governmental unit a performance bond and a payment bond which shall become binding upon the award of the contract to the principal contractor. . . . [MCL 129.201; MSA 5.2321(1). Emphasis added.]
If the Legislature had not been concerned with alleviating the statutory duty imposed on a governmental unit contracting for a public project, then there would have been no need to remove the words imposing such a duty. While we are not privy to the Legislature’s reasons for excluding the language that imposed the duty, such a change facilitates the public policy favoring individual involvement in public service, while simultaneously providing a remedy for unpaid subcontractors.3 Regardless of the Legislature’s motives, the clear effect of the change is apparent:
[T]he mere fact that the legislature enacts an amendment indicates that it thereby intended to change the original act by creating a new right or withdrawing an existing one. Therefore, any material change in the language of the original act is presumed to indicate a change in legal rights. . . . This is a rule peculiar to amendments and other *194acts purporting to change the existing statutory law. [1A Sands, Sutherland Statutory Construction (4th ed), § 22.30, p 265.][4]
It is obvious that the Legislature was aware of the explicit statutory duty imposed on a governmental unit contracting for the construction or improvement of a public project. It is equally apparent that the Legislature was aware of this Court’s line of cases imposing the statutory mandate. Armed with this knowledge, the Legislature excluded the language from the public works act that imposed the duty on a governmental unit to require the necessary bonds. Accordingly, we must give effect to its action.
Furthermore, the clear language of the statute supports the conclusion that the statute no longer imposes a duty on a governmental unit to require a bond.4
5 The statute, as presently enacted, requires the general contractor to furnish to the governmental unit payment and performance bonds. The statute clearly and unambiguously delegates the duty to the general contractor, not the government unit. "If the language employed in a statute is plain, certain and unambiguous, a bare reading suffices and no interpretation is necessary.” Dussia *195v Monroe Co Employees Retirement System, 386 Mich 244, 248; 191 NW2d 307 (1971). "It is a cardinal rule that the legislature must be held to intend the meaning which it has plainly expressed, and in such cases there is no room for construction, or attempted interpretation to vary such meaning.” MacQueen v Port Huron City Comm, 194 Mich 328, 342; 160 NW 627 (1916). We cannot and should not impose a duty on a governmental unit absent an expressed statutory directive to do so.6 Knapp v Swaney, 56 Mich 345, 347; 23 NW 162 (1885). The majority’s imposition of such a duty is repugnant to traditional notions of governmental immunity. See Benson v State Hosp Comm, 316 Mich 66, 73; 25 NW2d 112 (1946).
B
The majority’s holding is also contrary to federal case law applying the federal counterpart of the public works act, the Miller Act.7 Federal precedent applying the Miller Act, while not controlling, is instructive because of the similarities between the two acts and because the Michigan statute is modeled after the Miller Act. Pi-Con, Inc v AJ Anderson Construction Co, 435 Mich 375, 381; 458 NW2d 639 (1990). In Arvanis v Noslo Engineering Consultants, Inc, 739 F2d 1287 (CA 7, 1984), the general contractor of a federal public works project failed to furnish a payment bond as *196required by the Miller Act.8 Subcontractors sought compensation from the government after the general contractor declared bankruptcy. The subcontractors, similar to the plaintiff at bar, claimed that the government was negligent in failing to require the general contractor to post a payment bond.
Realizing that a party cannot be liable in negligence absent a duty to act, the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit inquired into whether the Miller Act imposed a duty on the government to require a payment bond. The court, on the basis of the clear directives of the statute, answered unequivocally that it did not.
The statute requires only that contractors obtain performance and payment bonds. The statute places no affirmative obligation on the government, and says absolutely nothing about when the contractor fails to furnish the bond. The Act grants a very narrow and specific position: the right to sue on the bond (if there happens to be one) .... [Id. at 1290.]
While the court acknowledged that there was a gap in the statute, it recognized that it could provide no remedy — "especially in view of the very narrow remedy actually granted by the statute.”9 Id.
*197Similar to its federal counterpart, the public works act provides a narrow, specific remedy to subcontractors who supply labor and materials for public projects. "A claimant . . . may sue on the payment bond for the amount, or the balance thereof, unpaid at the time of institution of the civil action, prosecute such action to final" judgment for the sum justly due him and have execution thereon.” MCL 129.207; MSA 5.2321(7). The public works act does not place an affirmative obligation on a contracting governmental unit to either require or verify a valid payment bond.
Having found no statutory duty for governmental units to require or verify the validity of a payment bond, I would affirm the trial court’s holding that the plaintiff failed to state a cause of action in negligence.10
II
The majority holds that the trial court improperly dismissed the plaintiff’s claims of unjust enrichment and constructive trust. When reviewing orders granting a party’s motion for summary judgment, the Court must view the evidence in a light most favorable to the opposing party. If reasonable minds could disagree regarding the conclusions to be drawn from the facts, the order granting summary judgment must be reversed. If, however, reasonable minds could not disagree, the order of summary disposition must be affirmed. DiFranco v Pickard, 427 Mich 32, 54; 398 NW2d 896 (1986).
*198A
The plaintiff readily admits that neither an express contract nor a contract implied in fact between the plaintiff and the defendant existed. The plaintiff asks this Court, however, to imply a contract in law in order to prevent the defendant from being unjustly enriched to the detriment of the plaintiff.
When a party is unjustly enriched, the law generally requires the benefited party to provide restitution for the benefit received. Courts often employ the legal fiction of a contract implied in law or quasi contract to justify payment where no contract exists. Detroit v Highland Park, 326 Mich 78, 100; 39 NW2d 325 (1949). To recover under this theory the plaintiff must show that the defendant received a benefit from the plaintiff and that it would be unjust for the defendant to retain that benefit. Buell v Orion State Bank, 327 Mich 43, 56; 41 NW2d 472 (1950). We must be cautious in applying this doctrine, however, because the mere fact that a benefit has been conveyed does not necessarily indicate that it is unjust for the party to retain that benefit.
Even where a person has received a benefit from another, he is liable to pay therefor only if the circumstances of its receipt or retention are such that, as between the two persons, it is unjust for him to retain it. The mere fact that a person benefits another is not of itself sufficient to require the other to make restitution therefor. [Restatement Restitution, § 1, comment c, p 13.]
It is undisputed that the plaintiff bestowed a benefit to the defendant through the paving work completed on the project. However, it is not unjust *199for the defendant to retain the benefit because the defendant paid the entire contract amount. While it is true that the general contractor absconded with the contract funds and failed to compensate the plaintiff, this does not render unjust the benefit the defendant received. The defendant performed its obligations under the general contract by paying the entire contract price. The defendant cannot be held liable under an unjust enrichment theory for Dougherty’s failure to perform its obligations owed to the plaintiff under the subcontract.11
*200B
Similarly, the plaintiff’s request for the imposition of a constructive trust on the amount of the contract fund not paid to Dougherty must fail. Like a contract implied in law or quasi contract, a constructive trust is imposed as a remedy to prevent unjust enrichment.12
The constructive trust, as it was put by Mr. Justice Cardozo, "is the formula through which the conscience of equity finds expression. When property has been acquired in such circumstances that the holder of the legal title may not, in good conscience, retain the beneficial interest, equity converts him into a trustee.” [Kent v Klein, 352 Mich 652, 656; 91 NW2d 11 (1958). Citation omitted.]
The remedy of a constructive trust will be imposed when it is inequitable under the circumstances13 to allow one to retain property.
The plaintiff’s constructive trust theory must fail for the same reason the unjust enrichment claim failed: the defendant has not been unjustly *201enriched. Furthermore, the interpleader action renders this claim moot because the defendant is no longer in possession of the remaining contract funds. If the plaintiff claims error in the way the funds were distributed in the interpleader action or somehow alleges a greater priority than other subcontractors, then the plaintiff’s proper avenue of redress is to appeal the result of this inter-pleader action.14
III
The public works act does not impose a statutory duty on a contracting governmental unit to verify the validity of the payment bond furnished by a general contractor of a public works project. Absent a duty owed to the plaintiffs, the plaintiffs cannot maintain an action in negligence. Furthermore, the trial court properly dismissed the plaintiffs’ claims of unjust enrichment, constructive trust, and breach of contract to a third-party beneficiary.
Accordingly, I would affirm the judgment of the Court of Appeals.
Griffin, J., concurred with Cavanagh, C.J.
MCL 129.201 et seq.; MSA 5.2321(1) et seq.
See also Wells v West Bay City Bd of Ed, 78 Mich 260; 44 NW 267 (1889), Plummer v Kennedy, 72 Mich 295; 40 NW 433 (1888), and Owen v Hill, 67 Mich 43; 34 NW 649 (1887). Similarly, under an earlier version of the public works act, 1883 PA 94, this Court recognized the Legislature’s explicit command to impose a duty. "It will be noticed that the duty to require the bond is specifically imposed in all cases falling within the purview of the statute.” Owen at 46.
The subcontractor’s remedy is not illusory because the public works act provides a method under which the subcontractor can confirm the existence of the remedy. The subcontractor can verify the validity of the furnished payment bond after receiving a certified copy of the payment bond from the governmental unit pursuant to MCL 129.208; MSA 5.2321(8).
While the majority is correct that the former statute was repealed and 1963 PA 213 enacted in its place, the rules of statutory construction with regards to amendments are instructive because the new act deals with the identical subject matter as the former act.
[Statutes requiring payment bonds should be liberally construed as regards the classes of labor, materials, and supplies covered, and it has been held that liberal construction of the procedural provisions must be resorted to when necessary to effect that purpose. Notwithstanding the rule of liberal construction applied to some provisions of payment bond statutes, where there is explicit language that is clear and unambiguous, the statute must be applied and not interpreted. [17 Am Jur 2d, Contractors’ Bonds, § 55, p 789. Citations omitted.]
An examination of the entire statute supports this conclusion. The public works act explicitly states the duties imposed on a government unit: MCL 129.202; MSA 5.2321(2), "The performance bond shall be in an amount fixed by the government unit . . . .” MCL 129.203; MSA 5.2321(3), "The payment bond shall be in an amount fixed by the government unit . . . .” MCL 129.208; MSA 5.2321(8), "The agent in charge of the office of the governmental unit shall furnish to anyone making an application ... a certified copy of the bond.”
40 USC 270(a) et seq.
Before any contract, exceeding $25,000 in amount, for the construction, alteration, or repair of any public building or public work of the United States is awarded to any person, such person shall furnish to the United States the following bonds, which shall become binding upon the award of the contract to such person, who is hereinafter designated as "contractor.” [40 USC 270(a). Emphasis added.]
Accord United States v Smith, 324 F2d 622 (CA 5, 1963); United States v Tac Construction Co, Inc, 760 F Supp 590 (SD Miss, 1991); Shore Contractors, Inc v Heatherly, 70S F Supp 293 (ED Va, 1987); 4-Star Construction Corp v United States, 6 Cl Ct 271 (1984); Baudier Marine Electronics, Sales & Service, Inc v United States, 6 Cl Ct 246 (1984).
In order to support an action for negligence, the defendant must owe a legal duty to the plaintiff. Buczkowski v McKay, 441 Mich 96; 490 NW2d 330 (1992).
The majority refers to City of Ingleside v Stewart, 554 SW2d 939 (Tex Civ App, 1977), as support for its conclusion that the trial court improperly dismissed the plaintiff’s unjust enrichment claim. Ante, p 187. Chief Judge Nye, the author of the Stewart opinion, explained the parameters of Stewart in Corpus Christi v Acme Mechanical Contractors, 736 SW2d 894, 899 (Tex App, 1987):
In effect, this Court held that a subcontractor who was able to prove that the City had "stepped into the shoes of the general contractor and chose to supervise and finish the job and pay some of the laborers and subcontractors,” was liable to the subcontractor on the theory of quantum meruit.
The facts that compelled the Stewart court to impose liability on the city on the basis of quantum meruit are distinguishable in several respects. The general contractor in Stewart failed to post the statutorily mandated bonds upon the advice of the city’s architect. Furthermore, "there was other evidence that the City impliedly agreed to pay the appellee [subcontractor] for its work.”
The trial court specifically found and the evidence supports such findings that the City initiated a dual payee system [each check drawn from the construction project’s fund was made out to the general contractor and the subcontractor to be paid] and took over the job when the contractor overspent his withdrawals. The record showed that the City assumed and undertook the duties of the general contractor and paid the laborers and subcontractors. [Stewart at 944.]
The case at bar does not present a factual situation warranting a determination of unjust enrichment. The school district did not step into the shoes of the general contractor, nor did it act in such a manner that would allow the plaintiff to infer that the school district would pay the subcontractors for their services.
[A] quasi-contractual obligation and a constructive trust closely resemble each other, the chief difference being that the plaintiff in bringing an action to enforce a quasi-contractual obligation seeks to obtain a judgment imposing a merely personal liability upon the defendant to pay a sum of money, whereas the plaintiff in bringing a suit to enforce a constructive trust seeks to recover specific property. [Restatement Restitution, § 160, comment a, p 642.]
A constructive trust need not arise because the property was wrongfully acquired, it may arise out of unconscionability and unjust enrichment. A constructive trust may be based upon a breach of fiduciary or confidential relationship, misrepresentation, concealment, mistake, undue influence, duress or fraud. [Grasman v Jelsema, 70 Mich App 745, 752; 246 NW2d 322 (1976).]
The majority fails to recognize that the plaintiff agreed to the disbursement: "Following an unsuccessful appeal to the Court of Appeals, the subcontractors and the School District agreed upon a distribution of the interpleader funds which were then disbursed. The interpleader action was dismissed.”

=== CASE 9738895 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:05:02.084232+00 ===

Mr. JUSTICE CRAVEN, dissenting: I dissent. The majority opinion transposes the rules of procedure into a snare and a trap for the unwary. The notice of appeal in this case was due to be filed in the trial court on January 26,1979. It was not filed on that date, but it was, in fact, placed in the mail on that date, properly addressed to the circuit clerk. It was received after the due date and filed notwithstanding the fact that it was late. This late filing was not noted by anyone until this court raised the issue. The appellants’ time for petition to seek leave to file a late notice of appeal was lost by reason of the fact that the circuit clerk filed the appeal after the permissible filing date. Supreme Court Rule 12 (58 Ill. 2d R. 12) authorizes the service of process by mail and the filing of papers in the appellate court by mail, the filing date being the date mailed. The postmarked date is the date of constructive as well as actual filing. There is no corresponding provision for filing by mail in the trial court. In a case most analogous to this one, In re Estate of Eiberger (1977), 49 Ill. App. 3d 1129 (order under Supreme Court Rule 23), the court dismissed an appeal because of the plaintiff’s failure to file a timely notice of appeal. In Eiberger, the plaintiff mistakenly mailed the notice of appeal to the appellate court for filing. That was done within the time specified. The clerk of the appellate court thereafter mailed the notice of appeal to the trial court for filing. By the time this was done, the 30-day period for filing had passed. No matter how you look at it, the notice of appeal in Eiberger was not tendered for filing until after the 30 days had expired. There, as here, the error was not discovered until after the time for filing a late notice of appeal had expired. In Eiberger, this court, sitting by assignment in the Third District, dismissed the appeal as the majority does here. The supreme court granted leave to appeal and in a supervisory order told us we were wrong and told us to reinstate the appeal. In its order of January 26,1978 (Docket No. 50090), the supreme court succinctly stated: “In the appeal from the Circuit Court of LaSalle County the notice of appeal was erroneously sent to the Clerk of the Appellate Court, instead of the Clerk of the trial court, within the 30-day period for filing such notice of appeal. The Clerk of the Appellate Court sent it to the trial court after the 30-day period expired, and the Appellate Court dismissed the appeal for failure to file the notice within time. The petition for leave to appeal is allowed and, in the exercise of this Court’s supervisory jurisdiction, the Appellate Court is directed to reinstate the appeal.” The action that the supreme court took in the Eiberger case is appropriate here. Here, as there, the notice of appeal did not get to the trial court on time. Here, as there, the time for a petition for a late notice of appeal expired before the purely clerical error was discovered. Here, as there, the clerical error does not work an injustice upon the appellee, and as a matter of fact, here, as there, the court, not the party, discovered the clerical error. (See also People v. Brown (1973), 54 Ill. 2d 25, 294 N.E.2d 267.) The majority opinion exalts form over substance and I dissent.

=== CASE 9738896 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:05:03.449772+00 ===

BUCHANAN, Chief Judge.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
Danny King (King) appeals from his conviction for unlawful dealing in hashish,1 claiming error in (1) denying his Motion to Dismiss, (2) admission of testimony of a telephone conversation, (3) permitting a police officer to testify as an expert, (4) allowing the prosecution to attempt to examine a witness who refused to testify on the grounds of self-incrimination, (5) refusing to allow certain questions on cross-examination of a prosecution’s expert witness, and (6) insufficiency of the evidence.
We affirm.
FACTS
The evidence most favorable to the judgment is:
In August of 1975, John Hurlock, an officer with the Kokomo City Police, was working undercover as part of the Metropolitan Enforcement Group (MEG Unit) investigating drug sales in Tippecanoe County, Indiana. Karen Smith, an informant, was working under Hurlock’s supervision.
On August 29, 1975, Smith contacted King by telephone for the purpose of arranging a hashish purchase. Following the telephone call, Smith and Officer Hurlock went to King’s house. Inside King’s house, Hurlock and King discussed the drug purchase. King stated that he had three quarters of an ounce of hashish and as Hurlock wanted only one-half ounce, he should return the next evening, giving King time to weigh and cut down the hashish.
The next night, the pattern repeated itself. Smith again telephoned King, and Smith and Officer Hurlock went to King’s house. King came out of the house and got into the car with Officer Hurlock and Smith. He had not reduced the hashish to one-half ounce, so Officer Hurlock agreed to buy three-quarters of an ounce. King gave the hashish to Smith who passed it to Officer Hurlock, and in return Officer Hur-lock passed the money through Smith to King.
Hurlock identified the substance which he purchased from King as hashish due to its appearance, texture, and by use of a chemical field test. The substance was later tested at the Indiana State Police laboratory and found to be approximately 18.5 grams of hashish.
King was indicted by a Tippecanoe County Grand Jury on January 29, 1976. The indictment was signed by George L. Hanna, special prosecutor for Tippecanoe County. The indictment was challenged by a motion to dismiss which, after a hearing, was denied.
ISSUES
Six issues are presented for review:
I. Did the special prosecutor lack authority to sign the charging indictment thereby rendering it-void and mandating dismissal of the action?
II. Did the trial court commit reversible error in admitting testimony by Officer Hurlock as to a telephone conversation between King and informant Smith?
*1264III. Did the trial court abúse its discretion in allowing Officer Hurlock to testify as an expert in identifying the substance which he purchased from King?
IV. Did the trial court commit reversible error in allowing the State to ask Karen Smith a question after she indicated she would refuse to answer all substantive questions on the grounds of self-incrimination?
V.Did the trial court err in refusing to allow the prosecution’s expert witness on controlled substances to be questioned on the statutory definitions of hashish and marijuana?
VI.Was there sufficient evidence that the substance purchased from King by Officer Hurlock was “dry hashish,” the delivery of which was prohibited by Ind.Code 35-24.1-4.1-10 (repealed effective October 1,1977).
For the sake of clarity, the parties’ contentions will be set forth with the discussion of each specific issue.
DECISION
ISSUE ONE — Motion to Dismiss
Was King’s indictment improperly signed thereby necessitating that the trial court grant his Motion to Dismiss?
PARTIES’ CONTENTIONS — King asserts the indictment was defective in that it was not signed by the proper person, that is, the elected prosecuting attorney of Tippecanoe County, James Kizer. King contends that the special prosecutor who signed the indictment, George L. Hanna, was without authority to do so because (1) there was no judicial determination of the factual basis for the prosecutor’s disqualification, and (2) the special prosecutor had no authority to investigate or prosecute drug cases.
The State maintains that there is no requirement for a judicial determination if the regular prosecuting attorney has admitted his disqualification and requested appointment of a special prosecutor.
ADDITIONAL FACTS
This issue revolves around the disqualification of the elected prosecutor of Tippecanoe County, James A. Kizer, and the appointment of special prosecutor, George L. Hanna. At the center of this controversy is the following order of disqualification:
Comes now James A. Kizer, Prosecuting Attorney for the 23rd Judicial Circuit.
It appears to the Court that certain allegations have been publicly made concerning possible criminal conduct by public officials and concerning the possible commission of crimes which have not been properly investigated or prosecuted, and that further allegations have been publicly made that the said prosecuting attorney has been influenced in the conduct of his office by political considerations.
It further appears to the Court that the interests of justice require that said allegations be made the subject of police and grand jury investigation.
And now the said Prosecuting Attorney, in the interests of a full and free investigation of all said allegations, disqualifies himself from participating therein, and requests the Court to appoint a special prosecutor to assist the police and grand jury in the investigation of all said allegations and to conduct the prosecution of any criminal charges which may arise therefrom.
Entered this 22nd day of October, 1975.
/s/ Warren B. Thompson
Warren B. Thompson, Judge Tippecanoe Circuit Court
/s/ Robert F. Munro
Robert F. Munro, Judge Superior Court of Tippecanoe County
/s/ Jack A. King
Jack A. King, Judge Superior Court No. 2 of Tippecanoe County
/s/ James A. Kizer
James A. Kizer, Prosecuting Attorney for the 23rd Judicial- Circuit
(emphasis supplied)
*1265According to evidence presented at the hearing on the Motion to Dismiss, the three judges prepared the order in advance of a meeting with Kizer. At an hour-long meeting on October 22, 1975, Kizer signed the disqualification order. That same day, the three judges signed an order appointing George L. Hanna as special prosecutor.2
At the hearing on the Motion to Dismiss, extensive testimony was taken, including testimony from Kizer, Judge King, and Judge Munro. Following the hearing, the trial court found that Kizer’s signature upon the order was voluntary and not the result of duress, fraud or threats;3 that the scope of authority of the special prosecutor included particular classes of crimes which had not been properly prosecuted or investigated; and that the crime with which King was charged (dealing in hashish) was included within the scope of the special prosecutor’s authority.4
CONCLUSION — The special prosecutor had authority to sign King’s indictment, and therefore the Motion to Dismiss was properly overruled.
King pursues a will-o’-the-wisp. The Indiana cases have long held that if an elected prosecutor admits his disqualification and requests appointment of a special prosecutor, a judicial determination of the factual basis for such disqualification is not necessary. See Perfect v. State (1925), 197 Ind. 401, 141 N.E. 52; State ex rel. Williams v. Ellis (1915), 184 Ind. 307, 112 N.E. 98. See also State ex rel. Goldsmith v. Superior Court of Hancock County (1979), Ind., 386 N.E.2d 942.
Reason governs these decisions. If a prosecutor believes himself to be incapacitated or disqualified to such a degree that he cannot properly perform some or all of his duties, it would seem superfluous to require a court to hold a hearing, receive evidence and make findings in order to merely confirm his belief. Such a procedure is not required of a judge who disqualifies himself. This court is in no position to second guess a prosecutor’s decision as to his own disqualification — whether that disqualification be as to one case, or as to a more general classification of cases. This is within the discretion and judgment of the prosecutor in fulfilling the duties of his office. Whether he is properly fulfilling those duties is ultimately for the judgment of the voters — not the courts.
This situation of voluntary disqualification by the prosecutor differs from *1266one in which the elected prosecutor opposes appointment of a special prosecutor. In the latter situation, judicial determination of •the factual basis for disqualification must be made prior to the special prosecutor’s appointment. State ex rel. Spencer v. Criminal Court of Marion County (1938), 214 Ind. 551, 15 N.E.2d 1020, 16 N.E.2d 888; State ex rel. Purcell v. Circuit Court of Sullivan County (1950), 228 Ind. 410, 92 N.E.2d 843; State ex rel. Latham v. Spencer Circuit Court (1963), 244 Ind. 552, 194 N.E.2d 606. This prevents the arbitrary judicial usurpation of the powers of a constitutional office — that of prosecutor.5 The prosecuting attorney is a constitutional officer, State ex rel. Spencer v. Criminal Court of Marion County, supra; State ex rel. Latham v. Spencer Circuit Court, supra, and is not subject to an arbitrary order of disqualification at the whim of a trial judge.6 State ex rel. Williams v. Willis, supra; State ex rel. Purcell v. Circuit Court of Sullivan County, supra. State ex rel. Williams v. Ellis, supra, spells out this limitation:
We do not hold that, because the judge of some court might be of the opinion that a given cause might be better prosecuted by some one other than the regular official, he would therefore be warranted in appointing such other person as special prosecutor. Neither lack of intellect, learning, nor even moral courage, in prosecuting attorney, judge, or other elective officer, constitutes a disqualification, to act officially, and a judge would no more be justified in supplanting a prosecuting attorney for such deficiency, than would the latter be warranted in demanding a more learned, conscientious, and capable judge to hear the causes he must prosecute. The responsibility for lack of capacity in officers must rest on the people who elected them.
184 Ind. at 321, 112 N.E. at 103.
State ex rel. Spencer v. Criminal Court of Marion County, supra, elaborates on the need for judicial determination of the basis for disqualification if the regular prosecuting attorney objects:
It cannot be doubted that, where it is established that the prosecuting attorney is an interested party, or otherwise clearly incapacitated, the court may appoint an attorney to represent the interests of the state. But this may not be done upon mere suspicion or rumor, and upon the mere ex parte motion of the judge, and the decisions disclose that in the cases where the appointment of a special prosecutor was upheld, the regular prosecutor had admitted disqualification or incapacity. The reasoning in the opinions would seem to clearly indicate that a special prosecutor may not be appointed to exercise the functions of the office over the objection of the regular prosecuting attorney, without a judicial determination of the fact of disqualification or interest after an opportunity for the regular prosecutor to be heard. It may not be done upon the mere suspicion of the judge that the prosecutor may not adequately and impartially perform his duties. (Emphasis added)
214 Ind. at 556-57, 15 N.E.2d at 1022-23.
King would also invalidate the indictment signed by the special prosecutor7 *1267because “drug cases” were not within his authority. King does not question that the scope of the special prosecutor included certain classes of crimes which had not been properly investigated or prosecuted. However, he does question whether “drug cases” fell within that classification, relying on the instructions given to the Grand Jury which returned his indictment to support his position. But he has failed to include such instructions in the record, and therefore has waived this argument. Mendez v. State (1977), Ind., 370 N.E.2d 323; Schuman v. State (1976), 265 Ind. 586, 357 N.E.2d 895; Pulliam v. State (1976), 264 Ind. 381, 345 N.E.2d 229.
Further, King asserts that the evidence at the Motion to Dismiss hearing showed that drug violations in Tippecanoe County had been properly investigated and prosecuted. However, there was evidence to the contrary.
John C. Dibble, a former deputy prosecutor who had been dismissed by Kizer, testified that drug cases had not been properly prosecuted. He specifically cited a series of cases resulting from a March, 1974 drug raid. Kizer did nothing with the cases after his taking of office on January 1, 1975. The Prosecutor’s office manager brought these cases to the attention of Dibble in March, 1975. At that time, there were discovery motions from the defense still outstanding which had not been answered, and the cases were perilously close (7 to 10 days) to lapsing under Crim.R. 4.
Dibble further testified that there were no “concerted” drug investigations in Tippecanoe County in 1975 by the local law enforcement agencies. This was in accord with Lafayette Police Chief Butler’s policy of having police respond only to complaints made. No offensive-type affirmative police investigations (such as undercover drug investigations) were being made.
On September 10, 1975, Dibble complained to Kizer that Police Chief Butler was an impediment to law enforcement in the county, and that Kizer should talk to the Lafayette mayor about it immediately. Kizer agreed to do so. However, when Dibble later inquired about Kizer talking to the mayor, Kizer stated he had taken care of the matter with Tom Heide, Lafayette City Attorney.
Dibble also testified that at that time (and for several years previously), Heide’s law firm of Heide, Gambs and Mucker was representing Michael Weatherford. Weath-erford, in turn, was being investigated as a major drug offender by the Federal MEG Unit investigating drug offenses in Tippecanoe County.
Dibble further testified that during his tenure as chief deputy prosecutor there were arrests and prosecutions for drug violations. But those arrests were in connection with other crimes. No solely drug-related arrests were made in the City of Lafayette during his tenure.
Additionally, Kizer, the elected prosecutor, testified that he had never instituted any type of legal action to challenge the special prosecutor’s authority to deal with this type of case.
This evidence supports the trial court’s determination that “drug cases” were within the types of crimes not being properly investigated or prosecuted, and therefore were within the scope of the special prosecutor’s authority.
Although not argued by the parties, there is an alternative basis upon which to uphold the trial court’s refusal to dismiss the indictment.
King correctly asserts in his brief that criminal prosecutions cannot be instituted by private individuals. Johnson v. White Circuit Court (1948), 225 Ind. 602, 77 N.E.2d 298. However, this case was not *1268instituted by a private individual. Rather it was initiated by a special prosecutor who, at minimum, was a de facto public official.8
The acts of a de facto public official may not be collaterally attacked. Fruit v. Metropolitan School District of Winchester-White River Township (1971), 241 Ind. 621, 172 N.E.2d 864; State ex rel. Crowmer v. Superior Court of Marion County (1957), 237 Ind. 633, 146 N.E.2d 88. This proposition is so deeply rooted that in 1892 the Indiana Supreme Court stated:
The rule that the acts of an officer de facto, performed before ouster, are, as to the public, as valid as the acts of an officer de jure, is too familiar to the profession to need the citation of authority. The public is not to suffer because those discharging the functions of an officer may have a defective title, or no title at all. Case v. State, 69 Ind. 46; Blackman v. State, 12 Ind. 556; Bansemer v. Mace, 18 Ind. 27; Mowbray v. State, 88 Ind. 324.
Parker v. State ex rel. Powell (1892), 133 Ind. 178, 200, 32 N.E. 836, 843.
This applies to prosecutor as it does to judges, see State ex rel. Crowmer v. Superior Court of Marion County, supra, legislators, see Fruit v. Metropolitan School District, supra, and other public officials. Therefore an indictment signed by a de facto special prosecutor is not subject to collateral attack by a motion to dismiss.
An indictment signed by a de facto prosecuting attorney will not be held void when attacked by accused on the ground of his want of authority.
42 C.J.S. Indictments & Informations § 57 at 912.
The validity of acts of a public officer may be challenged only by a direct challenge against the individual who purports to hold the office. Fruit v. Metropolitan School District, supra. See, e. g., State ex rel. Latham v. Spencer Circuit Court, supra; State ex rel. Purcell v. Circuit Court of Sullivan County, supra; State ex rel. Spencer v. Criminal Court of Marion County, supra; State ex rel. Williams v. Ellis, supra. See also State ex rel. Goldsmith v. Superior Court of Hancock County, supra. But see, e. g., Perfect v. State, supra. Such a procedure was not followed in this case.
The indictment not being subject to the type of attack mounted against it, the trial court’s overruling of the motion to dismiss was proper.
ISSUE TWO — Hearsay Evidence
Did the trial court err in admitting Officer Hurlock’s testimony as to telephone conversations between informant Karen Smith and King over the defendant’s hearsay objection?
PARTIES’ CONTENTIONS — King asserts that Hurlock’s testimony fit the definition of hearsay evidence and therefore was inadmissible, and furthermore, the court failed to instruct the jury that it should consider the evidence for a limited purpose only.
The State maintains that the statement was not hearsay because the declarant was available for cross-examination.
CONCLUSION — 1The admission of Hur-lock’s testimony, even if in error, was harmless, and therefore does not require reversal. See Ind.R.Tr.P. 61.
At issue is the following trial court testimony by Officer Hurlock:
Q. All right. Then in August of '75, what was the first contact you and Karen Smith had with Danny King?
A. The first contact was by telephone.
Q. And can you tell us when that was?
A. That was on the 29th of August; roughly, in the area of 10:00 — 10:30 p. m.
Q. Who called who?
A. Karen Smith called Danny King.
Q. And what -did Karen Smith say to Danny King?
BY MR. MOORE: Objection. Hearsay. .
*1269BY MR. McGLONE: It is not hearsay. It was said to Danny King; said in his presence, albeit over the phone. It’s simply a matter of what he heard her say. It’s not out of the presence of the Defendant. It isn’t hearsay.
BY MR. MOORE: Well, Your Honor, there's no showing that the Defendant was present in this phone conversation. He was just — I assume, he was with Karen Smith on one end of the phone and he doesn’t know who’s on the other end of the phone and that makes it hearsay.
BY THE COURT: Overruled. Go ahead.
Q. What did she say over the phone?
A. She asked Danny if he had had any— it’s — if he had, at that time, any hash.
Q. And then, without asking you what she said to you, — which I think would be hearsay — did she say anything then? Did — What was the rest of the conversation or was there any further?
A. She indicated to me in the affirmative that he indicated that he did have and she asked him how much he had and then she told me — or asked me how much I wanted to buy. I told her, at that time, if he had a half ounce that I would take it. And then she relayed that to Mr. King.
Traditionally, hearsay evidence is defined: Hearsay evidence is testimony in court or written evidence, of a statement made out of court, such statement being offered as an assertion to show the truth of matters asserted therein, and thus resting for its value upon the credibility of the out-of-court asserter.
Harvey v. State (1971), 256 Ind. 473, 476, 269 N.E.2d 759, 760.
-There is no merit to the State’s claim that the declarant, Karen Smith, was available for cross-examination. Karen Smith asserted her fifth amendment privilege against self-incrimination and refused to answer any substantive questions as to the matter before the court. A witness who exercises a privilege and does not testify is not available for cross-examination. McCormick on Evidence § 253 (2d ed. 1972).
Turning to the nature of Hurlock’s testimony, a non-participant to a telephone conversation may testify as to its occurrence. See generally, Bean v. State (1978), Ind., 371 N.E.2d 713; 22A C.J.S. Criminal Law § 718 at 998. See also Walker v. State (1976), 265 Ind. 8, 349 N.E.2d 161, cert. den. 429 U.S. 943, 97 S.Ct. 363, 50 L.Ed.2d 313. But a non-participant’s statement as to the truth of the matters asserted in the telephone conversation falls within the hearsay rule.9 22A C.J.S. Criminal Law § 718 at 997. See Walker v. State, supra. See generally Harvey v. State, supra (definition of hearsay).
However, in this case, admission of the statements was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. The events which took place in the presence of Officer Hurlock provided overwhelming evidence to support the conviction. See Mayes v. State (1974), 162 Ind.App. 186, 318 N.E.2d 811; Wills v. State (1974), 162 Ind.App. 159, 318 N.E.2d 385. Officer Hurlock and King twice engaged in “face to face” negotiations for the drug sale; in these direct talks, King stated that he had possession of three quarters of an ounce of hashish; and finally, King sold the hashish directly to Officer Hurlock while sitting in Hurlock’s car.
ISSUE THREE — Expert Qualifications
Did the trial court err in allowing Officer Hurlock to testify as an expert regarding *1270his opinion as to the nature of the substance which he purchased from King?
PARTIES’ CONTENTIONS —King asserts the trial court abused its discretion in allowing Officer Hurlock to testify as to the nature of the substance he purchased from King in that, (1) a narcotics officer is not per se an expert in the identification of controlled substances, and (2) Officer Hur-lock was not qualified to testify as to the results of the chemical field test which he performed.
The State contends there was no abuse of discretion, and in any event, any error was harmless because other testimony identified the controlled substance.
CONCLUSION — The trial court did not abuse its discretion in allowing Officer Hur-lock to testify as to the nature of the substance which he purchased from King.
Determination of whether or not a witness is qualified to testify as an expert is within the sound discretion of the trial court and may not be set aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion. Epps v. State (1977), Ind., 369 N.E.2d 404; Niehaus v. State (1977), 265 Ind. 655, 359 N.E.2d 513; Pettit v. State (1972), 258 Ind. 409, 281 N.E.2d 807. A witness may be qualified by both training and practical experience. Blair v. State (1977), Ind.App., 364 N.E.2d 793; Ross v. State (1977), Ind.App., 360 N.E.2d 1015.
Officer Hurlock testified that he had seen a great deal of hashish as the result of his experience in drug investigations. Because of his frequent contact with hashish, Officer Hurlock was familiar with the color, texture and appearance of the controlled substance. Allowing the officer to testify on this basis was not an abuse of discretion. See State v. Lewman (1973), 158 Ind.App. 550, 303 N.E.2d 668 (undercover drug investigator competent as an expert to identify hashish based on his experience). See also Telfare v. State (1975), 163 Ind.App. 413, 324 N.E.2d 270 (witness not required to be a chemist to qualify to identify marijuana).
As to the Dueguenois-Levine chemical field test which Officer Hurlock conducted on the controlled substance, the results of the test were properly admitted by the trial court. In order for such test results to be admissible our Supreme Court has held:
We do not go so far here as to hold that a complete and detailed description of scientific tests forming the basis of the witness’ opinion must be included in a proper foundation. Under circumstances such as these, it is only necessary that the type of test be identified and generally described and that the person doing the testing also be identified. It is within the discretion of the trial court to require more than this should circumstances so warrant. (Emphasis added).
McDonald v. State (1976), 265 Ind. 167, 172, 352 N.E.2d 708, 712.
Officer Hurlock identified and generally described the test which he conducted. A person administering a chemical test may testify as to its results even though he has no understanding of the reason for the chemical reaction which occurred. Reid v. State (1978), Ind., 372 N.E.2d 1149.
It was not error to admit Officer Hur-lock’s testimony as to the nature of a controlled substance.
As pointed out by the State, even had error been committed in this regard, it would have been harmless because State Police chemist Freddie Lee Huttsell testified that chemical tests showed the substance to be hashish. (Admission of improper evidence which tends only to disclose a fact clearly proved by other legitimate and uncontroverted evidence is harmless error. Sexton v. State (1974), 262 Ind. 554, 319 N.E.2d 829).
ISSUE FOUR — Questioning of Informant
Did the trial court err in allowing the prosecution to ask, in the presence of the jury, if witness Karen Smith would continue to claim her fifth amendment privilege as to the matters before the court?
*1271PARTIES’ CONTENTIONS —King contends that it was error for the prosecution to elicit informant Karen Smith’s response that she would assert her privilege against self-incrimination after it had been determined outside the presence of the jury that she would assert this privilege. The State says any error was waived because of a failure to make a timely objection.
CONCLUSION — King waived any error by failure to make a proper objection at trial.
It is axiomatic that failure to object at trial waives an issue on appeal. Cooper v. State (1972), 259 Ind. 107, 284 N.E.2d 799; Harrison v. State (1972), 258 Ind. 359, 281 N.E.2d 98; Burgett v. State (1974), 161 Ind.App. 157, 314 N.E.2d 799. We find nothing in the record that can be regarded as a timely objection to the State asking Karen Smith in the presence of the jury if she would continue to claim her fifth amendment privilege. In fact we find no objection at all relating to this issue.
The sequence of events at the trial make it evident that a proper objection was not made. Karen Smith was called to the witness stand. Following preliminary identification questions, she was asked four questions to which she responded that she was “pleading the fifth.” None of the questions drew any objection from the defense attorney relevant to the issue at hand. Following Smith’s fourth refusal to answer, the trial judge called counsel to the bench, and after a conference, the defense attorney made the following statement:
BY MR. MOORE:
At this time, before Karen Smith testified, I made an objection to her being called to testify based on the fact that we knew that she was going to raise the Fifth Amendment10 and having that done in front of the juror — jury. I ask that — that we go through this out of the presence of the jury and decide what she’s going to ask — that record was made before the testimony and we’re now putting it on the record.
We glean from this statement only a request for a hearing outside the presence of the jury to determine the extent to which the witness was going to claim her fifth amendment privilege. Outside the presence of the jury it was determined that Smith would continue to claim her privilege as to any substantive matters before the court. There was no further objection (if indeed the above statement by the defense counsel was an objection), nor was there any request to prevent any further questioning of Smith or to require her immediate removal from the witness stand before the jury returned.
When the jury returned, the following transpired:
BY THE COURT: Mr. McGlone, are you withdrawing your last question? BY MR. McGLONE: Well, in the light of the witness’s assertion of the Fifth Amendment, yes, Your Honor.
BY THE COURT: Proceed.
CONTINUED DIRECT EXAMINATION OF KAREN SMITH:
QUESTIONS BY MR. McGLONE:
Q Karen, is it your intention to not answer any questions or to assert the Fifth Amendment to any questions I might ask concerning the transaction involving Danny King and John Hur-lock?
A Yes.
BY MR. McGLONE: In the light of that, Your Honor, the — the State will not ask any further questions of this witness.
BY THE COURT: You’ve asked some. Do you have any cross-examination?
CROSS-EXAMINATION OF KAREN SMITH:
QUESTIONS BY MR. MOORE:
Q If the Defendant asked the questions, would you still assert the Fifth Amendment?
A I’ve never thought about that. I guess I would.
*1272BY MR. MOORE: No further questions.
BY THE COURT: You may step down.
It is the prosecution’s question after the return of the jury which King claims was in error. However, his failure to make a proper timely objection has waived this issue.11
ISSUE FIVE — Limiting Cross-Examination
Did the trial court err in refusing to allow the defendant to cross-examine an expert witness for the State as to the legal definitions of controlled substance, hashish and marijuana.
PARTIES’ CONTENTIONS — King contends such cross-examination should have been allowed as the State opened the door to the subject when the witness testified his job was to test materials to determine their legality.
The State maintains that questioning a witness as to his opinion about Indiana law is improper.
CONCLUSION — The trial court did not err in refusing to allow cross-examination of the witness as to his opinions about Indiana law.
The conduct of cross-examination is within the sound discretion of the trial court and is reversible only for an abuse of discretion. Strickland v. State (1977), 265 Ind. 664, 359 N.E.2d 244; Ringham v. State (1974), 261 Ind. 628, 308 N.E.2d 863; Taylor v. State (1976), Ind.App., 358 N.E.2d 167; Traylor v. State (1975), 164 Ind.App. 50, 326 N.E.2d 614.
Questions of law are not an appropriate subject for a witness’s opinion and are properly excludable. Ledcke v. State (1973), 260 Ind. 382, 296 N.E.2d 412; Baker v. State (1964), 245 Ind. 129, 195 N.E.2d 91. See Sexton v. State (1974), 262 Ind. 554, 319 N.E.2d 829.
Ledcke v. State, supra, presented a situation very similar to the case at bar. There our Supreme Court stated:
Appellant next claims that it was erroneous to sustain the State’s objection to the following question which appellant’s attorney asked of one of the police officers on cross-examination:
“In your education program of yourself, Officer Stillwell, have you determined what part of the plant is legal to possess and what part is not legal to possess?”
This was properly excludable because it involved a question of law and therefore not an. appropriate subject of an opinion.
260 Ind. at 394, 296 N.E.2d at 420.
The trial court correctly excluded the defense counsel’s questions on cross-examination.
ISSUE SIX — Insufficient Evidence
Was there sufficient evidence that King delivered “dry hashish” as prohibited by Ind.Code 35-24.1 — 4.1-10 (repealed effective October 1, 1977).
PARTIES’ CONTENTIONS — King asserts there was insufficient evidence that the hashish which Hurlock purchased from King was “dry hashish” as stated in Ind. Code 35-24.1-4.1-1. The State’s position is that the legislature has recognized two forms of hashish, dry hashish and hashish oil, and that there was sufficient evidence that the hashish purchased by Hurlock was not an oil, but rather the dry form of the controlled substance.
CONCLUSION — There was sufficient evidence that the hashish delivered was “dry hashish” as prohibited by the statute.
Ind.Code 35-24.1-4.1-10 (repealed effective October 1,1977), under which King was convicted stated (in pertinent part):
[A] person is guilty of unlawful dealing in marijuana or hashish if he:
(1) knowingly manufactures or delivers marijuana or dry hashish, pure or adulterated
(emphasis added)
*1273Indiana’s Controlled Substances Laws in effect at the time recognized two forms of hashish: dry hashish and hashish oil.12
Words used in a statute, unless specifically defined in that statute, are given their plain, ordinary and usual meaning. State v. Apex Steel and Supply Co. (1978), Ind.App., 375 N.E.2d 598; State v. Turner (1979), Ind.App., 386 N.E.2d 208. Ind.Code 1971,1-1 — 4-1. Given its usual meaning, oil is a liquid substance at room temperature. Dry, on the other hand, in the context of being used in contrast to the word oil, means a solid, non-liquid substance13 (i. e., dry as compared to a liquid, an oil, or a lotion).
Using these plain, ordinary and usual meanings of these words,14 we find there was sufficient evidence to sustain King’s conviction. Officer Hurlock described the hashish as a compressed brown substance which looked similar to a shoe sole. Furthermore, the hashish itself was introduced into evidence therefore allowing the jury to observe its nature.
Thus, there is sufficient evidence from which the jury could find that the hashish delivered was dry hashish, as stated in Ind. Code 35-24.1-4.1-10.
Affirmed.
SULLIVAN, J., concurs with opinion.
MILLER, P. J., dissents with opinion.
. Ind.Code 35-24.1-4.1-10 (repealed effective October 1, 1977).
.ORDER APPOINTING SPECIAL PROSECUTING ATTORNEY
WHEREAS, it appears that certain allegations have been publicly made concerning possible criminal conduct by public officials and concerning the possible commission of crimes which have not been properly investigated or prosecuted, and that further allegations have been publicly made that the said prosecuting attorney has been influenced in the conduct of his office by political considerations; and
WHEREAS, it appears that the interests of justice require that said allegations be made the subject of police and grand jury investigation; and
WHEREAS, James A. Kizer, Prosecuting Attorney, in the interests of a full and free investigation of all of said allegations has disqualified himself from participating therein and requested the appointment of a Special Prosecutor to assist the police and grand jury in the investigation of all of said allegations.
NOW, THEREFORE, the judges of the Tippecanoe Circuit Court, Superior Court of Tippecanoe County and Superior Court No. 2 of Tippecanoe County do hereby appoint George L. Hanna as such Special Prosecutor to assist the police and grand jury in the investigation of said allegations and conduct the prosecution of any criminal charges which may arise therefrom.
Entered this 22nd day of October, 1975.
/s/ Warren B. Thompson
Warren B. Thompson, Judge Tippecanoe Circuit Court
/s/ Robert F. Munro
Robert F. Munro, Judge Superior Court of Tippecanoe County
/s/ Jack A. King
Jack A. King, Judge Superior Court No. 2 of Tippecanoe County
. This issue was asserted in the Motion to Dismiss but not raised upon appeal.
. These latter findings were stated in negative terms, i. e., “The . . crimes charged . are not excluded from the scope of the said [Special] Prosecutor’s authority.”
. See Sapienza v. Hayashi (1976), 57 Haw. 289, 554 P.2d 1131. A court order of disqualification opposed by the prosecutor was struck down as overbroad when its scope extended beyond the factual basis established for the disqualification.
. The statutory authority to replace a prosecutor with a special prosecutor is found in Ind. Code (1971) 33-14-1-5, which states:
Failure to attend court. — If any prosecuting attorney fail to attend any court of his circuit, as the case may be, the judge of such circuit shall appoint some person to prosecute for such term who shall receive the docket fees of such term, and, if the appointment be made in the circuit court, such additional compensation as thé court may deem reasonable to be drawn from the state treasury on the allowance of the court and which allowance shall be deducted from the salary of such prosecutor.
.The order appointing the Special Prosecutor stated, in part:
■ WHEREAS, it appears that certain allegations have been publicly made . . . concerning the possible commission of crimes *1267which have not been properly investigated or prosecuted. .
NOW, THEREFORE, the judges of . . Tippecanoe County do hereby appoint George L. Hanna as such Special Prosecutor to assist the police and grand jury in the investigation of said allegations and conduct the prosecution of any criminal charges which may arise therefrom.
. Blacks’ Law Dictionary (4th ed. 1968) defines de facto as “an office, position or status existing under a claim or color of right.”
. There is authority that Officer Hurlock’s statement was not hearsay. What is normally “hearsay” testimony may be admissible to show the reason for further investigation by the police. McNew v. State (1979), Ind., 391 N.E.2d 607; Bluitt v. State (1978), Ind., 381 N.E.2d 458; Boles v. State (1973), 259 Ind. 661, 291 N.E.2d 357; Wills v. State (1974), 162 Ind.App. 159, 318 N.E.2d 385. But see Glover v. State (1969), 253 Ind. 121, 251 N.E.2d 814; Mayes v. State (1974), 162 Ind.App. 186, 318 N.E.2d 811 (hearsay information gathered by police during an investigation is not competent evidence). However, this theory was not raised by the State, and we need not base our resolution of this issue upon it.
. We have been directed to no such objection in the record nor does our own search of the record reveal such a prior objection. Failure to include matters alleged but not included in the record result in a waiver of that issue. Mendez v. State (1977), Ind., 370 N.E.2d 323.
. It is evident also that any error would have been harmless in light of the defense asking a virtually identical question which produced the same information.
. See Ind.Code 35-24.1 — 4.1-9(3) (repealed effective Oct. 1, 1977):
(3) the term “paraphernalia” means any instrument, device, article, or contrivance used, designed for use, or intended for use in ingesting, smoking, administering, or preparing marijuana, hashish, hashish oil, or cocaine. . . . (emphasis added)
. We take judicial notice that this comports with the forms hashish takes: the “normal” form of hashish which is created by a drying process, and hashish oil which is a more potent, concentrated liquid.
.This definitional problem created by Ind. Code 35-24.1-4.1-10 has been cured in the new Indiana Penal Code. The new statute, Ind. Code 1977, 35-48-4-10, has dropped the qualifying word “dry” from the dealing in marijuana or hashish statute.
. The investigation of Defendant King’s alleged crime was not reported to Prosecutor Kizer. Thus, he was given no opportunity to investigate or prosecute it.

=== CASE 9738897 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:05:03.456309+00 ===

SULLIVAN, Judge,
concurring.
I concur in the affirmance of King’s conviction. I do not, however, concur in the implication of Chief Judge Buchanan’s lead opinion that Officer Hurlock’s testimony concerning a telephone call between Smith and King was not hearsay. (See particularly Footnote 9 at page-.) The majority’s emphasis on Bean v. State (1978) Ind., 371 N.E.2d 713 and Walker v. State (1976) 265 Ind. 8, 349 N.E.2d 161, cert. den. 429 U.S. 943, 97 S.Ct. 363, 50 L.Ed.2d 313, may mislead the unwary reader. Both cases are inapplicable to the extent that they are relied upon to implicate King through hearsay.
In Bean, supra, the defendant sought to testify about a conversation he had had with two friends prior to a robbery. The court there adopted the defendant’s proposition that the testimony was admissible as proof of making the statement, but not as proof of the matter asserted therein. The Walker case, supra, held that testimony establishing the occurrence of a telephone conversation was permissible whereas any references to the content thereof were not. However, neither of these cases supports this court’s suggestion that a non-participant can testify as to the identity of the person on the other end of the phone. Here, there was no evidence that Officer Hurlock knew King’s phone number, watched Smith dial, or heard the recipient’s voice. At best, Hurlock from personal knowledge could testify only that Smith made a phone call and appeared to converse with someone.
In Footnote 9, Chief Judge Buchanan states that the questionable testimony may be admitted under an exception to the hearsay rule. He asserts: “What is normally ‘hearsay’ testimony may be admissible to show the reason for further investigation by the police.” In limited situations this principle bears some validity, but not in the case before us. As in Mayes v. State (1974) 162 Ind.App. 186, 193-94, 318 N.E.2d 811, 815:
*1274. we are not here concerned with a probable cause for arrest or with a search and seizure, the validity of which depends upon the reliability of an informant. . . . And we might . conclude that the testimony was not . introduced merely to explain why the officers proceeded to 30th and Illinois but rather was intended to serve as an additional weapon in the evidentiary arsenal
In Glover v. State (1969) 253 Ind. 121, 126, 251 N.E.2d 814, 818, the court explained:
“Hearsay testimony that law enforcement officers use and rely upon for investigation and thé gathering of competent and material evidence, of course i@ not evidence properly to be used in the trial of a criminal case.”
In the context of the question asked of Officer Hurlock, it is readily apparent that the testimony was elicited for the sole purpose of proving the truth of the matters therein asserted. See: Carr v. State (3d Dist. 1979) Ind.App., 388 N.E.2d 603. Accordingly, it was hearsay and was improperly admitted. However, in view of the overwhelming evidence against King, I agree that the error in admission was harmless and therefore not cause for reversal.
I further concur in Chief Judge Buchanan’s treatment of the other issues before us.
MILLER, Presiding Judge
(sitting by designation).
I respectfully dissent.
I do not agree with the Majority that the hearsay testimony of Officer Hurlock as to an alleged telephone conversation between Karen Smith and Defendant King was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
The alleged conversation contained an admission by King that he possessed hashish. Testimony of a police officer as to extrajudicial statements by a third person, not a witness at trial, concerning admissions allegedly made by a defendant in the presence of such a third person is hearsay and its admission is reversible error. Harvey v. State (1971), 256 Ind. 473, 269 N.E.2d 759. As stated in Glover v. State (1969), 253 Ind. 121, 251 N.E.2d 814, at 818:
“. . . Hearsay testimony that law enforcement officers used and rely upon for investigation and gathering of competent and material evidence, of course is not evidence properly to be used in the trial of a criminal- case . . . ”
Accord: Carr v. State (1979), Ind.App., 388 N.E.2d 603.
The Majority concludes that the uncorroborated testimony of Officer Hurlock concerning the events surrounding the alleged purchase constituted “overwhelming” evidence of King’s guilt and the prejudicial hearsay testimony was therefore rendered harmless citing Mayes v. State (1974), 162 Ind.App. 186, 318 N.E.2d 811 and Wills v. State (1974), 162 Ind.App. 159, 318 N.E.2d 385. Thus, the issue presented is whether the testimony of one credible witness, in this case a police officer but oftentimes a victim, constitutes “overwhelming” evidence of a defendant’s guilt. Mayes, supra, and Wills, supra, do not support the Majority’s position. In Mayes, supra, numerous police officers observed the commission of the crime. In Wills, supra, two officers participated in the search and seizure of a concealed weapon. Further, in Gillman v. State (1979), Ind., 389 N.E.2d 327, our Supreme Court concluded that “the evidence of guilt was overwhelmingly established by the eyewitness testimony of numerous police officers.” (Emphasis Added). Again, in Moore v. State (1972), 258 Ind. 200, 280 N.E.2d 57, where the defendant was apprehended in the act of attacking the victim by two co-workers and held for the police, the Court held the evidence of guilt to be “overwhelming.”
Officer Hurlock revealed that after the alleged sale he retained the hashish in his personal possession, allegedly locked in his desk drawer for a period of twelve days before delivering it to the State Police chemist. There was no evidence as to where his desk was located. After it was returned to him by the chemist, Hurlock, for the first time, placed it in the police *1275property room. Although this testimony was sufficient to establish chain of custody, still this delay of twelve days before the evidence was placed in normal police channels raises the question of possible substitution, tampering and/or mistake.
In Jones v. State (1973), 260 Ind. 463, 296 N.E.2d 407, 409 our Supreme Court stated:
“. . . A high degree of scrutiny must be placed on goods of a fungible nature such as heroin, especially where, as here, the evidence is an essential element of the crime. See Guthrie v. State (1970), 254 Ind. 356, 260 N.E.2d 579. We are faced with a ten-day period during which the State has not explained what security measures, if any, were taken to maintain the integrity of the exhibits. However, unlike Graham, [Graham v. State, 1970, 253 Ind. 525, 255 N.E.2d 652], we are not faced with a complete and unexplained break in the chain. The only officers whov were known to handle the exhibits testified at the trial.
We are not here concerned with absolute certainty, but with probabilities. The mere possibility that the evidence might have been tampered with will not make the evidence totally objectionable
In the regular course of a controlled substance seizure, the drugs are delivered without delay and usually within a few hours to a designated, secure storage area such as a safe or property room under control of the particular police agency. This, unfortunately, was not done in the case before us. Here, in my opinion, the twelve days in which the evidence was kept in the personal possession of Officer Hurlock, rather than being placed immediately in the secured police property room, contributed substantially to the opportunity for substitution, tampering or mistake. The jury could reasonably have inferred, among other things, that Officer Hurlock, who testified he made numerous drug purchases, was in the habit of retaining seized controlled substances in his personal possession and, thus, the evidence from another “buy” could have been mistakenly substituted by Officer Hurlock for the evidence in this case.
In conclusion, because Officer Hurlock was the only witness to the alleged sale and, further, because of the long delay during which the evidence was personally retained by said Officer, I do not consider the evidence in this case to be “overwhelming” nor can I say that I have “no reasonable doubt that the average jury would reach the same result” without the improper testimony. Gilman, supra. The admission of the prejudicial hearsay evidence did not constitute harmless error.
I agree with the Majority that George L. Hanna, the special prosecutor, was a de facto public official and the indictment signed by Hanna was not subject to collateral attack by a motion to dismiss. Thus the result reached by my colleagues on this issue was correct.
However, I disagree with the Majority in that I find the Judges of Tippecanoe County acted erroneously in issuing their Order appointing the special prosecutor. Such Order was clearly overbroad and vague. Our statute, Ind. Code (1971), 33-14-1-5, and case law authorize the appointment of a special prosecutor in a particular case of specific class of cases where the regular prosecutor has a conflict. In the case of his total incapacity, a special prosecutor may be appointed to fulfill all his duties. However, our law does not contemplate the existence of two public prosecutors within the same jurisdiction exercising the same or similar functions, a situation which is created by the Order in question.
Chief Judge Buchanan states:
“This Court is in no position to second guess a prosecutor’s decision as to his own disqualification — whether that disqualification be as to one case, or as to a more general classification of cases. This is within the discretion and judgment of the prosecutor in fulfilling the duties of his office. Whether he is properly fulfilling those duties is ultimately for the judgment of the voters — not the courts.” '
I disagree. A prosecutor cannot be disqualified at the whim of a trial judge. State ex rel. Williams v. Ellis (1915), 184 Ind. 307, *1276112 N.E. 98. I also believe a prosecutor may not disqualify himself at his own whim merely because the prosecution may appear to him to be unpleasant or inconvenient. The Code of Professional Responsibility for Attorneys At Law adopted by our Supreme Court provides, in part:
“. . . While a lawyer should guard against otherwise proper conduct that has a tendency to diminish public confidence in the legal system or in the legal profession, his duty to clients or to the public should never be subordinate merely because the full discharge of his obligation may be misunderstood or may tend to subject him or the legal profession to criticism . . . ” (EC 9-2)
In Sapienza v. Hayashi (1976), 57 Haw. 289, 554 P.2d 1131, cited in footnote 5 of the lead Opinion, this Canon was discussed as follows:
“Canon 9 was not intended to serve as a sweeping basis for the disqualification of attorneys who are otherwise, free of potential conflicts of interest. Neither was it designed to provide a convenient refuge for the timid practitioner or to serve as an excuse for the public servant to avoid the performance of an unpleasant duty.” (citations omitted).
I would hold under our statute and case law that a prosecutor, at a minimum, must represent to the trial court that he has a conflict before the court is authorized to replace him in a particular case or cases. This was not the situation here.
With regard to the Order itself, its over-breadth, vagueness and numerous ambiguities are apparent even on cursory examination. The first part of the Order allows the special prosecutor to act upon “certain allegations . . . concerning possible criminal conduct by public officials”. First, there is no allegation that James A. Kizer, the Prosecuting Attorney, had any conflict whatsoever which would serve as a basis for disqualification in the prosecution and investigation of these “allegations”. Second, since the Order does not define “public officials,” it purports to grant the special prosecutor authority to investigate and prosecute any “public officials”, whether they be connected with the executive, legislative or judicial branches of the Federal, State or local government.
The second portion of the Order permits the special prosecutor to investigate and prosecute allegations “concerning the possible commission of crimes which have not been properly investigated or prosecuted”. First, the language fails to denote whether the special prosecutor’s authority is limited to only those particular crimes which occurred prior to his appointment. Second, it is not clear whether the failure of the regular prosecutor to properly investigate or prosecute one crime would open the door for the special prosecutor to prosecute all crimes of that particular class. For example, if a theft case were improperly prosecuted by the regular prosecutor, would the special prosecutor then be authorized to prosecute all crimes involving thefts, including burglaries and robberies? This appears to be the interpretation given the language in the lead Opinion.1 Finally, does the language authorize the special prosecutor to prosecute crimes committed after his appointment? This interpretation would give the special prosecutor dual jurisdiction with the regular prosecutor who remained in office.
In the performance of their duties prosecutors decline prosecution in a variety of cases. In most instances these declinations are based on lack of evidence. Additionally, limited manpower and resources often force prosecutors to concentrate their efforts in those areas which, in the public interest, they deem most critical while giving certain types of crimes much less priority and, consequently, less attention. This legitimate exercise of discretion by a prosecutor, on occasion, is met with disapproval by law enforcement agencies, his own deputies and others. At times, criticisms of his judgment may be justified. Unfortunately the language used by the Majority could be *1277interpreted as opening the door to the replacement of a prosecutor upon the complaint and testimony of a dissatisfied police officer, former deputy2 or third parties, including victims of crimes, members of their families, local volunteer crime commissions, etc.
In State ex rel. Spencer v. Criminal Court of Marion County (1938), 214 Ind. 551, 15 N.E.2d 1020, 1022, our Supreme Court said:
“. . . [t]he prosecuting attorney is a constitutional judicial officer, elected by the people, and removable only by impeachment. In him is vested discretionary judicial power to investigate and determine who shall be prosecuted and who shall not be prosecuted. If he fails to exercise his official discretion, honestly and impartially, the remedy is by impeachment. Judges and Courts may not substitute their discretion for that of the prosecuting attorney. Inquisitorial powers are vested in the office of the prosecutor and in grand juries, and not in judges and courts '. . .”
15 N.E.2d at 1022.
Further, the Majority Opinion acknowledges that “[njeither lack of intellect, learning, nor even moral courage, in prosecuting attorney, judge, or other elected officers, constitutes a disqualification to act officially.” State ex rel. Williams v. Ellis (1915), 184 Ind. 307, 112 N.E. 98, 103.
The last portion of the Order authorized the special prosecutor to investigate public allegations that the prosecuting attorney has “been influenced in the conduct of his office by political considerations” and authorized such special prosecutor to investigate the allegations and “conduct the prosecution of any criminal charges which may arise therefrom.” What constitutes “political considerations” is not specified and is a term so vague that I need not burden this opinion with numerous possible interpretations. Suffice it to say that when a prosecutor is an interested party or otherwise clearly incapacitated the trial court may appoint a special prosecutor “But this may not be done upon mere suspicion or rumor.” State ex re. Spencer, supra.
In conclusion, Mr. Hanna was a de facto public officer and King lacked standing to collaterally attack his indictment as being initiated and signed by Hanna. However, the procedure utilized in the appointment and the Order appointing the special prosecutor stand as a model of when and how a special prosecutor should not be appointed.
. At the hearing on the motion to dismiss, Prosecutor Kizer testified that the drug cases which the Majority notes came “perilously close (7 to 10 days) to lapsing under Crim.R. 4” were actually assigned to and the responsibility of his then Chief Deputy John C. Dibble whose testimony formed the basis of the trial court’s determination that drug cases were improperly prosecuted by Kizer and, therefore, within the special prosecutor’s jurisdiction. Dibble had been fired by Kizer and thereafter had publicly. advocated the appointment of the special prosecutor and a special grand jury. Dibble’s testimony concerning City of Lafayette Police policies with respect to drug investigations was not relevant. The City administration, not the county prosecutor, fixes the policies of its police department. Because of the ambiguity of the Order and the conflicting testimony at the hearing, the trial court’s conclusion that “drug cases” were within the purview of the Order was based on mere speculation. Kizer apparently acquiesced in the special prosecutor’s appointment so he would not appear to be interfering with an investigation of alleged improprieties in the performance of his duties. The allegations of improper conduct were made by Dibble. There was no direct evidence by Kizer or the appointing Judges specifying the nature of the crimes included in the Order.

=== CASE 9738898 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:05:03.739051+00 ===

MR. JUSTICE KLUCZYNSKI delivered the opinion of the court: Defendant, Charles Masini, was found guilty by a jury of criminal damage to property of less than $150 in value. The circuit court of Lake County entered judgment thereon and sentenced defendant to 9 months’ incarceration. The appellate court affirmed, one judge dissenting. (65 Ill. App. 3d 1011.) We allowed defendant’s petition for leave to appeal. On November 13, 1976, at approximately 1:30 p.m., defendant was clearing brush on a farm which he had leased. He was using what he referred to as a “brush axe.” Also according to defendant, he and his barn were hit by buckshot which he believed had been fired by two “light-headed” gentlemen approximately 300 feet away. Defendant enlisted the support of four other individuals, and the five of them tracked down two 16-year-old youths, Charles August and David Grosskopf, approximately 45 minutes later. August was carrying a shotgun which his stepfather had either loaned or given to him. In approaching the two youths, defendant held his axe “at port arms.” He then told August three times to put the gun down, and, after the third time, defendant lowered the axe “to guard.” When August hesitated, defendant held the axe “out as a defensive measure.” In his testimony, August said, “He had it in my gut.” Grosskopf, too, testified that the axe was placed against August’s stomach. August then relinquished control of the gun. Defendant then used the axe to lift August’s lapels. He did so, he testified, “to check for a concealed weapon.” Grosskopf’s account of this aspect of the confrontation was similar. He testified that defendant “looked into Chuck’s coat, pressing it against him, looking into his coat for — I don’t know what he was looking for — probably a concealed weapon or something like that; I don’t know.” August added in his testimony that defendant asked, in reference to a pouch that August was carrying, “What’s in there?” August produced a rabbit that he had shot and, according to August, defendant “started hollering about shooting his bunnies.” At trial, the youths admitted shooting at other rabbits, too, as well as a railroad light on tracks adjacent to defendant’s property. August then picked up the gun and leaned it against a nearby fence. While it was leaning against the fence, defendant chopped the shotgun in half with his axe. In his testimony, defendant stated that he did so to protect against further threat to persons, wildlife, or property. Following the incident, the youths contacted the police, and defendant was thereafter charged with criminal damage to property of less than $150 in value, aggravated assault, and battery. He was convicted and sentenced to 9 months’ imprisonment on the criminal damage charge but acquitted on the other charges. The appellate court affirmed, and this appeal followed. Our review is limited to the criminal damage conviction and sentence. Defendant first asks us to rule that the circuit court erred in instructing the jury. The Illinois Pattern Jury Instructions (1968) on battery and aggravated assault (IPI Criminal Nos. 11.04, 11.06) were given at defendant’s trial and were modified, respectively, to include the phrases “without legal justification” and “without lawful authority,” thus allowing the jury to acquit defendant of these charges if it found that defendant was justified in his actions in confronting Charles August and David Grosskopf. The IPI criminal damage instruction (IPI Criminal No. 16.02) was also given, but it was not modified to include a reference to legal justification or to the use of lawful authority. Defendant maintains that the defenses of self-defense, defense of others, and defense of property were raised as to all offenses charged and that the circuit court therefore erred in failing to include the phrase “without lawful authority” in the criminal damage instruction. Defendant argues further that this defect in the criminal damage instruction was not cured merely because the circuit court gave a separate instruction on justifiable use of force in defense of property (IPI Criminal No. 24.08). The State questions defendant’s right to raise this argument in this court, as well as the merit of the argument itself. As to the former, the State points out that defendant did not submit his own proposed criminal damage instruction (58 Ill. 2d R. 366(b)(2)(i)) or object to the instruction given. In rebuttal, defendant contends that the issue is preserved for review by virtue of Rule 451(c) (58 Ill. 2d R. 451(c)), which provides that, as to instructions, “substantial defects are not waived by failure to make timely objections thereto if the interests of justice require.” Alternatively, defendant argues that the instruction desired is fundamental in nature and that the circuit court is obligated to give such an instruction regardless of whether one is requested by the parties. Pointing out that he appeared pro se in the circuit court, defendant argues that reviewing courts should be especially careful to ensure that the jury was properly instructed. He also brings to our attention the notation of the jury on its verdict form which states, “Due to circumstances the jury unanimously recommends suspension of sentence on the criminal damage charge.” This, the defendant argues, indicates that the jury would have acquitted defendant on the criminal damage charge if it had known that it could not influence sentencing. Because we do not believe that defendant produced any evidence of justification for breaking the gun which would require the desired modification of the criminal damage instruction, we are unable to find a defect in the instruction, much less a “substantial defect,” which would support an exception to the waiver rule under Rule 451(c). “[W] e believe the jury could not reasonably have returned other than a guilty verdict, and therefore hold any error in this instruction has been waived.” (People v. Lyons (1967), 36 Ill. 2d 336, 340.) For the same reason, we do not believe that the desired modification is fundamental in character. Defendant’s argument pertaining to the instruction is therefore waived. We do note that the trial judge, in recognition of his duty to protect the rights of a pro se defendant, did instruct the jury on such fundamental matters as the essential elements of the offenses charged, the State’s burden of proof, and the presumption of innocence. Defendant’s remaining argument is that his sentence of 9 months’ incarceration is excessive. He points out that the jury recommended suspension of sentence and that the State made no sentencing recommendation; he also claims that his probation officer recommended probation. As a result, defendant argues, the circuit court abused its discretion in imposing a term of imprisonment. As to the fact that the jury recommended suspension of sentence, we find no merit to the contention that the circuit court was thereby precluded from imposing a term of imprisonment. The jury’s only function was to determine guilt or innocence; the circuit court could correctly disregard the jury’s recommendation as surplusage. (.People v. Coleman (1911), 251 Ill. 497, 499-501; People v. Worsham (1975), 26 Ill. App. 3d 767, 769-70; People v. Jensen (1960), 24 Ill. App. 2d 302, 314, aff’d (1960), 21 Ill. 2d 52.) So, too, the prosecution’s failure to express an opinion on the subject does not preclude the circuit court from imposing what it believes to be a suitable sentence. We also find no basis for defendant’s contention that his probation officer recommended probation. The officer’s report states, “Considering the fact the defendant is presently on Federal Parole until 1980, probation does not seem to be a suitable alternative in this case. The defendant stated that if a period of incarceration is a necessary measure, it is probable his Federal Parole will be revoked. It is hopeful the Court will consider these factors in sentencing the defendant.” Contrary to defendant’s argument, we do not interpret this as a recommendation of probation. The officer’s statement was noncommittal. We therefore need not decide whether and to what extent the circuit court was bound by the probation officer’s report. Finally, we note that defendant does not claim that the circuit court considered improper sentencing factors or that it erred in considering his lengthy adult criminal record. The circuit court had before it materials which indicated extensive criminal activity on the part of the defendant, including Federal and State convictions. In light of this record, we could not say that the sentence of 9 months was excessive. The judgment of the appellate court is accordingly affirmed. Judgment affirmed.

=== CASE 9738899 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:05:03.743231+00 ===

MR. JUSTICE CLARK, dissenting: The jury’s determination that the defendant was guilty of criminal damage to property of less than $150 is supported by the evidence, and I would affirm the conviction. The circuit court’s sentence of 9 months’ incarceration is excessive. A fine, suspended sentence or probation would have been just. As the dissent in the appellate court found, the criminal record of the defendant, who represented himself at trial, does not justify the sentence under the facts of this case (65 Ill. App. 3d 1011, 1018). The defendant, and the barn on the property he was leasing, were pelted with buckshot while he was clearing brush. The complainant and his companion, while hunting, may or may not have been on his property; but one or both fired buckshot, which struck the defendant and his barn, on or onto the property, around which were signs indicating the property was a wildlife refuge. It does not surprise me that the defendant might have been fearful of possibly irresponsible shooting, or that he was angered that his “animal refuge” was being violated. Overreact he did. Anger, however, might have been justified. Certainly he did not engage in the threat to personal harm that he was subjected to by the complainant. Moreover, two matters, not binding on the trial court, I find significant. The jury recommended that defendant be given a suspended sentence, and his Federal probation officer testified that defendant had not caused problems during his supervision. In People v. Perruquet (1977), 68 Ill. 2d 149, 154, this court determined that a reviewing court may not alter a trial court’s sentence absent an abuse of judicial discretion. Such abuse exists here. Factors to be considered in sentencing arc “defendant’s credibility, demeanor, general moral character, mentality, social environment, habits, and age” (68 Ill. 2d 149, 154). The record is devoid of evidence, apropos of these factors, which dictates so harsh a sentence. I am puzzled that a sentence this harsh could be given for a crime of this character, a crime involving no injury to the person. Fairness demands a remand for resentencing. I therefore dissent.

=== CASE 9738903 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:05:04.567142+00 ===

HUNTER, Justice.
Defendant, Robin E. Cross, was convicted by a jury of murder in the second degree, Ind.Code § 35-1-54-1 (Burns 1975), and sentenced to fifteen to twenty-five years’ imprisonment. He now appeals raising several issues for our review. However, because of our disposition of the issue regarding jury selection procedures, we reverse upon consideration of only this issue.
Defendant challenges the procedures employed in selecting the venire for this cause as being violative of Ind.Code § 33-4-5-2 (Burns 1975). That statute provides in relevant part:
“Said commissioners shall immediately, from the names of legal voters and citizens of the United States on the latest tax duplicate and the tax schedules of the county, examine for the purpose of determining the sex, age and identity of prospective jurors, and proceed to select and deposit, in a box furnished by the clerk for that purpose, the names, written on separate slips of paper of uniform shape, size and color, of twice as many persons as will be required by law for grand and petit jurors in the courts of the county, for all the terms of such courts, to commence with the calendar year next ensuing. Each selection shall be made as nearly as possible in proportion to the population of each county commissioner’s district. In making such selections, they shall in all things observe their oath, and they shall not select the name of any person who is not a voter of the county, or who is not either a freeholder or householder, or who is to them known to be interested in or has cause pending which may be tried by a jury to be drawn from the names so selected. They shall deliver the box, locked, to the clerk of the circuit court, after having deposited therein the names as herein directed. The key shall be retained by one (1) of the commissioners, not an adherent of the same political party as is the clerk.”
Uncontroverted affidavits attached to defendant’s motion to correct errors indicate the procedure for selecting the venire in Brown County at and prior to the time of defendant’s trial. Verified affidavits were submitted by the Brown County Clerk, Violet Wayman, and one Jury Commissioner, Maurice “Pods” Miller. Both affidavits read in part as follows:
“3. When the jury panel was selected for March, 1976, the procedure followed was:
“a. The Jury Commissioners selected every tenth name from the voter registration records in the Brown County Clerk’s Office, going through such lists precinct by precinct.
“b. The names were placed on a list in the same order in which they were drawn from the alphabetized precinct voter registration lists.
“c. The list was then given to the County Clerk who presented it to the Circuit Court.
“4. There was no randomization process through the placing on uniform slips of paper of the names of the jurors on the panel, placing those slips in a locked box, *267having the box shaken well by the Clerk who would then draw names from that box.”
Prior to addressing the merits of this issue we turn to two objections to our review raised by the state. First, the state claims that defendant waived this issue by accepting the jurors on the trial of the case. In Fenwick v. State, (1926) 197 Ind. 572, 150 N.E. 764, this Court found that the defendant waived irregularities in the selection of prospective jurors by the jury commissioners by accepting the jurors. In Fenwick, defendant claimed that at the time of trial he was unaware of the alleged irregularities. However, this Court noted:
“An examination of the public records in the clerk’s office any time after his arrest and before April 25, the date of the trial, .would have disclosed all the facts of which he claims ignorance.” 197 Ind. at 574, 150 N.E. at 764.
However, in the case at bar, the Brown County Clerk, in her affidavit, said:
“The records in the Brown County Clerk’s Office do not reflect that the above-described selection process was followed, or that there was any impropriety in the selection process utilized.”
The state claims that defendant fails to show that he exercised due diligence in attempting to discover the alleged errors. We are at a loss to determine what sort of diligence the state would require of a defendant. For this Court to require routine interviews of county clerks and jury commissioners prior to voir dire of juries would unduly burden, not only defendants, but those public officials as well. We will not place so broad an interpretation on Fenwick v. State, supra. Where the records of the county clerk do not reveal irregularities in venire selection, acceptance of the jury will not be deemed a waiver of said irregularities.
Next the state argues that Ind.Code § 33-4-5-2 (Burns 1975) does not apply in this case because that statute applies only to counties with a population exceeding 650,000, i. e., Marion County, Indiana. The state has been led astray by the compiler’s heading to this section of the official Indiana Code, “Selection of jurors; counties of more than 650,000.” IC 33-4-5-2 (1976 Ed.). Had the state carefully read the text of the statute it would have discovered that the second paragraph of IC 33-4-5-2 (1976 Ed.) establishes a special procedure for Marion County. The first paragraph is clearly applicable to Brown County, Marion County and every other county of Indiana.
We now must look to whether the procedure followed in the case at bar amounts to substantial compliance with the statutory requirements. Rudd v. State, (1952) 231 Ind. 105, 107 N.E.2d 168; Shack v. State, (1972) 259 Ind. 450, 288 N.E.2d 155. In State v. Bass, (1936) 210 Ind. 181, 1 N.E.2d 927, we said:
“From the earliest times rules and methods have been devised for drawing juries in an effort to insure the selection of disinterested jurors, and with a view to preserving the purity of the jury as an institution. Our statutory method of drawing juries was devised for the purpose of putting the selection beyond suspicion of advantage or favoritism. This result can be achieved only by a strict conformance to the requirements of the statute.” 210 Ind. at 184, 1 N.E.2d at 928.
The language of the current statute indicates that the legislature has determined that an impartial jury can best be obtained through a random selection process.
The process employed in the case at bar meets neither the letter of the law nor the spirit of randomization. The trial court received a list of prospective jurors in alphabetical as well as some geographical order. The procedure employed would not likely achieve the goal stated in the statute:
“Each selection shall be made as nearly as possible in proportion to the population of each county commissioner’s district.” Ind.Code § 33-4-5-2 (Burns 1975).
We find that the venire selection procedure in the case at bar did not substantially comply with the requirements of Ind.Code § 33-4-5-2 (Burns 1975). When a *268defendant fails to show lack of substantial compliance with statutory requirements, this Court will require a showing of prejudice to the defendant’s rights. Shack v. State, supra; Leonard v. State, (1968) 249 Ind. 361, 232 N.E.2d 882. However, when there is a lack of substantial compliance, the defendant need not show actual prejudice.
“It seems to us that the proper construction is to hold that an accused, regardless of his guilt or innocence, has the right to insist that there be substantial compliance with [the statute], and if these provisions are not substantially complied with, his substantial rights are harmed. Rudd v. State, (1952) 231 Ind. 105, 111, 107 N.E.2d 168, 170.
Furthermore, Judge Emmert noted that: “The only way this court has to enforce substantial compliance with the statutes on juries is to reverse when the issue is properly presented in the trial court and here.” 231 Ind. at 113, 107 N.E.2d at 171.
Moreover, the record before us includes a certified transcript of another cause which depicts the events which brought the noncompliance to the attention of defendant in the case at bar. After a hearing Judge Woods discharged the venire in the other cause because of the selection procedure employed. We are not inclined to deny this defendant the protection of the law because he could not discover the errors of the jury commissioners through an examination of the clerk’s public records.
For the foregoing reasons, the judgment is reversed and the cause remanded for a new trial.
DeBRULER and PRENTICE, JJ., concur.
PIVARNIK, J., dissents with opinion in which GIVAN, C. J., concurs.

=== CASE 9738904 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:05:04.571378+00 ===

PIVARNIK, Justice,
dissenting.
I must respectfully dissent from the majority opinion, wherein it finds that appellant did not waive the issue concerning the manner in which the jurors were selected by accepting them at trial and failing to raise the question until his motion to correct errors. It is true that the system of selection used by the jury commissioners here was improper and did not comply with the statutes. It is also true, however, that appellant did not look at the public records in the Clerk’s office or make any other attempt to determine whether the statutory procedure had been followed. As the majority has pointed out, Fenwick v. State, (1926) 197 Ind. 572, 150 N.E. 764, places a duty on a defendant to examine the records and raise the issue at a time when the trial court can correct the problem by discharging the jurors who were improperly selected and requiring the commissioners to select a júry in the proper statutory method. This is the law under Fenwick, supra, and its progeny. See Sturrock v. State, (1951) 229 Ind. 161, 96 N.E.2d 226; Anderson v. State, (1941) 218 Ind. 299, 32 N.E.2d 705; Souerdike v. State, (1938) 214 Ind. 523, 15 N.E.2d 379; Kark v. Central Greyhound Lines, (1949) 119 Ind.App. 303, 85 N.E.2d 277.
Appellant argues that he did not discover the problem until four or five months after the trial, when the question was raised in another unrelated case. When the trial court had the issue before it in this other case, the jurors who had been selected were excused and new ones selected in a proper manner. The appellant gives no reason why he could not have discovered this in. May at the trial of his case, when in fact it was discoverable in another case a few months later. Appellant’s counsel never looked to attempt to discover it. The only other exhibit in the record is an affidavit by the Brown County Clerk, which simply states that the improper procedure could not have been determined by looking at her records. This affidavit is bewildering, to say the least, and is certainly not sufficient to establish the proposition adopted by the majority opinion — that appellant did not waive the issue. The Clerk gave no facts to substantiate the bare statement that the impropriety of the selection process would not have been disclosed by looking at the records. Without explanation, her conclusion is not sufficient.
*269If the records in the Clerk’s office failed to show at all how the jurors were selected, this alone would have given appellant, if he had examined the records, grounds for raising the question in the trial court. He could have called into question the propriety of impanelling a jury selected by a process not revealed in the records. On the other hand, if other facts would show that the improper selection process described by the Clerk was actually used, but the records falsely showed that a procedure which complied with the statutes was followed, this would give rise to a claim by those looking at the records and relying on them that they had been misled as to what actually happened and therefore should be excused from making the wrong conclusion as to whether to raise an issue concerning the correctness of the selection procedure. We have no basis for making either of these findings here, as we have been furnished nothing by the appellant except the accepted fact that he made no effort whatever to investigate this issue at the timé of trial, and the simple statement by the Clerk that he could not have determined it if he had investigated.
This record clearly shows that appellant failed to exercise due diligence in attempting to discover the alleged errors and thereby waived the issue. I would therefore affirm the trial court on this issue and proceed to consider the other issues raised in this appeal.
GIVAN, C. J., concurs.

=== CASE 2218081 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:40.630626+00 ===

78 Ill. App.3d 361 (1979)
397 N.E.2d 539
POLE REALTY COMPANY, Plaintiff-Appellee and Cross-Appellant,
v.
WILLIE SORRELLS, a/k/a Willie Edwards, Defendant-Appellant and Cross-Appellee.
No. 78-1627.
Illinois Appellate Court  First District (5th Division).
Opinion filed November 16, 1979.
*362 Alan Freedman, Daniel Rosenblum, Jeffrey L. Taren, and Eric Gershenson, all of Legal Assistance Foundation, of Chicago, for appellant.
Jay Goran, of Chicago, for appellee.
Affirmed in part, and reversed in part and remanded.
Mr. JUSTICE LORENZ delivered the opinion of the court:
Defendant appeals from an order striking her second affirmative defense and counterclaim to a complaint seeking possession of a single-family residence and from the entry of summary judgment in favor of plaintiff on the said complaint. On appeal, she contends that the trial court erred in holding that as a matter of law there is no implied warranty of habitability in the lease of a single-family residence. Plaintiff cross-appeals from an order denying reconsideration of its motion for costs and fees because of defendant's allegedly false and fraudulent pleading. On appeal, plaintiff argues that the trial court erred in failing to hold a hearing on the motion for costs and fees.
The following facts are pertinent to a disposition of this appeal.
On May 17, 1978, plaintiff filed a complaint alleging that defendant was unlawfully withholding the single-family residence located at 5951 S. Justine, Chicago, Illinois, from plaintiff and claiming possession of the said property. On June 2, 1978, defendant filed her answer, first and second affirmative defenses and counterclaim. In her answer defendant denied that she was unlawfully withholding possession of the premises and that plaintiff was entitled to possession thereto. As her first affirmative defense defendant alleged that she was not served with any notice terminating her tenancy for nonpayment of rent or otherwise. As a second affirmative defense defendant alleged that plaintiff was not entitled to possession of the premises because, as a result of plaintiff's breach of an implied warranty of habitability, no rent was due and owing. In support of this affirmative defense, defendant alleged that commencing in January 1976 and continuing to the present time, the premises at 5951 S. Justine "have been at various times to various degrees, in substantial violation of the Municipal Code of the City of Chicago." Specifically, she alleged the following violations: deteriorated roof with holes and rotted boards; loose windows with rotted frames and broken sashes; cracked and broken foundation permitting entry of rats and other rodents; holes, cracks and *363 rotting floor boards in bathroom on second floor; broken, cracked and loose plaster on walls and ceiling of upstairs staircase; broken kitchen sink; nonfunctioning bathroom sink; malfunctioning plumbing system causing "back up"; unsanitary and noxious odors from basement; defective and dangerous drainage pipe; inadequate covering on ventilation pipes; failure to provide screens for doors and windows from April 15 to November 15; failure to exterminate; inadequate heating facilities; and defective eaves. For each of the listed violations defendant cited the section of the municipal code allegedly violated.
Defendant further alleged that as an immediate and proximate result of the claimed code violations the fair market rental value of the premises had been reduced by 50% from January 1976 to the present. Defendant finally alleged that she had "paid plaintiff rent far in excess of the value of the premises and no money is due or owing to plaintiff from defendant for rent or otherwise."
In her counterclaim defendant alleged that as a result of plaintiff's breach of an implied warranty of habitability the value of her tenancy was reduced in the amount of $2,780. As further result of the breach she alleged that she had been forced to pay $80 for extermination services and $1200 in excessive gas bills and that she had been physically and emotionally injured in the amount of $1,000. In the prayer for relief to her counterclaim, defendant sought money damages, costs and attorney's fees and a writ of injunction ordering plaintiff to operate said building in substantial compliance with the Municipal Code of the City of Chicago.
Plaintiff subsequently moved to strike the answer and counterclaim. On July 11, 1979, the trial court granted the motion to strike as to the second affirmative defense and counterclaim because "as a matter of law the implied warranty of habitability does not apply to the leasing of a single family residence." The trial court allowed the answer and first affirmative defense to stand. The trial court denied defendant's motion to reconsider the order striking the counterclaim and second affirmative defense.
The trial court subsequently granted summary judgment in plaintiff's favor on the complaint, but denied plaintiff's motion for fees and costs because of allegedly false and fraudulent pleadings by defendant. Defendant appeals from the order granting summary judgment in favor of plaintiff and from the order striking the second affirmative defense and counterclaim. Plaintiff appeals from the order denying fees and costs.
OPINION
Defendant first contends that the trial court erred in striking her second affirmative defense and counterclaim for the reason that there is no implied warranty of habitability contained in the lease of a single-family *364 residence. She argues that the reasoning of the Supreme Court of Illinois in Jack Spring, Inc. v. Little (1972), 50 Ill.2d 351, 280 N.E.2d 208, is applicable to the lease of a single-family residence as well as to the lease of a multiple-unit dwelling. In Spring the court held:
"[I]ncluded in the contracts, both oral and written, governing the tenancies of the defendants in the multiple unit dwellings occupied by them, is an implied warranty of habitability which is fulfilled by substantial compliance with the pertinent provisions of the Chicago building code. We hold further that the defendants' answers sufficiently plead the existence and breach of the implied warranties. The issues raised were germane to the decisive question of whether the defendants were indebted to plaintiffs for rent and the trial court erred in striking the affirmative defenses alleging breach of the implied warranty." 50 Ill.2d 351, 366, 280 N.E.2d 208, 217.
A careful analysis of the Spring opinion reveals that the court based its decision upon both an analogy to its decision in Schiro v. W.E. Gould & Co. (1960), 18 Ill.2d 538, 165 N.E.2d 286, and upon the reasoning of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia in Javins v. First National Realty Corp. (D.C. Cir.1970), 428 F.2d 1071. We will, therefore, examine Schiro and Javins to determine whether the reasoning of those decisions is applicable to single-family residences as well as to multiple-unit dwellings.
In Schiro plaintiff entered into a contract for the purchase of certain real property upon which defendants promised to construct a residence. Prior to accepting a deed from defendants, plaintiff discovered that the water and sewerage system did not conform to the city code. Plaintiff thereupon tendered payment of the agreed purchase price and sought a court order compelling defendants to install a water and sewerage system which conformed with the city code. Defendant moved to strike the complaint for failure to state a cause of action, arguing that the contract of purchase did not require that such a system be installed. In reversing the trial court's order of dismissal, the Supreme Court of Illinois stated:
"It is settled law that all contracts for the purchase and sale of realty are presumed to have been executed in the light of existing law, and with reference to the applicable legal principles. (91 C.J.S. 1032.) Thus, the law existing at the time and place of the making of the contract is deemed a part of the contract, as though expressly referred to or incorporated in it.
* * *
Applying this established law to the instant case, it is evident that the contract to purchase the land and building to be constructed by defendants included, as an integral part, the relevant provisions of *365 the city code in existence at the time the contract was executed. The requirements of the code were, therefore, as much a part of the contract as if they had been enumerated by the parties. Illinois Bankers Life Ass'n v. Collins, 341 Ill. 548, 552." 18 Ill.2d 538, 544-45, 165 N.E.2d 286, 290-91.
In Jack Spring, Inc. v. Little (1972), 50 Ill.2d 351, 280 N.E.2d 208, the court reasoned that the Schiro situation was analogous to the case where a tenant alleges that an implied warranty of compliance with the Chicago building code exists in the lease of residential property. Although Spring involved a multiple-unit dwelling, logic compels that the same analogy be valid between the Schiro cases and the situation involving a single-family residence.
The Spring court also found the reasoning of Javins v. First National Realty Corp. (D.C. Cir.1970), 428 F.2d 1071, to be persuasive authority for recognizing an implied warranty of habitability in the lease of residential property and quoted extensively from that opinion. The Javins court discussed three considerations which compelled the recognition of a landlord's warranty of habitability. The first consideration was that the common law assumption that the land was more important than the living quarters and that the tenant was fully capable of making repairs himself is simply no longer true. The court in Javins recognized that the modern tenant, unlike his medieval predecessor, is interested not in a plot of land but a house which is suitable for occupancy. Moreover, the court noted that the modern tenant does not usually have the skills required to maintain a modern dwelling, nor will his tenure in a specific apartment be of sufficient duration to justify his efforts at repairs.
The Javins court secondly drew support from principles found in consumer protection cases, stating:
"The landlord sells housing as a commercial businessman and has a much greater opportunity, incentive and capacity to inspect and maintain the condition of his building. Moreover, the tenant must rely upon the skill and bona fides of his landlord at least as much as a car buyer must rely upon the car manufacturer." 428 F.2d 1071, 1079.
The Javins court stated thirdly that the nature of the modern urban housing market requires application of the implied warranty of habitability. In this regard the court noted the inequality of bargaining power between landlord and tenant, the severe shortage of adequate housing and the fact that poor housing is detrimental to the whole society rather than merely to the tenant himself.
We believe the above three considerations, relied upon by both the Javins and Spring courts, are equally applicable to the lease of a single-family residence. The single-family tenant is concerned with the *366 adequacy of his living quarters and only remotely in the condition of the land upon which those quarters rest. Moreover, he usually lacks the skill and means to himself effectively and economically maintain the single-family residence in a state of good repair. This lack of skill and means is accentuated by the fact that such a tenant's tenure is seldom of sufficient length to justify his efforts at repairs. Principles derived from consumer protection cases are also analogous to the situation involving a single-family residence. The tenant in such a residence must also rely upon the landlord to inspect and maintain the building. Such a tenant has neither the skill nor opportunity to adequately determine the condition of the premises, other than in a superficial manner, prior to entering into a lease agreement. We also agree that the existence and use of poor housing, as measured by building code standards, results in a detriment to our whole society. Moreover, that detriment exists regardless of whether the poor housing be multiple unit or single family.
 1 For the foregoing reasons we hold that the implied warranty of habitability established by the Supreme Court of Illinois in Spring is also included in contracts governing tenancies in single-family residences. We further hold that, as in Spring, this warranty is fulfilled by substantial compliance with the pertinent provisions of the local building code. In the instant case defendant's second affirmative defense sufficiently raised the issue of whether plaintiff breached the implied warranty of habitability. Since that issue was germane to the question of whether defendant was indebted to plaintiff for rent, we hold that the trial court erred in striking the second affirmative defense alleging breach of the implied warranty of habitability.
Plaintiff argues, however, that the court in Spring limited its holding to cases involving multiple-unit dwellings. Although it is clear that defendants in Spring were residents of multiple-unit dwellings and the court addressed itself to the facts of that case, we find no language in the court's opinion which would bar extension of the implied warranty of habitability to cases involving single-family residences. As we have discussed above, logic and policy clearly favor such an extension.
 2 Defendant also contends that the trial court erred in striking her counterclaim for damages resulting from plaintiff's alleged breach of the implied warranty. It is clear that a counterclaim raising the issue of whether excess rent has been paid may be asserted in an action for possession of property based upon nonpayment of rent. (Peoria Housing Authority v. Sanders (1973), 54 Ill.2d 478, 298 N.E.2d 173.) Accordingly, we further hold that the trial court erred in striking defendant's counterclaim.
Defendant further contends that the trial court erred in granting summary judgment in favor of plaintiff on the complaint. It is clear that summary judgment is appropriate where "there is no genuine issue as to *367 any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law." (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 110, par. 57.) In light of our determination that the trial court erred in striking the second affirmative defense, it is clear that we must reverse the summary judgment. An issue of material fact clearly remains as to whether plaintiff has breached the implied warranty of habitability.
On cross-appeal plaintiff contends that the trial court erred in refusing to allow its motion for costs and fees pursuant to section 41 of the Civil Practice Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 110, par. 41). Section 41 provides as follows:
"Allegations and denials, made without reasonable cause and found to be untrue, shall subject the party pleading them to payment of reasonable expenses, actually incurred by the other party by reason of the untrue pleading, together with a reasonable attorney's fee."
 3 The basic thrust of plaintiff's motion was that defendant's allegations of building code violations in her second affirmative defense and counterclaim were untrue and made in bad faith. Plaintiff's motion to strike admitted the well-pleaded facts of the second affirmative defense and counterclaim for purposes of the motion. The trial court granted the motion to strike, holding that the allegations were insufficient as a matter of law. Only a question of law was before the court on the motion to strike. The trial court specifically held that the lease for a single-family residence did not contain an implied warranty of habitability. Therefore, the trial court did not reach the questions of whether the allegations of building code violations were untrue and whether those allegations were made in bad faith.
 4 Section 41 does not apply where a party seeking costs and fees has prevailed on a motion to strike or dismiss since the allegations in such a case have not been found to be untrue. (Fred Nemerovski & Co. v. Barbara (1969), 106 Ill. App.2d 466, 246 N.E.2d 124; Awotin v. Abrams (1941), 309 Ill. App. 421, 33 N.E.2d 179.) Accordingly, we do not believe that the trial court erred here in refusing to grant plaintiff's motion for fees and costs.
For the foregoing reasons the judgment of the circuit court striking defendant's second affirmative defense and counterclaim and granting summary judgment in favor of plaintiff is reversed and the matter is remanded for further proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion. The judgment of the circuit court denying plaintiff's motion for costs and fees is affirmed.
Reversed in part; affirmed in part; remanded with directions.
SULLIVAN, P.J., and MEJDA, J., concur.

=== CASE 9738905 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:05:06.742033+00 ===

Mr. JUSTICE TRAPP delivered the opinion of the court: On June 2, 1978, defendant entered a plea of guilty to two counts of burglary and one count of criminal damage to property in violation of sections 19 — 1(a) and 21 — 1(a) of the Illinois Criminal Code (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 38, pars. 19 — 1(a), 21 — 1(a)). Defendant also pled guilty to one count of possession of a stolen vehicle, a violation of section 4 — 103 of the Illinois Title and Registration Law (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 95½, par. 4— 103). On June 21, 1978, the defendant was sentenced to serve terms in the penitentiary of four years on each of the burglary counts, three years for the count of criminal damage to property, and one year on the count of possession of a stolen vehicle. The defendant filed a motion to reduce sentence which was denied. The defendant did not file a motion for leave to withdraw his plea of guilty as required by Supreme Court Rule 604(d) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 110A, par. 604(d)). This court has, however, exercised jurisdiction to hear this appeal. All charges against the defendant arose from incidents occurring on April 23 and April 24, 1978. On April 23 the defendant, without authorization from the Huisinga Grain Company, entered a truck located on that property and drove it west on Route 40 until it ran out of gas. The defendant abandoned the vehicle and fled on foot. On April 24, the defendant accompanied by Tonja Graham, Jody Minor, and Misty Davis, broke and entered into the Casey Liquor Store and removed *100 worth of liquor. Subsequently, the defendant and his companions traveled to the Moonshine Store, a rural grocery store in Clark County. After prying open a door, they entered the store and removed approximately *600 worth of merchandise. Thereafter, while the others waited outside, the defendant took a piece of wood and broke several glass display cases and turned over others. Approximately *1,000 worth of damage was done. Defendant on appeal argues that the trial court acted arbitrarily and abused its discretion in denying probation. Section 5 — 5—4.1 of the Unified Code of Corrections (Ill. Rev. Stat., 1978 Supp., ch. 38, par. 1005 — 5—4.1) provides that the defendant has a right of appeal from sentences entered upon conviction of a felony, that on such appeal “there is a rebuttable presumption that the sentence imposed by the trial judge is proper,” and that a reviewing court is authorized to modify the sentence and enter any sentence that the trial judge could have entered, or enter “an alternative sentence to a prison term.” The record discloses that no evidence in aggravation or mitigation was presented at the sentence hearing, but that matters relevant to determining the sentences were presented through facts stated in support of the pleas of guilty, and the presentence report prepared by a probation officer. At the hearing upon defendant’s motion to reduce sentence, defendant was not present and no evidence was heard. Defendant’s counsel argued the issues upon sentence which he deemed to justify probation, both at the sentence hearing and at the hearing upon the motion to reduce. It was agreed that substantial economic losses were suffered as a result of the burglaries. Counsel emphasized that the defendant was but 17 years of age with the judgment of a juvenile, and that the series of offenses for which he was convicted occurred within a span of two days and should be treated as a single occurrence. Counsel’s claim of defendant’s remorse is supported in the presentence report and to some extent by the pleas of guilty. While we find no specific evidence upon the subject, at each hearing it was urged that defendant’s restitution was available to mitigate the economic loss. The presentence report discloses a stable family of parents and siblings, albeit no evidence appears upon the guidance and control which the family might provide if probation was granted. The report shows that defendant was a high school dropout with little responsible employment. There were no convictions other than a disorderly conduct charge upon one occasion. Counsel argued, as factors in mitigation, that the defendant did not cause or contemplate serious harm or injury to any person; that his remorse and attitude indicated that he was unlikely to commit another crime, but rather that he was likely to comply with the terms of probation. Counsel sought a maximum probation with conditions of a jail term and restitution. The probation officer, through his report, advised that mental health counselling was available and that while the crimes were serious and the prognosis difficult, probation was a possibility. The report notes, “The outcome of this case could well determine how this young man’s life will turn out in the years to come.” Section 5 — 6—1(a) provides in part: “(a) Except where specifically prohibited by other provisions of this Code, the court shall impose a sentence of probation or conditional discharge upon an offender unless, having regard to the nature and circumstance of the offense, and to the history, character and condition of the offender, the court is of the opinion that: (1) his imprisonment or periodic imprisonment is necessary for the protection of the public; or (2) probation or conditional discharge would deprecate the seriousness of the offender’s conduct and would be inconsistent with the ends of justice.” Ill. Rev. Stat., 1978 Supp., ch. 38, par. 1005-6 — 1(a). In People v. Cox (1979), 77 Ill. App. 3d 59, 396 N.E.2d 59, this court noted that the present Unified Code of Corrections “enumerates specific, objective criteria (factors in aggravation and mitigation) which are to be considered in imposing or withholding various forms of punishment. (Ill. Rev. Stat., 1978 Supp., ch. 38, pars. 1005—5—3.1, 3.2,5—8—2.) Finally in sentencing offenders for felony convictions the judge is required to set forth on the record his reasons for his sentencing determination. Ill. Rev. Stat., 1978 Supp., ch. 38, par. 1005—4—1.” Cox concluded that the legislature contemplated that the reviewing court should seek to determine whether or not the sentence imposed deviated from the sentencing objectives stated in the Unified Code of Corrections. (Ill. Rev. Stat., 1978 Supp., ch. 38, pars. 1005—5—3.1, 1005—5—3.2.) That conclusion is stated in other comparable language when it was said that the reviewing court had the duty to ascertain whether the sentence “was appropriate under all the facts and circumstances ° # People v. Choate (1979), 71 Ill. App. 3d 267, 273, 389 N.E.2d 670, 674. In imposing sentence, the trial court stated: “I have searched these files and the report of investigation for mitigating circumstances and I can find none. I find the granting of probation or conditional discharge to either defendant would deprecate the seriousness of their conduct and would be inconsistent with the ends of justice. The very nature and circumstances of the offenses for which each defendant stands convicted requires for the protection of the public that they be imprisoned. I further find imprisonment to be necessary as a deterrent to others. * * Section 5 — 5—3.2 of the Unified Code of Corrections (Ill. Rev. Stat., 1978 Supp., ch. 38, par. 1005—5—3.2) provides seven “factors in aggravation” as framed by the legislature. Of the relevant factors, the trial court found only the aggravating factor that imprisonment was necessary “to deter others from committing the same crime.” (Ill. Rev. Stat., 1978 Supp., ch. 38, par. 1005—5—3.2(7).) Although he found that defendant caused perverse economic loss, the trial court did not find, and the record does not show that defendant caused or threatened to cause serious harm to another (Ill. Rev. Stat., 1978 Supp., ch. 38, par. 1005—5—3.2(1)), or that defendant had a history of delinquency or criminal activity (Ill. Rev. Stat., 1978 Supp., ch. 38, par. 1005—5-3.2(3)). The Unified Code of Corrections section 5 — 5—3.1 (Ill. Rev. Stat., 1978 Supp., ch. 38, par. 1005—5—3.1), states 12 factors to be considered in mitigation or in favor of withholding imprisonment. Correlative to the factors in aggravation, the record supports the mitigating factors that defendant did not cause or threaten “serious physical harm to another” (Ill. Rev. Stat., 1978 Supp., ch. 38, par. 1005—5—3.1(1)), that he did not contemplate that he would cause or threaten to cause such physical harm (Ill. Rev. Stat., 1978 Supp., ch. 38, par. 1005—5—3.1(2)), and that he had no critical prior history of criminal activity. As to other mitigating factors stated in the Code, defendant’s counsel urged that defendant would compensate the victims for the economic damage sustained, that the conduct was under circumstances unlikely to again occur, and that the defendant was likely to comply with the terms of probation. While upon this record the prognosis as to the latter factors is uncertain, the report of the probation officer concludes that defendant is remorseful and is ready to seek a law-abiding way of life. The defendant was but 17. It is not clear whether the criminal conduct present was motivated by youthful bravado and irresponsibility or had a more criminal quality. The record, however, does not yet demonstrate a chronic offender with no hope of salvation. We speak again of the statement of the probation officer: “The outcome of this case could well determine how this young man’s life will turn out in the years to come.” There is a substantial question as to whether a term of imprisonment for an immature first offender is related to the ends of justice. (See People v. Knowles (1979), 70 Ill. App. 3d 30, 33-34, 388 N.E.2d 261, 264.) In a penitentiary there is anger, bitterness, and no escape from a continuing association with more sophisticated criminals. It is a function of probation to provide a youthful first offender whose future is uncertain or doubtful with the benefit of supervision under the guidance of the court system, while it is better determined whether or not his life may be directed away from criminal activity. If he rejects the life of a law-abiding citizen there is the ultimate recourse of probation revocation and an appropriate sentence of imprisonment. Where successful, probation is an alternative by which the ends of justice may be better served. The trial court’s objective of imposing a sentence which deters like crimes by others is indeed appropriate. As to a young first offender, a substantial period of probation supervision with lesser incarceration other than in a penitentiary, and the making of restitution for damages inflicted is not necessarily a trivial penalty which may be scoffed at by potential offenders. In People v. Knowles (1979), 70 Ill. App. 3d 30, 388 N.E.2d 261, this court determined that where imprisonment is for the single purpose of deterence, this sentence must be further reviewed. Section 1 — 1—2 of the Unified Code of Corrections (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 38, par. 1001—1—2) includes the legislative purposes to seek out the differences in possible rehabilitation to the end that offenders may be restored to useful citizenship. Upon examination of this record in the light of the statutory factors in aggravation and mitigation and of the stated legislative purpose, we conclude that the propriety of the sentence has been rebutted. Upon such analysis, we reduce defendant’s sentence to a sentence of four years’ probation upon the burglary charges with a condition of three months’ imprisonment (Ill. Rev. Stat., 1978 Supp., ch. 38, pars. 1005—6—2(b)(1), 1005—6—3(d)). The cause is further remanded to the trial court to determine appropriate periods of probation upon the remaining convictions, for the imposition of further conditions of probation relevant to making restitution for the damages inflicted, and such other terms as the trial court shall find appropriate to establish a stable home life with educational or other necessary training. Sentence reduced; cause remanded with directions. REARDON, P. J., concurs.

=== CASE 9738906 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:05:06.746869+00 ===

Mr. JUSTICE GREEN, dissenting: Although I agree that the propriety of the sentence has been rebutted, I do not think that we have jurisdiction to reduce the sentence to probation. My position is based upon the same reasons I set forth in my dissent in People v. Cox (1979), 77 Ill. App. 3d 59, 396 N.E.2d 59. People ex rel. Stamos v. Jones (1968), 40 Ill. 2d 62, 66, 237 N.E.2d 495, 498, sets the precedent that provisions of the Judicial Article of 1962 (Ill. Const. 1870, art. VI (1964)), reenacted in article VI of the Illinois Constitution of 1970, “placed responsibility for rules governing appeal in the Supreme Court, and not in the General Assembly.” Thus, even if the supreme court had seen fit to enact a rule authorizing the appellate court to reduce a sentence to probation, the legislature could not authorize us to do so. Moreover, here the legislation by which the majority would reduce the sentence to probation concerns a precise appellate court power upon which the supreme court has enacted a rule. Supreme Court Rule 615 (58 Ill. 2d R. 615) authorizing us to reduce sentences has been held by that court to not authorize reductions of sentences to probation. (People v. Bolyard (1975), 61 Ill. 2d 583, 338 N.E.2d 168; People ex rel. Ward v. Moran (1973), 54 Ill. 2d 552, 301 N.E.2d 300.) Although the rule does not expressly prohibit the appellate court’s reduction of a sentence to one of probation, the legislature’s action attempting to expand the appellate court’s power beyond that given by the rule is more clearly a violation of the Stamos doctrine than would be the case if the legislation involved a power of the court upon which no rule had been enacted. Accordingly, I would reverse the sentence and remand to the trial court for resentencing.

=== CASE 9738907 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:05:08.155228+00 ===

YETKA, Justice.
On March 12, 1989, the Commissioner of Public Safety issued to Joy Marie Friedman a notice and order of revocation of her driver’s license for 1 year for refusing to take an implied consent breath test. Friedman sought judicial review, but the revocation was sustained in an order by the district court. The district court was affirmed by the Minnesota Court of Appeals. 455 N.W.2d 93. We reverse.
On the evening of March 12, 1989, Joy Friedman was arrested by a Minneapolis police officer for DWI following her failure of a preliminary breath test. The officer took Friedman to the police station for an intoxilyzer test. They were forced to wait 25 minutes because the testing unit was in use. Friedman asked what her rights were and whether she could consult an attorney. The officer did not allow her to contact an attorney.
During the wait, another officer took Friedman into a video taping room. He questioned her on tape. The arresting officer read the implied consent advisory to Friedman. The advisory stated that Friedman’s driver’s license would be revoked for 1 year if she refused the chemical test for blood alcohol, that the refusal or the results of the test would be used against her at trial, and that she had a right to consult an attorney after testing. The officer read the advisory three times. Friedman told him that she didn’t understand the advisory and that she had already been tested in the squad car. The police took Friedman’s response as a refusal to be tested, and her driver’s license was revoked for 1 year pursuant to Minn.Stat. § 169.123, subd. 4 (1990).
The issue before this court is: When does the right to counsel in a DWI proceeding attach?
I.
The right to counsel is a long-established principle in this nation. Under the common law of England, those accused of felonies had no right to retain counsel. See W. Beaney, The Right to Counsel in American Courts 8-9 (1955). In 1695, Parliament enacted a statute which permitted those accused of treason to retain counsel, but for all other felonies, there was no such provision until 1836. Id. at 9. Illogically, for minor offenses, including libel, perjury, battery, and conspiracy, counsel was permitted. Id. at 8. Blackstone denounced the English rule as inhumane. 4 W. Blackstone, Commentaries *355 (cited in Powell v. Alabama, 287 U.S. 45, 60-61, 53 S.Ct. 55, 60-61, 77 L.Ed. 158 (1932)).
The American colonies rejected the harsh English rule. Even before the federal Constitution was adopted, the constitutions of Maryland, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New York and Pennsylvania granted the accused in criminal proceedings the right to *830retain counsel. Powell v. Alabama, 287 U.S. 45, 61-62, 53 S.Ct. 55, 61-62, 77 L.Ed. 158 (1932). Delaware, North Carolina, South Carolina, Virginia, Connecticut, Georgia, and Rhode Island early in their history adopted constitutional or statutory provisions guaranteeing the right to counsel. Id. at 62-64, 53 S.Ct. at 61-62. When James Madison drafted the federal Bill of Rights, he drew upon existing provisions in various state constitutions. Force, State “Bills of Rights”: A Case of Neglect and the Need for a Renaissance, 3 Val. U.L.Rev. 125, 136 (1969).
There is no history of the intentions surrounding the adoption of the right to counsel embodied in the sixth amendment of the United States Constitution. The sixth amendment provides: “In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall * * * have the assistance of counsel for his defense.” U.S. Const, amend. VI. Although there was debate over other amendments, including religious freedom, free speech and free press, and the right to bear arms, there was no such debate over the clause granting assistance of counsel in criminal proceedings. See I Annals of Congress 756 (proposing right to counsel), 757-60 (religious freedom), 731-49 (free speech and free press), 749-56 (right to bear arms) (1834). It may be that the federal courts were perceived to have jurisdiction over only a small number of criminal cases. W. Beaney, supra, at 25. The extent of the right to counsel thus was left implicitly to be determined by the states.
State courts always have had the power to interpret their own constitutions. Before the fourteenth amendment was adopted, state courts determined questions of individual rights exclusively according to state constitutions. See Fleming & Nord-by, The Minnesota Bill of Rights: “Wrapt in the Old Miasmal Mist”, 7 Hamline L.Rev. 51, 56 (1984).
In recent years, as the United States Supreme Court has retrenched on Bill of Rights issues, state courts have begun to interpret expansively the rights guaranteed under their own state constitutions.1 Commentators have noted and encouraged the trend. See, e.g., Brennan, State Constitutions and the Protection of Individual Rights, 90 Harv.L.Rev. 489 (1977); Countryman, Why a State Bill of Rights?, 45 Wash.L.Rev. 454 (1970); Falk, The State Constitution: A More Than “Adequate” Non Federal Ground, 61 Calif.L.Rev. 273 (1973); Fleming & Nordby, The Minnesota Bill of Rights: “Wrapt in the Old Mias-mal Mist”, 7 Hamline L.Rev. 51 (1984); Force, State “Bills of Rights”: A Case of Neglect and the Need for a Renaissance, 3 Val.U.L.Rev. 125 (1969); Linde, First Things First: Rediscovering the States’ Bills of Rights, 9 U.Balt.L.Rev. 379 (1980); Morris, New Horizons for a State Bill of Rights, 45 Wash.L.Rev. 474 (1970).
State courts must follow the United States Supreme Court in matters of federal constitutional law. They are free to interpret their own law, however, so as to provide greater protection for individual rights than that which the federal Constitution minimally mandates. Pruneyard Shopping Center v. Robins, 447 U.S. 74, 81,100 S.Ct. 2035, 2040, 64 L.Ed.2d 741 (1980). Rulings which rest on adequate independent state grounds are not subject to review by the United States Supreme Court. Herb v. Pitcairn, 324 U.S. 117, 125-26, 65 S.Ct. 459, 462-64, 89 L.Ed. 789 (1945) (United States Supreme Court’s “only power over state judgments is to correct them to the extent that they incorrectly adjudge federal rights”).
In their expansion of the rights of individuals, states have been particularly attentive to the protection of those citizens accused of crimes.2 The United States Su*831preme Court has recognized the right of a state, under its own law, “to impose greater restrictions on police activity than those this Court holds to be necessary upon federal constitutional standards.” Oregon v. Hass, 420 U.S. 714, 719, 95 S.Ct. 1215, 1219, 43 L.Ed.2d 570 (1975). A number of states have interpreted their own constitutions to grant a more expansive right to counsel to those accused of crimes than the right afforded by the sixth amendment of the federal Constitution.3
Minnesota has a long tradition of assuring the right to counsel. Article I, section 6 of the Minnesota Constitution requires that “[i]n all criminal prosecutions the accused shall enjoy the right * * * to have the assistance of counsel in his defense.” Minn. Const, art. I, § 6. Minnesota Stat*832utes section 481.10, which has been the law in this state since 1887, provides:
All officers or persons having in their custody a person restrained of liberty upon any charge or cause alleged, except in cases where imminent danger of escape exists, shall admit any resident attorney retained by or in behalf of the person restrained, or whom the restrained person may desire to consult, to a private interview at the place of custody. Such custodians, upon request of the person restrained, as soon as practicable, and before other proceedings shall be had, shall notify any attorney residing in the county of the request for a consultation with the attorney. Every officer or person who shall violate any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, in addition to the punishment prescribed therefor shall forfeit $100 to the person aggrieved, to be recovered in a civil action.
Minn.Stat. § 481.10 (1990). In State v. Schabert, 218 Minn. 1, 9, 15 N.W.2d 585, 589 (1944), we construed the statute and held that interrogation of an accused person was a “proceeding.”
II.
We turn now to our case law in the area of DWI proceedings. The respondent relies on State v. Palmer, 291 Minn. 302, 191 N.W.2d 188 (1971), where we held that, under the Minnesota Constitution, the right to counsel does not extend to a DWI license revocation because of the civil or administrative nature of the proceeding. Id. at 306, 191 N.W.2d at 190. However, we subsequently questioned the validity of the “civil” label of the DWI license revocation proceeding in Prideaux v. State, Dep’t of Public Safety, 310 Minn. 405, 247 N.W.2d 385 (1976):
The bases of all these [cases denying the right to counsel], including our decision in Palmer, have been that driver’s license revocation is a civil proceeding, and, as a corollary, that the taking of a chemical test is not a “critical stage” in a criminal prosecution. Upon reflection, we have some doubt as to the continuing vitality of these cases.
Id. at 408-09, 247 N.W.2d at 388 (footnote omitted).
We then articulated in Prideaux three reasons why the “civil” label was subject to question. First, a driver’s license revocation for failure to submit to chemical testing is “necessarily and inextricably intertwined with an undeniably criminal proceeding — namely, prosecution for driving while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage.” Id. at 409, 247 N.W.2d at 388. Second, the revocation of a driver’s license has, in most instances, the same impact as the traditional criminal sanctions of a fine and imprisonment. Thus, “[w]e cannot allow a ‘civil’ label to obscure the quasi-criminal consequences of revocation to the ordinary citizen.” Id. at 410, 247 N.W.2d at 389. Third, we noted that the choice of whether to submit to the chemical testing procedures is a very important one to the individual driver. A driver must make a critical and binding decision regarding chemical testing, a decision that will affect him or her in subsequent proceedings. Therefore, when asked to submit to a chemical test, a driver finds him- or herself at a “critical stage” in the DWI process. Id. at 411, 247 N.W.2d at 389-90. However, we did not have to reach the constitutional issues in Prideaux, finding instead that the Minnesota Legislature, pursuant to Minn.Stat. § 481.10, did not intend a blanket denial of a right to counsel. Id. at 414, 247 N.W.2d at 391.
Subsequent to Prideaux, we reached the right-to-counsel issue in Nyflot v. Commissioner of Public Safety, 369 N.W.2d 512 (Minn.1985). We held that the decision of whether to submit to chemical testing was not a “critical stage” in the pretrial investigation. Thus, no right to counsel attached at that point. Id. at 515-16. However, Nyflot was decided under federal constitutional law. We must now confront directly whether Minnesota constitutional history dictates a different result. Because we do not find the Nyflot analysis persuasive under our constitution, we conclude that article I, section 6 requires that the right to counsel attaches at the chemical testing stage.
*833III.
We recognize that the purpose of the right to counsel is to protect the lay person who “lacks both the skill and knowledge” to defend him- or herself. Powell v. Alabama, 287 U.S. 45, 69, 53 S.Ct. 55, 64, 77 L.Ed. 158 (1932). As the United States Supreme Court explained in United States v. Ash, 413 U.S. 300, 93 S.Ct. 2568, 37 L.Ed.2d 619 (1973), the expansion of the right to counsel is necessary “when new contexts appear presenting the same dangers that gave birth initially to the right itself.” Id. at 311, 93 S.Ct. at 2574. As we noted in Prideaux, such a context arises in DWI proceedings; the technology involved in the DWI testing procedure makes it “inextricably intertwined with an undeniably criminal proceeding.” 310 Minn, at 409, 247 N.W.2d at 388.
As the Supreme Court stated in Ash, the test for whether the defendant needed assistance of counsel is “whether the accused required aid in coping with legal problems or assistance in meeting his adversary.” 413 U.S. at 313, 93 S.Ct. at 2575. In defining what constitutes a “critical stage” in the proceeding, the Court held that it includes “those pretrial procedures that would impair defense on the merits if the accused is required to proceed without counsel.” Gerstein v. Pugh, 420 U.S. 103, 122, 95 S.Ct. 854, 867, 43 L.Ed.2d 54 (1975).4 We adopt this broad definition as we now interpret the right to counsel set forth in the Minnesota Constitution. We believe that a driver who has been stopped for a possible DWI violation and has been asked to submit to a chemical test is at a “critical stage” in DWI proceedings, thus triggering the right to counsel.
The implied consent situation usually begins with a police officer requesting that the accused perform either a preliminary breath test or field sobriety test. Failure of either test can result in the issuance of a ticket or tab charge.5 Though the police could issue a ticket at this initial confrontation, one is not usually issued until after the implied consent advisory has been recited and the chemical test performed (or not performed if the accused declines to submit).
It was at this point in the process that Friedman requested, and was denied, an opportunity to consult her lawyer. As the facts in this case indicate, she initially agreed to take the preliminary breath test, failed it, and was taken to the police station. She was in police custody and was questioned on video tape. She was told that she would be tested again. When she asked why she had to be tested again, the officer made no attempt to explain. Another officer then read the implied consent advisory. When Friedman expressed confusion about the advisory, requesting a consultation with her attorney, her confused response was deemed a refusal to take the test.
In the facts before this court, the driver was confused about the legal ramifications of her decision. As is often the case, the driver at this critical stage looked to the police for guidance. An attorney, not a police officer, is the appropriate source of legal advice. An attorney functions as an objective advisor who could explain the alternative choices. We think the Minnesota Constitution protects the individual’s right to consult counsel when confronted with this decision. Thus, to the extent that Minn.Stat. § 169.123 denies access to counsel under these circumstances, *834we find that it violates Minn. Const, art. I, § 6.
As noted earlier, other courts have taken a similar view, finding a state constitutional basis for expanding the right to counsel at the chemical testing stage of a DWI proceeding. We agree with the Oregon Supreme Court’s decision in State v. Spencer, 305 Or. 59, 750 P.2d 147 (1988), which gave a more expansive reading than federal law to its state right-to-counsel provision, Or. Const, art. I, § 11. We find persuasive the following statement by that court:
A person taken into formal custody by the police on a potentially criminal charge is confronted with the full legal power of the state, regardless of whether a formal charge has been filed. Where such custody is complete, neither the lack of a selected charge nor the possibility that the police will think better of the entire matter changes the fact that the arrested person is, at that moment, ensnared in a “criminal prosecution.” The evanescent nature of the evidence the police seek to obtain may justify substantially limiting the time in which the person may exercise his or her Article I, section 11, right, but it does not justify doing away with it.
305 Or. at 74, 750 P.2d at 155-56.
As the dissent said in Nyflot:
If forcing an individual to a police station alone is an intrusion on one’s dignity, holding someone incommunicado on top of it makes the intrusion all the more severe. * * *
This grave intrusion on an individual’s dignity must be weighed against the state’s interests. The state claims that denying a right to counsel will decrease the number of refusals to take the chemical test and increase the number of DWI convictions. Even if consultation with an attorney does increase the number of refusals, those who refuse lose their licenses for a year. Minn.Stat. § 169.123, subd. 4 (1984). Either way, the driver is severely punished and the state relatively unharmed. Even without the chemical test, the driver can still be convicted of driving while intoxicated.
* * * * * *
The person suspected of drunk driving is generally an average citizen in a totally new, confusing, and uncomfortable situation. One’s dignity, the dignity of a free citizen to determine one’s rights and obligations through consultation with a trusted counselor rather than one’s accusers, is gravely intruded upon. This grave intrusion is balanced against, at best, a weak and ill-supported state interest. The state has failed to show that the intrusion is reasonable; thus, denying counsel is constitutionally invalid.
Nyflot, 369 N.W.2d at 521 (Yetka, J., dissenting).
We recognize that drunk driving is a serious problem, but we do not believe it justifies cancelling out the protection offered by over 100 years of precedent in Minnesota.
In the years between our decision in Pri-deaux in 1976 and Nyflot in 1985, there is no credible evidence that law enforcement was inhibited in any way by a person demanding the right to counsel. The prosecutor in Nyflot argued that he believed that there were fewer defendants consenting to the alcohol chemical test than before Nyflot, but there was no evidence offered that there were fewer convictions; nor is there evidence that the drunk-driving problem has diminished after Nyflot. Similarly, there was no evidence presented here that the number of intoxicated drivers on Minnesota roads has decreased since Ny-flot. It is strange logic that concludes that there will be more drunk drivers on the road because a driver can consult counsel before taking a test rather than after taking it.
If the objective of DWI prosecution is to get drunk drivers off the highways, into treatment, and on the way to sobriety, an attorney can play a very important role. A good lawyer is not only interested in protecting the client’s legal rights, but also in the well-being and mental and physical health of the client. A lawyer has an affirmative duty to be a counselor to his client. See Minn.R.Prof.Conduct 2.1 (1985) (“In rendering advice, a lawyer may refer not only to law but to other considerations *835such as moral, economic, social and political factors, that may be relevant to the client’s situation.”) The lawyer may be able to persuade a problem drinker to seek treatment. The prosecution, on the other hand, may be concerned only with getting statistics and convictions. We have ample evidence that a conviction alone does not solve the problem because we read almost daily in the newspapers of long-time inebriates, convicted again and again, who continue to drive and thus maim and kill their innocent victims. The intent should be, in our opinion, not only to convict, but also to get drunk drivers off the roads. In addition to education, there are numerous steps the legislature can take to mitigate the problem, including confiscation of the driver’s license, the car plates, or even the automobile itself.
The rights of all citizens embodied in our Minnesota Bill of Rights, however, are so important that they cannot be overridden for temporary expediency in building statistics. Of all those rights embodied in our Bill of Rights, the two most fundamental are the right to counsel and the right to trial by jury. Without them, there can be no constitutional rights at all. Every citizen has learned at an early age that whenever one is in trouble, the first resort should be to contact one’s attorney and seek advice. We thus repeat the age-old rule of law that was embodied in our state constitution: The defendant shall have the right to counsel.
However, we also recognize that the evanescent nature of the evidence in DWI cases requires that the accused be given a limited amount of time in which to contact counsel:
Consistent with this opinion, any person who is required to decide whether he will submit to a chemical test * * * shall have the right to consult with a lawyer of his own choosing before making that decision, provided that such a consultation does not unreasonably delay the administration of the test. The person must be informed of this right, and the police officers must assist in its vindication. The right to counsel will be considered vindicated if the person is provided with a telephone prior to testing and given a reasonable time to contact and talk with counsel. If counsel cannot be contacted within a reasonable time, the person may be required to make a decision regarding testing in the absence of counsel.
Prideaux, 310 Minn. at 421, 247 N.W.2d at 394. Thus, we hold that, under the right-to-counsel clause in article I, section 6 of the Minnesota Constitution, an individual has the right, upon request, to a reasonable opportunity to obtain legal advice before deciding whether to submit to chemical testing.
IV.
The dissent asserts that it is inappropriate for judges to vote to overrule the major constitutional decision in Nyflot. Nyflot was based on federal constitutional grounds. What the dissent ignores is that Nyflot itself ignored the reasoning and precedent of the Prideaux case decided only 9 years earlier. The dissent also fails to recognize the rapidly growing precedent embodied in recent decisions returning initiative to the individual states in protecting individual liberties through state courts interpreting their own state constitutions. This is a return to the climate that existed at the time the United States Bill of Rights was first adopted. Where the federal courts and the federal criminal justice system have eroded the federal Bill of Rights, it is appropriate for judges of this court to consider the protection provided by our own state bill of rights. The United States Supreme Court has, in effect, encouraged the states to expand their own bills of rights. See Pruneyard, supra. This court has historically protected the rights of Minnesota citizens; our decision today is no startling and unjustified shift by this court. We have had a statute since 1877 recognizing the important right to counsel. Today’s decision simply reinforces that ancient trend.
What has changed since Nyflot is not the membership of the court, but the development of state constitutional law. State courts are returning to local protection of individual liberties as intended by the colo*836nists before there was a United States Supreme Court. Whether the state constitution has language similar to that of the federal Constitution or not, states are free to interpret their own constitutions. See State v. Fuller, 374 N.W.2d 722, 726 (Minn.1985).
The dissent relies on State v. Hamm, 423 N.W.2d 379 (Minn.1988), for the proposition that contemporaneous history is a legitimate ground for interpreting the state constitution. Interestingly, today’s dissenter dissented in State v. Hamm.6 In Hamm, this court found justification for interpreting the state constitution differently from the way the United States Supreme Court interpreted the federal Constitution. We believe that history supports our interpretation today of the right to counsel.
We reiterate these basic reasons for our decision in this case:
1. Since very early statehood, Minnesota has recognized the right to counsel as a fundamental right incorporated in the ancient statute adopted in 1877 and quoted in this opinion.
2. In Palmer, Prideaux, and Nyflot, this court has struggled with the question of what type of proceeding a DWI stop is and when right to counsel attaches. This struggle has occurred over a period of a quarter century. This case should help resolve with finality that struggle.
3. Prideaux came closest to defining this court’s position on this subject in 1976. Even though our decision was based on statutory grounds, the dictum in that case also made clear what the court felt of the constitutional rights of defendants.
4. Nyflot was decided under the United States Constitution as this court thought the right to counsel would be defined by the United States Supreme Court, not under the Minnesota Constitution.
5. We hold today that, because of Minnesota’s lengthy and historic recognition of human rights, human dignity, and the procedural protection for the rights of the criminally accused, detention of drivers suspected of driving while under the influence is a criminal proceeding invoking the right to counsel.
6. We do not disagree with the proposition that drunk driving is a very serious social as well as legal problem. The resolution, however, does not lie in eroding and weakening the Minnesota Bill of Rights and resorting to the law of the Old West. Nor will the solution be impeded by allowing an accused to consult counsel; rather the opposite is the more likely. It is altogether fitting that our constitution be interpreted by this state’s highest court to offer greater safeguards of fundamental rights for Minnesota citizens than the protection offered citizens of the United States under the federal Constitution.
7. The legislature has the authority to pass, and in fact has passed, legislation making the penalty for refusal to submit to chemical testing nearly as serious as conviction for the offense itself. The availability of an attorney early in the process can aid in the removal of drunk drivers from the highway and assist in their rehabilitation. Certainly, no laws seem to have worked heretofore to deter the problem of drunk driving. We believe that the legal profession is uniquely qualified to aid in resolving the problem. Other professions and occupations deal with specific objectives of their jobs. It is the legal profes*837sion, with its broad educational base stemming from the Constitution itself, its code of professional responsibiity, and its advice to individual citizens in every field of endeavor, that will be looked to with increasing frequency to solve serious social and economic as well as legal problems. We challenge them further with this decision.
8. The dissent points out that this decision affords those charged with DWI privileges given no other accused. That is oversimplification and simply not true. In the case of a DWI, the chemical tests are more than just a search. The act itself could produce the evidence leading to conviction before any trial is even necessary.
Thus, while we hold that the point at which an individual is asked by law enforcement officials to undergo a blood alcohol test constitutes a critical stage in the criminal process and that article I, section 6 of the Minnesota Constitution guarantees an individual in such a situation the limited right to counsel within a reasonable time before submitting to testing, our holding does not justify the sweeping conclusions alleged by the dissent of the Chief Justice.
We have been required to decide a difficult question in a specific situation and have done so. We have held that a “ticket or tab charge” is the functional equivalent of a complaint in a DWI setting, but our holding does not go beyond that. It is unnecessary to speculate or decide issues not before us.
9. We believe that to hold differently could possibly lead to attempts in the future to decriminalize other serious public offenses and redefine them as civil rather than criminal and thus deny the right to counsel and a right to jury trial. Such denial would further erode fundamental rights that have been acquired over the centuries. Once erosion of these rights begins, where will it end?
We decide this case solely on the basis of article I, section 6 of our Minnesota Constitution, and not on any provision of either federal law or the United States Constitution. The trial court and the court of appeals are reversed.7
SIMONETT and GARDEBRING, JJ., took no part in the decision or consideration of this matter.
. The trend for states to interpret the provisions of their own constitutions has become so pervasive that the National Association of Attorneys General began in December 1987 to publish the State Constitutional Law Bulletin, which reports monthly on cases decided pursuant to state constitutions.
. See, e.g., Roman v. State, 570 P.2d 1235 (Alaska 1977) (rights of parolee); Zehrung v. State, 569 P.2d 189 (Alaska 1977), modified on reh’g, 573 P.2d 858 (1978) (search incident to misdemeanor, bail rights); Davenport v. State, 568 P.2d 939 (Alaska 1977) (rights of parolee); Scott v. State, 519 P.2d 774 (Alaska 1974) (discovery *831power of prosecutor); Baker v. City of Fairbanks, 471 P.2d 386 (Alaska 1970) (right to trial by jury for minor offenses, overruling Knudsen v. City of Anchorage, 358 P.2d 375 (Alaska 1960)); State v. Bolt, 142 Ariz. 260, 689 P.2d 519 (1984) (exclusionary rule); People v. Anderson, 6 Cal.3d 628, 100 Cal.Rptr. 152, 493 P.2d 880 (1972) (death penalty is “cruel and unusual” punishment in violation of state constitution); People v. Paulsen, 198 Colo. 458, 601 P.2d 634 (1979) (double jeopardy); contra United States v. Scott, 437 U.S. 82, 98 S.Ct. 2187, 57 L.Ed.2d 65 (1978); People v. Clyne, 189 Colo. 412, 541 P.2d 71 (search incident to traffic arrest was violation of statute); State v. Santiago, 53 Haw. 254, 492 P.2d 657 (1971) (statement obtained in violation of Miranda may not be used for impeachment); State v. Pokini, 45 Haw. 295, 367 P.2d 499 (1961) (state constitution mandates exclusionary rule); State v. Mullen, 216 N.W.2d 375 (Iowa 1974) (entrapment defense on statutory grounds); State v. Sklar, 317 A.2d 160 (Me.1974) (state constitution permits trial by jury for all criminal prosecutions, not just "serious" violations); contra Duncan v. Louisiana, 391 U.S. 145, 88 S.Ct. 1444, 20 L.Ed.2d 491 (1968) (federal Constitution requires trial by jury for "serious”, but not "petty” offenses); State v. Collins, 297 A.2d 620 (Me.1972) (burden of proof in determining voluntariness of confession); District Attorney for the Suffolk Dist. v. Watson, 381 Mass. 648, 411 N.E.2d 1274 (1980) (death penalty violates state constitution); People v. Beavers, 393 Mich. 554, 227 N.W.2d 511 (1974), cert. denied, 423 U.S. 878, 96 S.Ct. 152, 46 L.Ed.2d 111 (1975) (monitoring conversation); People v. White, 390 Mich. 245, 212 N.W.2d 222 (1973) (double jeopardy); People v. Turner, 390 Mich. 7, 210 N.W.2d 336 (1973) (entrapment defense); People v. Sundling, 153 Mich.App. 277, 395 N.W.2d 308 (1986) (search and seizure); State v. Granberry, 491 S.W.2d 528 (Mo.1973) (overruling State v. Nimrod, 484 S.W.2d 475 (Mo.1972)) (use of prior inconsistent statements as substantive evidence); State v. Johnson, 221 Mont. 503, 719 P.2d 1248 (1986) (right to counsel); State v. Hogg, 118 N.H. 262, 385 A.2d 844 (1978) (double jeopardy); State v. Phinney, 117 N.H. 145, 370 A.2d 1153 (1977) (burden of proof in determining voluntariness of confessions); State v. Mollica, 114 N.J. 329, 554 A.2d 1315 (1989) (search and seizure standard); State v. Johnson, 68 NJ. 349, 346 A.2d 66 (1975) (consent searches); State v. Burkholder, 12 Ohio St.3d 205, 466 N.E.2d 176, cert. denied, 469 U.S. 1062, 105 S.Ct. 545, 83 L.Ed.2d 432 (1984) (exclusionary rule in probation revocation); State v. Caraher, 293 Or. 741, 653 P.2d 942 (1982); State v. Benoit, 417 A.2d 895 (R.I.1980) (search of impounded vehicle); State v. Opperman, 247 N.W.2d 673 (S.D.1976) (vehicle inventory searches); Parham v. Municipal Court of Sioux Falls, 86 S.D. 531, 199 N.W.2d 501 (1972) (trial by jury for petty offenses); State v. Becker, 130 Vt. 153, 287 A.2d 580 (1972) (trial by jury for minor offenses); State v. Simpson, 95 Wash.2d 170, 622 P.2d 1199 (1980) (defendants have automatic standing under state constitution to challenge search or seizure of contraband or stolen goods); contra United States v. Salvucci, 448 U.S. 83, 100 S.Ct. 2547, 65 L.Ed.2d 619 (1980).
. See, e.g., Blue v. State, 558 P.2d 636 (Alaska 1977) (right to counsel at pre-indictment lineup); Roberts v. State, 458 P.2d 340 (Alaska 1969) (right to counsel at taking of handwriting samples); Nichols v. State, 425 P.2d 247 (Alaska 1967) (right to counsel on application to vacate or set aside sentence); State v. Stoddard, 206 Conn. 157, 537 A.2d 446 (1988) (police are required under state constitution to inform suspect in custody of attorney’s efforts to reach him); Bryan v. State, 571 A.2d 170 (Del.1990) (failure of police to inform defendant his attorney was on telephone was denial of right to counsel as guaranteed by state constitution); Haliburton v. State, 514 So.2d 1088 (Fla.1987) (failure of police to inform defendant his attorney was at stationhouse was violation of state constitution); People v. Jackson, 391 Mich. 323, 217 N.W.2d 22 (1974) (requiring counsel at photo lineup and rejecting United States v. Ash, 413 U.S. 300, 93 S.Ct. 2568, 37 L.Ed.2d 619 (1973)); People v. Skinner, 52 N.Y.2d 24, 436 N.Y.S.2d 207, 417 N.E.2d 501 (1980) (suspect cannot waive right to counsel unless in the presence of counsel); State v. Spencer, 305 Or. 59, 750 P.2d 147 (1988) (driver arrested for DWI has right to counsel under state constitution before deciding to submit to breath test); Commonwealth v. Richman, 458 Pa. 167, 320 A.2d 351 (1974) (right to counsel attaches at arrest); State v. Welch, 135 Vt. 316, 376 A.2d 351 (1977) (right to counsel attaches before chemical test); State v. Fitzsimmons, 93 Wash.2d 436, 610 P.2d 893 (1980) (police denial of access to appointed counsel was violation of right to counsel as guaranteed by state law).
. In State v. Hershberger, 462 N.W.2d 393 (Minn.1990), we approved use of the terms "compelling state interest” and "least restrictive alternative," although they arose from federal doctrine, as embodying concepts that provided guidance as we examined our state constitution. We likewise make use of "critical stage” analysis as we now interpret our Minn. Const, art. I, § 6.
. The ticket or tab charge is the functional equivalent of a complaint. If the prosecution has not filed a complaint by the time of the defendant’s first appearance in court under a gross misdemeanor DWI, the court administrator’s office enters on the record a brief statement of the offense charged. "This brief statement serves as a substitute for the complaint and is referred to as a ‘tab charge.’ ” M. Costello, R. Frase & S. Simon, Minnesota Misdemeanors and Moving Traffic Violations 48-49 (1990).
. This court has overruled precedent for reasons other than those articulated by the dissent. See, e.g., Hapka v. Paquin Farms, 458 N.W.2d 683 (Minn.1990) (overruling Superwood Corp. v. Siempelkamp Corp., 311 N.W.2d 159 (Minn.1981) in regard to UCC pre-emption of the law of negligence in cases involving damage to other property); Giese v. Green Giant Co., 426 N.W.2d 879 (Minn.1988) (declining to follow Patton v. Thompson Elec. Co., 420 N.W.2d 596 (Minn.1988), in regard to the amount of temporary partial disability compensation where an employee is working at a reduced-wage job); Herrly v. Muzik, 374 N.W.2d 275 (Minn.1985) (declining to follow Holmquist v. Miller, 367 N.W.2d 468 (Minn.1985), and Meany v. Newell, 367 N.W.2d 472 (Minn.1985), regarding the preemption of the dram shop field by the Civil Damages Act); Wakefield v. Federated Mutual Insurance Co., 344 N.W.2d 849 (Minn.1984) (declining to adhere to Wasche v. Milbank Mutual Insurance Co., 268 N.W.2d 913 (Minn.1978), regarding the stacking of priority level insurance coverage).
. Former Chief Justice Popovich presided over oral arguments, over the court conference in this case, and participated in the deliberations of this court when it arrived at a decision. Because the case was not released for filing until after he left office, his participation cannot officially be recorded in this matter.

=== CASE 2218398 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:47.088116+00 ===

125 Ill. App.2d 424 (1970)
261 N.E.2d 23
People of the State of Illinois, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
David Buford, Defendant-Appellant.
Gen. No. 69-137.
Illinois Appellate Court  Second District.
July 29, 1970.
*425 John T. Beynon, Public Defender of Winnebago County, of Rockford, and John F. McNamara, Assistant Public Defender, for appellant.
Philip G. Reinhard, State's Attorney of Winnebago County, of Rockford, for appellee.
MR. PRESIDING JUSTICE DAVIS delivered the opinion of the court.
This case presents the narrow issue of whether the trial court erred in imposing upon the defendant a sentence of not less than two nor more than seven years in the penitentiary.
The defendant was arrested on May 29, 1968, and was charged with the offense of having cashed a forged check in the sum of $50 on December 1, 1967. After an indigency hearing, the Public Defender was appointed on June 11, 1968, to represent him. The next day the defendant waived a preliminary hearing, and he was indicted by the Winnebago County Grand Jury on October 17, 1968.
Upon arraignment, he entered a plea of not guilty, but subsequently, on November 19, 1968, changed his plea to guilty, waived jury trial, and was granted leave to file a petition for probation. The defendant does not question the propriety of the court's admonitions in connection with the waiver of jury trial or the entry of a plea of guilty. The sole issue before us is the propriety of the sentence. The defendant contends that it was too severe and should be reduced.
*426 [1] One of the purposes of the Criminal Code is to "Prescribe penalties which are proportionate to the seriousness of offenses and which permit recognition of differences in rehabilitation possibilities among individual offenders." (Ill Rev Stats 1969, c 38, par 1-2(c).) This purpose affords the court a range of discretion in sentencing which permits a recognition of the rehabilitative possibilities of the individual offender. The law does not necessarily contemplate that the same penalty will be inflicted upon all persons who are guilty of the same offense.
[2] In considering this subject, we stated in People v. Buell, 120 Ill. App.2d 367, 256 NE2d 845 (1970), at pages 371, 372:
"In imposing a sentence, the trial court has an obligation to the public as well as to the person found guilty of the crime.... Thus, in sentencing, the court must consider the punishment warranted under the circumstances of the particular case, the protection of the public, and the potential for rehabilitation of the party being sentenced. The circumstances of the case include the nature of the offense, the attending circumstances, the character and propensities of the offender, his family, work record, past delinquencies, his potential for rehabilitation, and all other pertinent matters."
At the hearing on the petition for probation, the defendant, a Catholic priest, and a Protestant minister, testified on behalf of the defendant. The priest had known him for four and one-half years, and had helped him financially, as well as spiritually. He knew that the defendant was a drug addict, and that he had turned himself in for traffic in drugs. The defendant had told him of his efforts to quit the use of drugs, his failures, and his aspirations.
*427 The Protestant minister, Chaplain of the Council on Law Enforcement, related that he became acquainted with the defendant at a recent date when the local press carried a series of articles on drugs; that the defendant came to the church and talked with him about drugs and about his drug problem; that the defendant, as a former drug addict, made suggestions to him relative to combating the drug problem in this community. He believed that the defendant had leadership possibilities in connection with the operation of a Halfway House, or a similar facility, which could be dedicated to aiding former addicts.
The defendant, thirty-eight years of age, was employed at the time of the probation hearing. He was a high school graduate, and had been in the armed service of the United States on three occasions. He first enlisted when under the age requirement, and was discharged about a year later when his true age was discovered. Later he reenlisted, and was in the service in Korea from 1949 to 1952. He again enlisted in 1954, but was discharged when it was discovered that he had failed to notify the armed services that he was on probation at the time of enlistment. At the time of his last enlistment, he was on probation for forgery.
The defendant admitted that he had three felony convictions: one for forgery, one for possession, and one for the sale of narcotics. He stated that he had used drugs, and that he became an addict after being hospitalized for a service incurred wound. While hospitalized, he received morphine and later switched to other drugs. He served a Federal sentence at Leavenworth prison and used no drugs while there. Upon leaving Leavenworth, he voluntarily went to the Federal hospital at Lexington, Kentucky, for treatment. He later reverted to the use of drugs and voluntarily went to Covington, Tennessee, for treatment.
*428 The defendant had taken courses in literature above the high school level, and started writing while in Leavenworth prison during the years of 1958 to 1963. His works were published under the name of D. Thomas Bond.
The probation report  the verity of which was acknowledged by the defendant  reflected the following:
"FAMILY STATUS: The defendant states he was born in Shelby County, Tennessee, June 30, 1930. His parents are separated, and his father, Estes Buford, lives at 2044 - 21st Lane, Milwaukee, Wis. His mother, Viola Hill, resides at 530 Symington, Covington, Tenn. He has four sisters and five brothers, and he states that one of his brothers, Estes Buford, resides with the defendant. He completed his high school education in 1963 while confined to Leavenworth Penitentiary. He states he was married at Milwaukee, Wis. March 13, 1953, and that one child was born of this marriage. His wife presently resides in Milwaukee, Wis. pending the outcome of this probation hearing.
"Defendant states he enlisted in the U.S. Army Jan. 27, 1946 and was honorably discharged Jan. 13, 1947; that he enlisted in the U.S. Army April 7, 1948 and was honorably discharged July 6, 1952; that he enlisted in the U.S. Army March 15, 1954 and that on June 2, 1954 he received an undesirable discharge for failure to make known at the time of his enlistment that he was on probation on a felony conviction from Milwaukee, Wis. for forgery.
"EMPLOYMENT: He states he has been employed as a laborer in construction work in Rockford, Illinois by John Fridh and Linden & Son.
"FORMER TROUBLE: The defendant states he has been arrested on at least four previous occasions, *429 as follows: 1) in 1953 at Milwaukee, Wis. for forgery, placed on two years probation from which he was discharged in 1955; 2) In April, 1953, at Milwaukee, Wis. for possession of narcotics, sent to the narcotics hospital at Lexington, Ky. for two years; 3) In 1957 at Milwaukee, Wis. for the sale of narcotics and sentenced to 10 years at Leavenworth Penitentiary in 1958. Following his release from Leavenworth in 1963 he was transferred to the narcotics hospital at Lexington, Ky., being discharged in 1964; 4) in Feb. 1967 at Rockford, Illinois for narcotics violation. However, the informant later admitted that he had falsified his testimony, and the defendant was released shortly thereafter.
"PRESENT TROUBLE: The defendant is charged with and admits the cashing of a forged check in the city of Rockford, Illinois on December 3, 1967 in the amount of $50.00. He also admits to your Probation Officer that there were approximately eight other checks totaling approximately $600.00 which were involved in the same episode. In May, 1968 the defendant returned to Rockford, Illinois from Milwaukee, Wisconsin where he had gone following the cashing of these checks, whereupon he was arrested while driving a car without a proper license. He states he was arrested May 29, 1968, released on bond July 7, 1968 and has since remained at liberty. His petition for release on probation was filed November 18, 1968."
The defendant's character, propensities, family background, work record, past delinquencies, and the nature of his present offense, were not indicative of a good rehabilitation potential. Thus, the evidence would support the view of the trial judge: that the defendant was not a good probationary risk.
*430 Section 117-1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, provides:
"(a) A person who has been found guilty of any offense except a capital offense, the sale of narcotics or rape may be admitted to probation when it appears that:
"(1) The defendant is not likely to commit another offense;
"(2) The public interest does not require that the defendant receive the penalty provided for the offense; and
"(3) The rehabilitation of the defendant does not require that he receive the penalty provided for the offense.
"(b) The term of probation may be for any period not less than 6 months and not to exceed 5 years. The court may for good cause extend the period of probation for not more than an additional 2 years.
"(c) A person admitted to probation shall remain subject to the jurisdiction of the court.
"(d) The judgment of guilty entered prior to the admission of defendant to probation shall be a final judgment subject to review under Article 121 of this Code."
(Ill Rev Stats 1969, c 38, par 117-1.)
The defendant's record does not inspire the hope that he is not likely to commit another offense. When he reverts to the use of narcotics, the desire for drugs drives him to repeated forgeries. Confinement appears to be necessary to protect the public from continued criminal activity by the defendant. It is fondly hoped that the narcotics habit may be broken while the defendant is incarcerated; and that he may receive correctional *431 treatment which can be most effectively provided during confinement.
[3] When a sentence is imposed within the limits prescribed by statute, an appellate court will not disturb that sentence unless it clearly appears that the penalty imposed constitutes a great departure from the fundamental law and its spirit and purpose, or that it is manifestly in excess of the proscription of section 11 of Article II of the Illinois Constitution requiring that all penalties be proportioned to the nature of the offense. People v. Taylor, 33 Ill.2d 417, 424, 211 NE2d 673 (1965); People v. Smith, 14 Ill.2d 95, 97, 150 NE2d 815 (1958); People v. Juve, 106 Ill. App.2d 421, 428, 245 NE2d 293 (1969). Also see: People v. Scott, 117 Ill. App.2d 344, 253 NE2d 553 (1969).
[4-6] The imposition of sentence is peculiarly within the discretion of the trial court and this discretion should not be interfered with unless it is clearly abused. People v. Nordstrom, 73 Ill. App.2d 168, 183, 219 NE2d 151 (1966). We find no abuse of discretion by the trial court in this respect. The power in reviewing courts to reduce sentences should be exercised with considerable caution. People v. Taylor, supra, 424.
Under the circumstances of this case, the evidence does not warrant a reduction of the sentence imposed by the trial court. Accordingly, the judgment is affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.
ABRAHAMSON and SEIDENFELD, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9738986 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:06:50.853845+00 ===

SABERS, Justice.
Mother appeals a change in custody of the eldest of three boys to Father. Father appeals the requirement that he pay $250 monthly child support for two boys.
Facts
Father and Mother were divorced on July 13, 1984. They had three children during the marriage; David, Randy, and Michael. By stipulation, Father and Mother agreed that Mother would receive custody of the three boys. Custody was not contested at the divorce hearing, and Father appeared without counsel. Mother presented evidence in the form of testimony and exhibits. The trial court awarded custody of the three boys to Mother. As provided in the stipulation, Father was ordered to pay $375 monthly child support.1
Following the divorce, Father continued to farm near Flandreau, South Dakota. Mother lived in Brookings, South Dakota, where she worked at Minnesota Mining & Manufacturing (3M). On June 3, 1988, Father made a motion to modify the child custody and support provisions in the divorce decree. Father requested custody of the oldest, David, and that all three boys be permitted to reside with him during the summer months. The motion further requested that child support obligations be modified accordingly. A hearing was held on the motion on July 25, 1988.
David was fourteen at the time of the hearing. Father introduced evidence showing that David enjoyed the farm and preferred to live with Father. On the farm, David did chores and repair work on an old car. According to Father’s testimony, Randy, age eleven, and Michael, age nine, also enjoyed the farm.
Father introduced evidence that, while in Mother’s custody, David had problems in school, including failing grades, numerous days absent, and a three-day suspension from school. He also presented evidence that David had gotten in trouble with the law in a minor incident involving two friends. Father was upset that Mother had not notified him of this incident. Father also introduced evidence that the Flan-dreau school system had a special program which gave assistance and training similar to the one David was enrolled in at Brook-ings. Father testified that a neighbor, a substitute teacher in the Flandreau school system, agreed to tutor David to improve his grades.
Mother expressed concern for David’s safety on the farm because Father permitted him to operate farm machinery and an unlicensed and uninsured automobile. However, she admitted that she gave no thought to David’s operation of a lOOOcc Harley Davison on the highway without a motorcycle license. She testified to her belief that Father was unconcerned with *369David’s education because Father did not finish high school, failed to attend any parent-teachers’ conferences or show other interest in David’s education. Mother also expressed concern about the effect of separating the three boys.
David testified at the change of custody hearing. He indicated that though he loved both parents and felt both were good parents, he preferred to live with Father. Following this testimony, the trial judge spoke with David alone in chambers where David again expressed a desire to live with Father.
On September 12, 1988, the trial court amended the original divorce decree and gave Father custody of David. The decree was also modified to permit all three boys to live with Father during the summer months, with the exception of three weeks when all three would be with Mother. Father’s monthly child support was reduced to $250 and reduced further to $125 during the summer months when all three boys stay with Father. Mother appeals the custody change and denial of attorney fees. Father appeals the amount of child support. We affirm the change of custody and denial of attorney fees and reverse and remand on child support.
1. Change of custody.
As a general rule, a parent seeking a change of custody must show 1) a substantial change of circumstances, and 2) that the welfare and best interests of the child require modification. Mayer v. Mayer, 397 N.W.2d 638 (S.D.1986); Kolb v. Kolb, 324 N.W.2d 279 (S.D.1982); Masek v. Masek, 90 S.D. 1, 237 N.W.2d 432 (1976). However, when custody is not contested in the divorce, the party seeking a change of custody is not required to show a substantial change of circumstances. Mayer, supra; Flint v. Flint, 334 N.W.2d 680 (S.D.1983); Kolb, supra; Haskell v. Haskell, 324 N.W.2d 423 (S.D.1982).
Mother argues that custody was contested in the divorce and Father failed to meet his burden for a change of custody. She argues the trial court heard evidence and found that it was in the best interests of the children to grant her custody. She rejects the claim that custody was based on a stipulation of the parties and argues that no such stipulation exists in the record. In fact, the parties’ stipulation regarding custody and other matters appears in the record. Father and Mother agreed that Mother should receive custody, subject to reasonable visitation. Father did not present evidence at the divorce hearing or contest the custody issue. It is clear that the trial court relied on the stipulation as the decree mentions and follows its terms. As stated in Flint, supra:
Since here the parties stipulated that father would have custody of the daughters, the Kolb decision removes the element of substantial change of circumstances from the burden of proof. Kolb, supra. However, the moving party, ... is left with the burden of showing that the welfare and best interests of the child require modification.
Id. at 681.
Mother argues that the findings of fact do not establish that the best interests of the child require modification. In part, the findings provide: “there is a need for a closer relationship with David and his father and a need for closer supervision which the Court feels he will get when living and working with his father on the farm” and that “These facts indicate to the Court that a separation from his current friends and acquaintances would be in his best interest.”
It is evident that David was having problems while in his mother’s custody. Father testified that Mother failed to give adequate supervision and discipline to David and that he planned to rectify this situation. The court apparently believed this testimony in concluding that David needed closer supervision from Father. The court also recognized the bad influence which friends had upon David. The evidence showed that David enjoyed the farm and preferred to live with Father. In addition to David’s testimony concerning his preference, the trial judge spoke with David alone in chambers. SDCL 30-27-19 provides that a child’s preference is a proper consideration for the court in determining *370the child’s best interests. The trial court had an opportunity to speak with David and observe the parties at the hearing. We cannot say that the trial court erred in finding that the best interests of the child required modification.
Mother also argues that the trial court’s findings fail to show compelling reasons to separate David from his brothers. She claims that the two younger boys look up to David and share a very close bond which would be harmed by their separation.
We have held that the best interests of the child require compelling reasons to separate siblings. Adam v. Adam, 436 N.W.2d 266 (S.D.1989); Mayer, supra. The trial court must make adequate findings which show compelling reasons to split custody of siblings. Mayer, supra.
In this case the court found compelling reasons to split custody of the children. The court relied in part on David’s preference to live with his father. While Mayer states that a child’s preference alone may not constitute a compelling reason, there is other evidence supporting the court’s finding. As discussed above, the evidence showed David’s need for a change from his environment in Brookings. Further, the evidence indicated that split custody would not be harmful to the boys’ relationship. David was entering high school in the fall, while his brothers were both in grade school. David testified that the brothers got along but he did not share many activities with his younger brothers. The court may properly consider age differences and different interests in determining whether compelling reasons exist. Adam, supra. More importantly, David and his brothers will be within one-half hour of each other and spend the summer months together. The arrangement may provide as much quality time together as before. Unlike Mayer, the sibling relationship between David and his brothers will not be completely broken. Under these circumstances, the court did not err in finding compelling reasons to split custody of David and his brothers during the school year. The court did not abuse its discretion in the change of custody.
2. Mother’s attorney fees.
Mother argues that the court erred in summarily denying her attorney fees because the court failed to set forth the factors it considered. She argues that this requires reversal and remand for redeter-mination of this issue. Mother relies on Pengra v. Pengra, 429 N.W.2d 754 (S.D.1988), which states:
The record here does not indicate what, if any, factors the trial court considered, leaving this court with nothing to review. We reverse and remand for a redetermi-nation of this issue.
Id. at 757. Father argues that Mother failed to introduce evidence to permit the court to evaluate her claim for attorney fees. He claims that the only evidence concerning attorney fees was the net monthly income of the parties, which showed Mother’s income was higher than Father’s. This is sufficient to distinguish the present case from Pengra. In Pengra, the trial court denied wife’s motion for attorney fees, without stating any reasons, despite the fact that the husband’s income was substantially higher. Here, Mother’s income exceeds Father’s and the court found it equitable for each party to pay their own attorney fees. In addition, we note that Mother was unsuccessful in her resistance to the change of custody.
The trial court has broad discretion in considering factors for an award of attorney fees and we will not reverse unless there is a clear abuse of that discretion. Pengra, supra; Cole v. Cole, 384 N.W.2d 312 (S.D.1986); Garnos v. Garnos, 376 N.W.2d 571 (S.D.1985); Lien v. Lien, 278 N.W.2d 436 (S.D.1979). We find no abuse of discretion and affirm. In consideration of these factors, we also deny Mother’s motion for attorney fees on appeal. Malcolm v. Malcolm, 365 N.W.2d 863 (S.D.1985).
3. Child support.
After granting Father custody of David, the court modified Father’s monthly child support obligation. The court determined Father’s child support under the *371guidelines in SDCL 25-7-7 by cancelling out one child with each parent, leaving Mother with an additional child. The court then considered Father’s child support for one child under the guidelines. Father’s net monthly income at the time of the hearing was $1,250. Accordingly, the court set Father’s monthly child support at $250. Father claims this was error. He claims that the court should have compared the amount of child support Father would pay for two children under the guidelines against the amount of child support Mother would pay for one child and subtract the difference to determine Father’s support.
We agree with Father in part. SDCL 25-7-7 provides that “The child support obligation shall be established in accordance with the obligor’s net income and number of children affected[.]” Following the change of custody, Father was obligated to pay support for two children based on his net monthly income of $1,250. Mother was obligated to pay support for one child based on her net monthly income of $1,582. Since Mother’s net monthly income exceeded Father’s, her child support obligation for one nearly cancels out Father’s child support obligation for two under the guidelines.2 Mother argues that such a formula may lead to absurd results.3 However, SDCL 25-7-7 does not permit deviation from the guidelines absent specific findings. Bruning v. Jeffries, 422 N.W.2d 579 (S.D.1988). Thus, the trial court erred in its calculation of child support. We reverse and remand for the trial court to reconsider child support in accordance with this opinion. We note, however, this may provide inadequate support for the boys. Father’s farm occupation provides certain necessities, such as housing, utilities, transportation, etc. which would otherwise be personal expenses. On remand, the trial court may look to the record and make additional specific findings which may support deviations from the child support guidelines and provide adequate support.
Affirmed in part, reversed and remanded in part.
WUEST, C.J., and MORGAN, J., concur.
MILLER, J., specially concurs.
HENDERSON, J., concurs in part, concurs in result in part, and dissents in part.
. Father missed certain support payments which he claimed was due to sporadic income from the farm. He made the payments following an order to show cause. Following this, the trial court increased Father's monthly child support to $420 pursuant to the child support guidelines in SDCL 25-7-7.
. Under the guidelines, Father’s obligation for two children with his net monthly income of $1,250 would be between $360 to $390 monthly. Mother’s obligation for one child with her net monthly income of $1,582 would be at least $330 monthly. Subtracting the difference, Father would owe child support of approximately $30 to $60 monthly.
. Assume a mother with custody of five children and a net monthly income of $1,500, and father with a net monthly income of $1,000. Father would pay approximately $350 per month child support to the mother under the guidelines.
However, if the father were to gain custody of one child he would no longer pay any child support for the four children in mother’s custody. In fact, the mother would be required to pay $20 per month for support of the one child in the father’s custody. While such a result appears inequitable, such a result is required under the current guidelines in the absence of specific findings supporting deviations. In this context, it is important to note that the guidelines in SDCL 25-7-7 have been replaced with new guidelines effective July 1, 1989.

=== CASE 2220876 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:59.546723+00 ===

654 N.E.2d 894 (1995)
In re the Marriage of Judith Ann GABRIEL, Appellant-Petitioner,
v.
John E. GABRIEL, Appellee-Respondent.
No. 79A02-9412-CV-750.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
August 25, 1995.
*895 Ann G. Davis, Holder, Davis and Smith, Lafayette, for appellant.
Margret G. Robb, Camille Townsend, Margret G. Robb & Associates, Lafayette, for appellee.
OPINION
KIRSCH, Judge.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
Judith Ann Gabriel (Wife) appeals from the dissolution of her marriage to John E. *896 Gabriel (Husband), and raises three issues which we consolidate as follows:
Did the trial court abuse its discretion by accepting parties' written property settlement agreement after Wife's repudiation?
We affirm.
FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
Husband and Wife were married in 1987. The marriage was the second for both, and no children were born during the marriage. In 1991, the parties discussed the possibility of dissolving their marriage and agreed to initiate proceedings to do so after they received a purchase offer on the marital residence. After receiving such an offer on September 1, 1993, they began itemizing all remaining marital property.
Husband and Wife submitted their completed property list to Wife's attorney. Husband was not represented by counsel at this time. Wife's counsel prepared a settlement agreement conforming with the parties' list. The agreement provided that Husband would receive his pension, 401 (K) plan, and savings and retirement plans through his employer. The agreement also provided that Wife would receive her pension, 401(K) plan, and savings and retirement plans through her employer. In September 1993, Wife signed the agreement and sent it to Husband, who also signed and approved the agreement.
Pursuant to the agreement, the parties began dividing the marital property. Each received one-half of the proceeds from the sale of the marital residence; Wife took sole possession of the 1991 Toyota and 1970 Mercedes Benz; Husband took possession of the 1989 Cadillac and 1976 Chevrolet truck. Wife received a $2,000.00 check which represented the full liquidation value of the parties' investment accounts. The parties also divided furniture, personal effects, and works of art. Wife provided written consent to be removed as the beneficiary on the Husband's 401(K) and retirement accounts, and Husband received sole possession of the accounts.
Husband then elected to take early retirement benefits offered by his employer. Husband testified at the dissolution hearing that he could not get his job back or rescind his retirement bonus. After the distribution of the marital property and Husband's retirement, Wife filed her petition for dissolution. The parties agreed to wait until after the end of the year to finalize the proceeding so that a joint tax return could be filed.
In early 1994, Wife decided that the agreement was not fair and did not represent an equal division of the marital property. She contacted her attorney and told him she intended to repudiate the agreement. At this time, the agreement had not been submitted to the court, nor had the matter been set for hearing. Wife filed a third-party request for production of documents and subpoena duces tecum asking Husband's employer to release financial information regarding Husband's lump-sum retirement benefit and his monthly retirement benefit. Husband moved to quash Wife's third-party request for production and subpoena duces tecum and to enter and approve the dissolution agreement.
After hearing evidence on Husband's motions to quash and to enter the dissolution agreement, the trial court took the motions under advisement and subsequently found that: 1) the parties entered into the written settlement agreement without fraud, duress, or undue influence; 2) the terms of the agreement were fair and equitable; 3) the parties had already substantially performed the terms of the agreement; and 4) the agreement should be incorporated into the court's Decree of Dissolution. We will supply additional facts as necessary.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
Indiana law recognizes the use of settlement agreements:
"(a) To promote the amicable settlements of disputes that have arisen or may arise between the parties to a marriage attendant upon the dissolution of the marriage, the parties may agree in writing to provisions for . . . the disposition of property. . . .
"(b) In an action for dissolution of the marriage the terms of the agreement if approved by the court shall be incorporated *897 and merged into the decree and the parties ordered to perform them. . . ."
IC 31-1-11.5-10 (1988 Ed.). This provision "gives the parties free rein to make such continuing financial arrangements as, in a spirit of amicability and conciliation, they wish." Hull v. Hull (1982), Ind.App., 436 N.E.2d 841, 843.
The trial court has the discretion to accept, modify, or reject a negotiated settlement agreement. Anderson v. Anderson (1979), Ind.App., 399 N.E.2d 391, 398. The court should accept the agreement "[u]nless the record demonstrates some unfairness, unreasonableness, manifest inequity in the terms of the agreement, or that the execution of the agreement was procured through fraud, misrepresentation, coercion, duress, or lack of full disclosure. . . ." Stockton v. Stockton (1982), Ind.App., 435 N.E.2d 586, 589. An abuse of discretion results if the court rejects or modifies "an otherwise fairlyentered-into and reasonable settlement agreement where no rational basis for such action is supported by the record. . . ." Id at 589-90.
Wife recognizes the trial court's authority to accept, modify or reject a property settlement agreement. She argues, however, that the trial court has no authority to accept an agreement that a party has earlier repudiated. More specifically, she contends that the trial court erred when it incorporated the property settlement agreement into the decree of dissolution because she repudiated the agreement in a timely manner, namely, before the trial court approved it.
In support of her argument, Wife relies primarily upon McClure v. McClure (1984), Ind.App., 459 N.E.2d 398. In that case, the parties reached an oral agreement immediately prior to the final hearing. During the final hearing, the parties testified regarding the contents of the oral property agreement. The trial judge requested that the agreement be reduced to writing and signed by the parties before he would incorporate it into the dissolution decree. After the hearing, the wife filed a petition to set aside the agreement, alleging that at the time of the hearing, she was under medical care for stress and did not know to what she was assenting. The trial court held a hearing on the wife's petition, but denied her request. It then granted the dissolution and approved the oral property settlement. A dissolution decree and written settlement agreement were subsequently filed with the court. The decree was signed by the trial judge and by the husband's counsel. The accompanying settlement agreement was signed by the husband and his attorney, signed and approved by the trial judge, but not signed by the wife or her counsel.
Wife is correct that McClure recognized error in the trial court's acceptance of an agreement that was timely repudiated. 459 N.E.2d at 401. The timeliness of the repudiation, however, was determined by the fact that the wife voiced her repudiation before the agreement was reduced to writing and signed by the parties. Contrary to Wife's contention in the present case, the timeliness of the wife's repudiation in McClure was not determined with reference to the trial court's acceptance of the agreement. We explicitly stated that "[t]he salient fact in this case is that there never was a property settlement agreement in writing between the parties for the court to approve." Id at 400. There never was a written agreement because the wife never signed it. The wife's repudiation of the oral agreement, together with her failure to sign the written agreement, were the factors controlling the outcome in McClure.
Here, on the other hand, Wife did not repudiate the agreement until after it was reduced to writing, signed by both parties, and most importantly, substantially performed. The home was sold; vehicles and household goods were distributed; and investment accounts were liquidated, all pursuant to the agreement. Moreover, Husband had substantially changed his position by retiring from his job; he was unable to return to that job or rescind his acceptance of his retirement bonus. These circumstances constitute a rational basis supporting the trial court's decision to accept the written agreement signed by both parties.
*898 Wife also contends that reversal is warranted by our decision in Eddings v. Eddings (1982), Ind.App., 437 N.E.2d 493. There, the wife signed a prospective settlement agreement, but prior to trial, she hired counsel and repudiated the agreement. Relying in part on Anderson, 399 N.E.2d 391, we held in Eddings that "under the facts of this case," the trial court erred in accepting the agreement. 437 N.E.2d at 494.
In Anderson, the trial court entered a dissolution decree without dividing the parties' property or indicating that the parties had submitted a negotiated property settlement agreement. In an action independent of the dissolution proceedings, the wife challenged the settlement agreement, claiming fraud and attorney misconduct. In holding that the trial court properly dismissed wife's separate action, this court noted that:
"The settlement agreement in itself is not a legal instrument binding on the parties, no matter how formally executed, until it is approved by the court and incorporated and merged into the decree. Hence, a settlement agreement that has not been approved by the dissolution court and incorporated and merged into the decree has no legal efficacy. The Dissolution of Marriage Act provides the sole method for dividing the marital property in a dissolution proceeding,by the court's order or decree."
Anderson, 399 N.E.2d at 398. Based upon this language, we held in Eddings that the wife "was acting within her rights" when she repudiated the agreement. Our meaning there, as in Anderson, was that a party is not bound to comply with a settlement agreement unless and until it is accepted by the dissolution court and made a part of the decree.
Neither Anderson nor Eddings confer on parties to a settlement agreement an absolute right of repudiation prior to trial court approval of the agreement. Were it otherwise, the public policy favoring the amicable settlement of disputes by written agreement would be thwarted. As would be the case here, one party might reap all the benefit from the substantial performance of an agreement yet repudiate it to the other party's detriment prior to court approval.
We hold that there is no absolute right to repudiate a negotiated written property settlement agreement prior to court approval. This holding does not preclude a party from challenging an agreement at the final hearing by establishing the existence of "some unfairness, unreasonableness, manifest inequity in the terms of the agreement, or that the execution of the agreement was procured through fraud, misrepresentation, coercion, duress, or lack of full disclosure." Stockton, 435 N.E.2d at 589.
Wife also argues that the trial court erred in accepting the agreement because the evidence shows that Husband "pressured [her] and unduly influenced her by threatening her, telling her she would regret it if she did not cooperate, and that she did not deserve to live, and he should put a gun to her head." Appellant's Brief at 14. The trial court had conflicting evidence before it regarding coercion. Wife was represented by counsel throughout the agreement negotiations; Husband had no counsel. We also note that Wife testified that Husband never threatened her to procure her signature on the agreement. Given this evidence, we cannot say that the trial court erred when it found that the parties entered into the agreement without fraud, duress, or undue influence.
Finally, we reject Wife's contention that the trial court erred when it inquired into the extent of her inheritance. The basis of Wife's claim that the agreement was unfair was that the value of Husband's retirement benefits increased after the agreement was signed but before Wife filed the petition for dissolution of the marriage. Wife's inheritance, like Husband's retirement, did not occur until after the agreement was negotiated and signed. For this reason, evidence of the extent of this inheritance was necessary to determine the fairness of the agreement.[1]
Affirmed.
FRIEDLANDER and ROBERTSON, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Wife also argues that the trial court erred when it quashed her third-party request for production of documents and subpoena duces tecum. Our decision that the trial court did not abuse its discretion when it accepted the agreement and incorporated it into the decree renders this discovery issue moot.

=== CASE 9739762 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:20:32.821538+00 ===

Per Curiam.
This is an appeal by a plaintiff of a damages award in the district court for Hall County. Plaintiff, Mia M. Vredeveld, was a passenger in a car which was rear-ended by defendant, Scott R. Clark. The court granted plaintiff’s motion for summary judgment as to liability and submitted to the jury the determination of damages proximately caused by defendant. The jury found for plaintiff in the amount of $5,000. Plaintiff appeals the damages awarded.
STATEMENT OF FACTS
On August 23,1986, at approximately 11 p.m., plaintiff and a friend, Lana Leitschuck, after going to a movie, were driving home in plaintiff’s Corvette. Leitschuck was driving and *48headed south on South Locust Street in Grand Island. As she arrived at Brookline Drive, she waited for the northbound traffic to clear so that she could make a left turn onto Brookline Drive. As she waited, another vehicle pulled up behind her. Shortly thereafter, defendant, also traveling southbound, approached in his vehicle and struck the vehicle immediately behind plaintiff’s, pushing it into plaintiff’s vehicle. Plaintiff, who was not wearing her seatbelt, testified that in response to Leitschuck’s gasp immediately prior to the collision, she reached out to the dashboard with her right hand.
After the collision, plaintiff experienced stiffness in her neck and pain in the tops of her shoulders and the middle of her back. Plaintiff drove Leitschuck to plaintiff’s house, and later, early Sunday morning, plaintiff went to the St. Francis Hospital emergency room. She was x-rayed and fitted with a cervical collar.
Plaintiff consulted her family physician, Dr. Sheridan Anderson, on August 26, because of persistent pain in her neck and across the top of her shoulders. Dr. Anderson diagnosed muscle strain and spasm in her neck. He prescribed pain medication and physical therapy. However, plaintiff began to experience pain in her right shoulder joint between August 27 and September 2. On September 2, plaintiff returned to Dr. Anderson’s office, complaining of a resurgence of pain after attending a dance at her parents’ home. At the recommendation of Dr. Anderson, plaintiff consulted Dr. Balachandran Wariyar, a neurologist, on October 1. In a letter to Dr. Anderson, Dr. Wariyar indicated that plaintiff had increasing problems with the right side of her shoulder and her neck “with the arm popping.”
Dr. Wariyar found no nerve damage. On October 21, plaintiff drove to Iowa. Plaintiff testified that her right shoulder began to hurt as she drove to Iowa and that she was unable to complete the drive home. Plaintiff’s neck pain began to subside by October 1986 and was resolved by March 13, 1987. Between October 28,1986, and approximately November 27, 1989, plaintiff had consultations with, and treatments from, a number of specialists for her right shoulder pain. Dr. Matthew Reckmeyer, an orthopedic surgeon, treated plaintiff *49on several occasions beginning in October 1986. In a letter he prepared after plaintiff’s visit, Dr. Reckmeyer stated that plaintiff had not recalled any specific trauma to her shoulder. His treatments included physical therapy and injections in the shoulder to relieve the pain. Dr. Reckmeyer was apparently the first to diagnose plaintiff’s condition as shoulder impingement syndrome. Subsequent consultations with other doctors supported the diagnosis. In October 1987, a Dr. Miller, consulted for a second opinion, performed an arthrography. Dye was injected into the problem area to assist in the diagnosis. A myelogram and a CAT scan were also done.
Plaintiff eventually had two surgeries to relieve the shoulder impingement syndrome. On November 17, 1988, Dr. Reckmeyer performed an arthroscopic shoulder decompression, a procedure in which a tube is inserted through a puncture wound into various areas of the shoulder joint. This procedure alleviated the pain for a short time, but the pain in plaintiff’s right shoulder resumed. On August 22, 1989, a Dr. Lesiak, an orthopedic surgeon who had previously seen plaintiff for the same condition, performed an open shoulder decompression. This surgery required a 3- to 4-inch incision in plaintiff’s shoulder.
Plaintiff was involved in other motor vehicle accidents on June 26,1987, and May 11 and 19, 1990. There is no indication that plaintiff suffered any injuries from the June 26 accident. Dr. Lesiak saw plaintiff on May 24,1990, because of the May 11 accident. Dr. Lesiak found that plaintiff had a second degree acromioclavicular joint separation, a separation in her shoulder.
On April 16, 1990, plaintiff filed the present action against defendant, requesting special damages in the amount of $14,883.12 and general damages. The trial court granted summary judgment against defendant as to liability and submitted the issues of proximate cause of the injuries and the amount of damages that plaintiff suffered, if any, to the jury. At trial, plaintiff offered expert testimony from orthopedic surgeon Bruce Claussen. Dr. Claussen examined plaintiff in November 1990. In explaining the injury to her shoulder, plaintiff told Dr. Claussen she had placed her arm on the *50dashboard prior to impact. Dr. Claussen testified that plaintiff’s history and physical findings were consistent with the diagnosis of continuing impingement syndrome and that the accident of August 23, 1986, was the proximate cause of the shoulder injury at issue in the trial. He found that plaintiff had suffered in the past from a grade II shoulder separation, but it had healed by the time he saw plaintiff. Defendant presented the videotaped deposition of Dr. John G. Yost. Dr. Yost saw plaintiff on November 29,1990. He stated that as of November 29, plaintiff showed no evidence of a grade II shoulder separation or of true impingement syndrome. Dr. Yost diagnosed plaintiff as suffering from frozen shoulder. On January 25, 1991, the jury found for plaintiff in the amount of $5,000.
In this appeal, plaintiff claims the trial court erred in giving the jury instructions on intervening cause and failure to wear seatbelts for mitigation of damages; in failing to receive exhibits 25A, 25B, 25C, which were not listed in the pretrial order, and exhibit 63, an instructive video on arthroscopic surgery; in receiving into evidence exhibits 66 and 67, which were pictures of the vehicles involved in the accident; in failing to sustain plaintiff’s motion in limine to exclude the pictures of the vehicles, motion for directed verdict against defendant as to proximate cause, motion for a new trial, motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict, and motion for a protective order pursuant to Neb. Ct. R. of Discovery 26(b)(4)(C) (rev. 1992); and in failing to tax costs.
DIRECTED VERDICT
After defendant rested, plaintiff moved for a directed verdict on the issue of proximate cause. If a motion for a directed verdict made at the close of all the evidence is overruled by the trial court, this court’s review is controlled by the rule that a directed verdict is proper only where reasonable minds cannot differ and can draw but one conclusion from the evidence, where an issue should be decided as a matter of law. Schleich v. Archbishop Bergan Mercy Hosp., 241 Neb. 765, 491 N.W.2d 307 (1992).
The party against whom the verdict is directed is entitled to *51have every controverted fact resolved in his or her favor and to have the benefit of every inference which can reasonably be drawn from the evidence. If there is any evidence which will sustain a finding for the party against whom the motion is made, the case may not be decided as a matter of law. Leonard v. Wilson, 238 Neb. 1, 468 N.W.2d 604 (1991).
“Proximate cause” is that cause which, in a natural and continuous sequence, unaccompanied by any efficient intervening cause, produces injury, and without which the result would not have occurred. Belgum v. Mitsuo Kawamoto & Assoc., 236 Neb. 127, 459 N.W.2d 226 (1990).
In resolving the proximate cause issue, this court is guided by the following principle: A plaintiff is not bound to exclude the possibility that the accident might have happened in some other way, but is only required to satisfy the jury, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the injury occurred in the manner claimed. McVaney v. Baird, Holm, McEachen, 237 Neb. 451, 466 N.W.2d 499 (1991).
Plaintiff claimed her shoulder impingement syndrome was proximately caused by the accident involving defendant. She offered the testimony of two doctors who stated the injury to her shoulder resulted from the 1986 accident. Triers of fact are not required to take opinions of experts as binding upon them. Keystone Ranch Co. v. Central Neb. Pub. Power & Irr. Dist., 237 Neb. 188, 465 N.W.2d 472 (1991). Thus, we find that plaintiff was not entitled to a directed verdict, because determining the weight that should be given expert testimony is uniquely the province of the fact finder. See In re Application A-16642,236 Neb. 671,463 N.W.2d 591 (1990).
JURY INSTRUCTIONS
Standard of Review
In an appeal based on the claim of an erroneous instruction, the appellant has the burden to show that the questioned instruction was prejudicial or otherwise adversely affected a substantial right of the appellant. Sikyta v. Arrow Stage Lines, 238 Neb. 289, 470 N.W.2d 724 (1991).
In reviewing a claim of prejudice from instructions given or refused, the instructions must be read together, and if, taken as *52a whole, they correctly state the law, are not misleading, and adequately cover the issues supported by the pleadings and evidence, there is no prejudicial error necessitating reversal. Behm v. Northwestern Bell Tel. Co., 241 Neb. 838, 491 N.W.2d 334 (1992); Grote v. Meyers Land & Cattle Co., 240 Neb. 959, 485 N.W.2d 748 (1992).
Efficient Intervening Cause
Plaintiff claims that the evidence was insufficient to warrant an instruction on intervening cause. Defendant asserts in his brief that the instruction on intervening cause was correct because plaintiff’s shoulder injury did not manifest itself until after the trip plaintiff took to Iowa.
An efficient intervening cause is a new and independent force which breaks the causal connection between the original wrong and the injury. Belgum v. Mitsuo Kawamoto & Assoc., supra.
After the accident, plaintiff initiated physical therapy for the strain and spasms in her neck. The physical therapy sessions consisted, in part, of upper extremity exercises. The exercises were performed on an upper body ergometer, otherwise referred to as a “bicycle for the arms.” Plaintiff exercised her upper body on the ergometer on several dates throughout September. Although the duration and intensity were gradually increased, plaintiff did not complain of any pain in her shoulder during those sessions. The record reflects plaintiff did not complain of any shoulder pain during her physical therapy sessions until October 23, after the weekend trip she took to Iowa. When she sought treatment for the pain in her shoulder from Dr. Reckmeyer, she told him she could not recall any specific trauma to her shoulder. Specifically, she did not remember placing her arm on the dashboard prior to the accident with defendant, although that accident originally caused her cervical sprain.
The appearance of pain in plaintiff’s right shoulder approximately 1 month after the accident, with no prior indication of injury to the shoulder, and plaintiff’s own failure to remember the accident which caused severe pain in her neck and the tops of her shoulders, warranted the instruction on the intervening cause.
*53Seatbelt Instructions
Plaintiff also claims the trial court erred in instructing the jury on nonuse of seatbelts for mitigation of damages because defendant provided no evidence regarding the causal relationship between the accident and the injuries plaintiff sustained. Neb. Rev. Stat. § 39-6,103.08 (Reissue 1988) provided:
Evidence that a person was not wearing a seat belt at the time he or she was injured shall not be admissible in regard to the issue of liability or proximate cause, but may be admissible as evidence concerning mitigation of damages, except that it shall not reduce recovery for damages by more than five percent.
A number of states allow evidence of a plaintiff’s failure to wear a seatbelt for mitigation of damages, but only when the defendant has demonstrated a causal connection between the plaintiff’s failure to wear an available seatbelt and the damages sustained by the plaintiff. See, Benner v. Interstate Container Corp., 73 F.R.D. 502 (1977) (instruction on nonuse of seatbelt for mitigation proper where expert testified plaintiff’s injuries could have been avoided if she had worn seatbelt); Law v. Superior Court of State of Ariz., 157 Ariz. 147, 755 P.2d 1135 (1988) (under comparative negligence statute, nonuse of seatbelt can be considered and used to reduce damages if nonuse either caused or enhanced injuries to plaintiff); Foley v. City of West Allis, 113 Wis. 2d 475, 335 N.W.2d 824 (1983) (failure to wear seatbelts not negligence per se, but proper to instruct jury where seatbelts are available and evidence indicates causal relationship between injuries sustained and failure to wear seatbelts). See, also, Knapp v. Shores, 550 So. 2d 1155 (Fla. App. 1989) (error to instruct jury on seatbelt defense in absence of evidence that seatbelts were fully operational); Thomas v. Gottlieb, 520 So. 2d 622 (Fla. App. 1988).
Although plaintiff testified at trial she was not wearing a seatbelt at the time of the accident, defendant presented no evidence demonstrating the injuries sustained by plaintiff which were attributable to her failure to wear the seatbelt in the rear-end collision. In F. A. F Motor Cars, Inc. v. Childers, 181 Ga. App. 821, 354 S.E.2d 6 (1987), the defendants asserted that *54the trial court had erred in failing to charge the jury with the requested seatbelt charge. The appellate court found it proper for the trial court to refuse to make the charge, even though the plaintiff had testified she was not wearing a seatbelt. The court reasoned that the defendants had not introduced evidence connecting the injuries of the plaintiff with her failure to wear a seatbelt.
Thus, [defendants’] requested charge, which would have instructed the jury not to award any amount for injuries and damages sustained which were proximately caused by [plaintiff’s] failure to wear a seat belt, was not adjusted to the evidence and the trial court did not err by refusing to so charge.
Id. at 822, 354 S.E.2d at 8.
Here, the instruction given to the jury on failure to wear a seatbelt for mitigation of damages required the jury to reduce damages if defendant proved that plaintiff was not wearing her seatbelt and that plaintiff’s injuries would have been less if she had been wearing her seatbelt. However, no evidence was presented regarding the extent to which the injuries to plaintiff would have been diminished had she been wearing a seatbelt. Submission of an issue on which the evidence is insufficient to sustain an affirmative finding is, generally, prejudicial and results in a new trial. Jensen v. Archbishop Bergan Mercy Hosp., 236 Neb. 1, 459 N.W.2d 178 (1990). Since no evidence was provided indicating the causal relationship between plaintiff’s failure to wear the seatbelt and the extent of injuries she sustained in the accident, the instruction was improper.
Prejudicial Error
In Oberhelman v. Blount, 196 Neb. 42, 241 N.W.2d 355 (1976), we found that although the jury had found for the plaintiff, it was prejudicial error for the trial court to have instructed the jury on contributory negligence where there was insufficient evidence to sustain an affirmative finding of contributory negligence, because the instruction allowed the jury to reduce damages due the plaintiff. In the instant case, the instruction on seatbelts was also prejudicial because it allowed the jury to reduce the amount of damages due plaintiff. See id.
*55MOTION IN LIMINE
Plaintiff assigns as error the trial court’s failure to exclude exhibits 66 and 67 because they were irrelevant. Exhibit 66 consists of an enlarged photograph taken of the back end of plaintiff’s Corvette after the accident. Exhibit 67 is an enlarged photograph taken of the front end of the vehicle that was forced into the rear of the Corvette. The photographs depict the minor damage sustained by the vehicles during the accident.
Standard of Review
In all proceedings where the Nebraska Evidence Rules apply, admissibility of evidence is controlled by the Nebraska Evidence Rules, not judicial discretion, except in those instances under the Nebraska Evidence Rules when judicial discretion is a factor involved in admissibility of evidence. Behm v. Northwestern Bell Tel. Co., 241 Neb. 838, 491 N.W.2d 334 (1992). See, also, State v. Messersmith, 238 Neb. 924, 473 N.W.2d 83 (1991). Thus, this court reviews a trial court’s ruling on the admissibility of evidence for an abuse of discretion only where the Nebraska Evidence Rules permit judicial discretion in assessing admissibility. Behm v. Northwestern Bell Tel. Co., supra.
Exhibits 66 and 67
Rule 403 of the Nebraska rules of evidence provides the trial court with the discretion to exclude evidence, although it is relevant, if it is unfairly prejudicial. Neb. Rev. Stat. § 27-403 (Reissue 1989).
Prior to trial, plaintiff filed a motion in limine to exclude any evidence of damage to plaintiff’s vehicle as irrelevant and to exclude such evidence even if relevant because “its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice.” The trial court overruled the motion, and the exhibits were introduced at trial.
No abuse of discretion is evident from the record. In his amended answer, defendant denied the injuries were of the extent and nature alleged by plaintiff. The question presented, then, is whether defendant’s negligence in striking plaintiff’s vehicle proximately caused all the injuries of plaintiff.
A similar situation arose in Springer v. Smith, 182 Neb. 107, *56153 N.W.2d 300 (1967). In Springer, the defendant’s vehicle rear-ended the plaintiff’s vehicle. The plaintiff initiated a lawsuit against the defendant, who admitted the accident, but denied the injuries were of the nature and extent alleged in the plaintiff’s petition. At trial, photographs of the automobiles and the parties were admitted. The defendant argued that the photographs were admitted to show the force of the collision and thus were immaterial, because he had admitted negligence and that negligence was the proximate cause of the accident. This court found that because the defendant disputed the claimed injuries of the plaintiff, the photographs were relevant to show the nature and the contact of the force. The court stated, “To have refused to admit them would deny to the jury evidence helpful in resolving the issue of the injuries the plaintiff sustained and their nature and character.” Id. at 110, 153 N.W.2d at 302.
In the case at hand, the trial court did not abuse its discretion in admitting into evidence the photographs of two of the vehicles involved in the accident. Dr. Lesiak testified that the severity of the impact to plaintiff’s vehicle is significant because the amount of energy absorbed at impact determines the nature and the extent of the injury. Dr. Claussen also stated that “the younger the person is the more severe a jolt it would have to be to cause an impingement syndrome.” As in Springer, the photographs were relevant to show force of impact, which in turn could assist the trier of fact in ascertaining the injuries plaintiff sustained.
EXHIBITS 25A, 25B, 25C, AND 63
There is no merit in plaintiff’s assignment of error that the trial court erred in not admitting exhibits 25A, 25B, 25C, and 63. Plaintiff does not discuss the assignment of error in regard to exhibit 63 in her brief, and therefore, we will not discuss it. To be considered by the Supreme Court, an error must be assigned and discussed in the brief of one claiming that prejudicial error has occurred. Regency Homes Assn. v. Egermayer, 243 Neb. 286, 498 N.W.2d 783 (1993); Carlson v. Zellaha, 240 Neb. 432, 482 N.W.2d 281 (1992).
The first three exhibits in question consisted of. three *57drawings prepared by Dr. Claussen. Prior to trial the parties produced a number of exhibits which were marked and identified by stipulation of the parties. The trial judge’s pretrial notes state: “If, additional exhibits or documents are discovered, the party intending to use them shall immediately exhibit them to opposing counsel, and submit them to the court to be marked for identification... Failure to comply, except for good cause shown, will make such exhibit inadmissible.”
Exhibit 25 was listed among those exhibits to which the parties might object. Plaintiff’s exhibit list described exhibit 25 in the following manner: “Dr. Bruce Claussen will use during the course of trial for purposes of medical illustration props, models, diagrams, charts and other aids.” Defendant’s counsel had been given exhibit 25 to examine prior to trial. By introducing additional exhibits without submitting them to defendant’s counsel, plaintiff subjected herself to the penalty provided by the pretrial agreement, to wit, the exclusion of the offered exhibits.
EXPERT FEES
Plaintiff assigns as error the trial court’s failure to assess the costs of the expert witnesses to defendant.
In Hefti v. Hefti, 166 Neb. 181, 88 N.W.2d 231 (1958), this court stated that expert witness fees could be taxed above the statutory fee where a special contract existed. In Lockwood v. Lockwood, 205 Neb. 818, 290 N.W.2d 636 (1980), this court upheld the taxing of expert witness fees to the husband in a divorce action. It found evidence of a contract where the expert testified he had been employed by the wife to examine certain financial documents furnished to the wife by the husband in preparation for the trial, he had testified to the value of his services, and these documents and the expert’s testimony were accepted into evidence.at trial. In Hefti and Lockwood, costs for expert witness fees were permitted pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. § 42-367 (Reissue 1988) and its predecessor, which permit a court to direct costs against either party involved in a divorce action. These cases are thus distinguishable from the present case. The court did not err in refusing to tax expert witness fees to defendant.
*58PROTECTIVE ORDER
The next assignment of error is that the trial court erred in denying plaintiff’s motion for a protective order for her medical records retained by the offices of Dr. Wariyar. Dr. Wariyar examined plaintiff for the pain in her shoulder at the recommendation of Dr. Anderson. Plaintiff testified that she had seen Dr. Wariyar before that time. Defendant apparently filed a notice of medical records deposition, although the record only contains plaintiff’s motion for a protective order concerning the medical records held by Dr. Wariyar. In the motion, plaintiff requested the court to order the defendant to take a deposition of Dr. Wariyar “to determine whether or not physician-patient communications that occurred before the injury at issue are relevant to the conditions complained of in the pending action.”
Neb. Rev. Stat. § 27-504 (Cum. Supp. 1990) grants a physician-patient privilege to a person seeking medical treatment. Section 27-504(4)(c) waives the privilege in certain circumstances: “There is no privilege under this rule as to communications relevant to an issue of the physical, mental, or emotional condition of the patient in any proceeding in which he or she relies upon the condition as an element of his or her claim or defense.” (Emphasis supplied.)
Courts have generally held that filing a personal injury claim waives the physician-patient privilege as to all the information concerning the health and medical history relevant to the matters which plaintiff has put at issue. See, State ex rel. Pierson v. Griffin, 838 S.W.2d 490 (Mo. App. 1992); Nelson v. Lewis, 130 N.H. 106, 534 A.2d 720 (1987); Clark v. District Court, Second Jud. Dist., 668 P.2d 3 (Colo. 1983); Trans-World Investments v. Drobny, 554 P.2d 1148 (Alaska 1976); State ex rel. Calley v. Olsen, 271 Or. 369, 532 P.2d 230 (1975). But see, State ex rel. Mapes v. District Court, 250 Mont. 524, 822 P.2d 91 (1991) (plaintiff waives her physician-patient privilege to the extent necessary for the defendant to discover whether plaintiff’s current condition is the result of some other cause). However, medical records or information which is unrelated to the condition at issue and irrelevant to the cause of action remains privileged. Canfield v. Sandock, 563 N.E.2d 526 (Ind. *591990); Trans-World Investments v. Drobny, supra; State ex rel. Calley v. Olsen, supra.
Defendant’s motion is not within the record, and therefore, it is not possible to determine whether defendant asserted that the medical records contained evidence upon which he wished to rely for his defense or whether defendant’s request for the records was reasonably calculated to lead to the discovery of admissible evidence pursuant to Neb. Ct. R. of Discovery 26(b)(1) (rev. 1992).
CONCLUSION
The trial court was correct in denying plaintiff’s motion for directed verdict on the issue of proximate cause of plaintiff’s injuries and in its evidentiary rulings. Plaintiff is entitled to a new trial because the seatbelt instruction was prejudicial to plaintiff. The cause is remanded to the lower court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Reversed and remanded for
FURTHER PROCEEDINGS.
Shanahan, J., not participating.

=== CASE 9738908 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:05:08.161661+00 ===

ON PETITION FOR REHEARING
YETKA, Justice.
We stated in McDonnell v. Commissioner of Public Safety, 473 N.W.2d 848, 853 (Minn.1991):
[Gjiven the reasonable reliance of law enforcement officials on prior decisions of this court in creating and administering the present Implied Consent Advisory, and given the enormous burden on the administration of justice that would result from giving Friedman completely retroactive effect, we limit the application of Friedman to the three appeals now before this court, to any case in which the Implied Consent Advisory has been challenged as a violation of the right to counsel guaranteed by the Minnesota Constitution now pending before a district court, before the court of appeals, or before this court, and to any case arising after the date of Friedman’s, release.
We confronted a similar issue after we filed our decision in Prideaux v. State, Dep’t of Public Safety, 310 Minn. 405, 247 *838N.W.2d 385 (1976). On petition for rehearing, we said:
Because police officers have reasonably relied on our earlier decision in State v. Palmer, 291 Minn. 302, 191 N.W.2d 188 (1971), it was our intent that the informational requirement be applied only to cases arising after the date of the decision. The holding on the facts of the case was more narrow — appellant requested an opportunity to consult with an attorney and his request was denied. These circumstances define the impact of our holding to cases pending on the date of the decision in this court, district court, and county or municipal court. In all other cases predating the decision, no right to counsel will be recognized * * *.
Id. at 428, 247 N.W.2d at 398. In State v. Hamm, 423 N.W.2d 379, 386 (Minn.1988), we stated that those who had not previously raised the constitutional issue had waived the objection. Friedman thus applies retroactively only to cases pending on the date of the Friedman decision where the driver properly and in a timely fashion requested an opportunity to consult with an attorney, the request was denied, and the driver properly challenged the denial in district court as a violation of the right to counsel under the Minnesota Constitution. Amendments to pleadings that purport to raise the right-to-counsel issue will not relate back to the original filing date as relation back would be inconsistent with McDonnell’s limitation on Friedman’s retroactive application. Only if the issue of right to counsel under the Minnesota Constitution had actually been raised in district court prior to June 7, 1991, will Friedman apply retroactively.

=== CASE 9738909 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:05:08.169109+00 ===

COYNE, Justice
(dissenting).
Had I been a member of the Minnesota legislature in 1984, it is quite possible that I would have voted against the law that today’s majority holds violative of the Minnesota Constitution. My role, however, as a judge of the Minnesota Supreme Court is not to decide whether the legislature’s policy decision would have been my legislative choice. It is not our opinion of the wisdom of Minn.Stat. § 169.123, subd. 2(b)(4) (1990), which is at issue here; the question is whether the statute rises to the minimum requirements of article I, section 6 of the Minnesota Constitution, and I sharply disagree with the majority’s approach to and analysis of this question. My position can be stated simply:
(a) Less than six years ago this court decided that a drunk driving arrestee has “no right, statutory or constitutional,” to consult counsel before deciding whether to comply with the statutory obligation to submit to chemical testing. Nyflot v. Commissioner of Public Safety, 369 N.W.2d 512, 513 (Minn.1985) (two judges dissenting), appeal dismissed, 474 U.S. 1027, 106 S.Ct. 586, 88 L.Ed.2d 567 (1985). That decision, which comports with recognized principles of constitutional law, constitutes controlling authority in this case.
(b) Denying what seems to me the clear import of Nyflot, the majority has neither articulated a satisfactory rationale for disregarding that decision nor proposed a sound basis for interpreting the Minnesota Constitution more broadly than the United States Supreme Court has interpreted the corresponding provision of the United States Constitution. Bluntly stated, the majority has made no attempt to explain why a person arrested for drunken driving is entitled to special treatment: until today at least, no one arrested for any other crime has been accorded a constitutional right to consult a lawyer before submitting to a search.
The right to the assistance of counsel recognized by the Minnesota Constitution corresponds almost exactly with that set out in the sixth amendment to the United States Constitution. The sixth amendment to the United States Constitution provides:
In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury of the State and district wherein the crime shall have been committed, which district shall have been previously ascertained by *839law, and to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation; to be confronted with the witnesses against him; to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor, and to have the Assistance of Counsel for his defense.
Article I, § 6 of the Minnesota Constitution, before being amended in 1988, provided:
In all criminal prosecutions the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial by an impartial jury of the county or district wherein the crime shall have been committed, which county or district shall have been previously ascertained by law. The accused shall enjoy the right to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation, to be confronted with the witnesses against him, to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor and to have the assistance of counsel in his defense.1
From the very beginning it has been clear that the drafters of these (for all practical purposes) identical provisions understood that the right to counsel ensured by these provisions applied only to “criminal prosecutions.” The term “criminal prosecution” is a legal term of art then and ever since used to refer not to the investigative, evidence-gathering phase of a proceeding, nor to all proceedings taking place after a suspect is arrested, but only to those proceedings which occur after the state has committed itself to prosecuting the suspect by formally charging the suspect with a crime. The right to counsel does not attach until the state has formally made the suspect a defendant, usually either by indictment or by filing a formal complaint or what in some jurisdictions is called an “information.”
There is, moreover, a second prerequisite to the attachment of the constitutional right to counsel: the stage of the prosecution must be a “critical stage.” See, e.g., United States v. Ash, 413 U.S. 300, 93 S.Ct. 2568, 37 L.Ed.2d 619 (1973), and State v. Higginbotham, 298 Minn. 1, 212 N.W.2d 881 (1973) (recognizing that while the “core” purpose of the right to counsel guaranteed by these provisions was to assure the defendant assistance of counsel at a criminal trial, the right contemplated by the provisions includes assistance at all “critical stages” of the proceeding following formal commencement of the criminal prosecution).
The presence of one but not the other prerequisite is not enough. That a criminal prosecution has been formally commenced is not enough to invoke the right to counsel if the stage of the proceeding is not a “critical stage.” State v. Higginbotham, 298 Minn, at 3, 212 N.W.2d at 884. On the other hand, the fact that the stage might otherwise be deemed a “critical stage” does not mean that the suspect has a constitutional right to counsel if the government has not yet formally commenced a criminal prosecution of that suspect. Thus, it has been held that before being formally charged, a suspect has no right to consult a lawyer before submitting to a search or the drawing of a blood sample or before appearing in a lineup.2 Nor does a defendant *840formally charged have a right to counsel at a photographic display or when providing a handwriting exemplar because neither event is a “critical stage” of the prosecution.3
There is, of course, a “Miranda right to counsel” which a suspect who is in custody but who has not yet been formally charged may assert before being interrogated. Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436, 471, 86 S.Ct. 1602, 1626, 16 L.Ed.2d 694 (1966). But the court-created Miranda right to counsel is not based on the sixth amendment; it is specifically designed to vindicate the fifth amendment privilege against self-incrimination.4 Furthermore, the defendant in the present case does not (nor could she) assert a Miranda right to counsel, which applies only to custodial interrogation and has nothing to do with whether an accused has a right to counsel before deciding whether to submit peaceably to a police search.5 South Dakota v. Neville, 459 U.S. 553, 564 n. 15, 103 S.Ct. 916, 923 n. 15, 74 L.Ed.2d 748 (1983).
Based on this bedrock of recognized constitutional law, this court has heretofore resisted the temptation to declare that a person arrested for DWI has a constitutional right to consult counsel before deciding whether to submit to chemical testing. In State v. Palmer, 291 Minn. 302, 305-07, 191 N.W.2d 188, 190 (1971), we expressly rejected the argument6 that a driver has a right under the sixth amendment and the corresponding provision of the Minnesota Constitution to consult counsel before deciding whether or not to provide a breath sample: “It is well settled that under the Federal and Minnesota Constitutions the accused, in all criminal prosecutions, shall enjoy the right to have assistance of counsel in his defense,” but the court concluded that the constitutional right to counsel did not apply in proceedings for revocation of a driver’s license. Three justices dissented, but only on statutory grounds; the dissen*841ters expressly agreed with the majority that “this is not a constitutional matter * * 291 Minn, at 309, 191 N.W.2d at 192 (Otis, J., dissenting).
Subsequently, in Prideaux v. State, Dept. of Public Safety, 310 Minn. 405, 247 N.W.2d 385 (1976), the court took issue with Palmer, observing that the “civil” label should not be allowed to obscure the quasi-criminal consequences of revocation to the ordinary citizen and stating that “the decision whether to take or refuse chemical testing is arguably a ‘critical stage’ in the driving-under-the-influence proceeding.” 310 Minn, at 411, 247 N.W.2d at 389. Nevertheless, the court expressly refrained from deciding the case on constitutional grounds and expressly declined to overrule Palmer, Prideaux, 310 Minn, at 414, 422, 247 N.W.2d at 391, 395; instead, the Pri-deaux court limited its decision to statutory grounds. In Prideaux it was held that Minn.Stat. § 481.10 gives a driver arrested for DWI a limited statutory right to consult counsel before deciding whether to submit to chemical testing.7 The court declared, “The importance of a driver’s license and the binding decisions which must be made by the driver asked to submit to chemical testing make the chemical-testing process a ‘proceeding’ within the meaning of section 481.10 before which consultation with counsel is to be accorded.” 310 Minn, at 419, 247 N.W.2d at 393.8
Apparently in response to the court’s explicit recognition that if the implied consent statute forbade a limited right to counsel before chemical testing, that statute, which is later and more specific in its scope, would control over the limited statutory right accorded by section 481.10, id., the legislature signified its agreement with the holding in Prideaux by expanding the implied consent advisory to include a statement to the effect that the driver had a limited right to consult with an attorney. In 1984, however, the legislature amended the advisory by inserting a new warning that Minnesota law “requires” the person to submit to testing and by adding a statement that “after submitting to testing” the driver has a right to consult with an attorney (and to have additional tests made by someone of the person’s own choosing).
The effect of the 1984 amendment was tested in Nyflot v. Commissioner of Public Safety, 369 N.W.2d 512 (Minn.1985), appeal dismissed, 474 U.S. 1027, 106 S.Ct. 586, 88 L.Ed.2d 567 (1985). The commissioner of public safety contended that, notwithstanding the dictum to the contrary in Prideaux, Palmer was still good law. In response Nyflot argued that the officer’s invocation of the implied consent law to require a drunk driving arrestee to submit to chemical testing constituted a “critical stage” of the prosecution and, in effect, asked us to overrule Palmer and to recognize a constitutional right to counsel. This court fully considered this issue and all the other issues raised and held that “a driver arrested for DWI has no right, statutory or constitutional, to consult with counsel before deciding whether to submit to chemical testing.” 369 N.W.2d at 513 (emphasis supplied). Noting that at the time Pri-deaux was decided, there was still some dispute about when a prosecution was commenced for purposes of attachment of the constitutional right to counsel, the court concluded that the constitutional right to counsel does not attach “until judicial pro*842ceedings are formally commenced (by indictment, complaint or substitute for complaint).” 369 N.W.2d at 616-16.
It is my understanding that the majority’s position here is that the state constitutional issues have not previously been decided, but the fact of the matter is that the court did consider all of the issues raised in Nyflot and did decide, inter alia, that implied consent testing before a person is formally charged does not constitute a “critical stage” of a “criminal prosecution” and did decline to overrule Palmer. Quite frankly, in my judgment, a fair reading of the opinion, the two special concurrences, and the dissent in Nyflot demands recognition that this court fully understood at that time that it was specifically holding under both federal and state constitutions that there was no constitutional right to consult counsel before deciding whether to submit to chemical testing under the implied consent law. Justice Scott, concurring specially, declared that only a constitutional restriction could override the legislative intention to preclude consultation with a lawyer until after the driver had submitted to testing. Because testing for blood alcohol is a matter of search and seizure and because “[t]here is no constitutional right to consult an attorney before a search is conducted,” he concluded that the statute was constitutionally sound. 369 N.W.2d at 518-19. Justice Kelley, in his special concurrence, took the position that the driver’s revocation action is civil in nature and that therefore Nyflot’s arguments with respect to the right to counsel under both the state and federal constitutions and the constitutional discussion in both the majority and dissenting opinions were irrelevant because the constitutional right to counsel arises only in the event of criminal prosecution. 369 N.W.2d at 518-19. In his dissent Justice Yetka vigorously argued that chemical testing is a “critical stage” of a “criminal prosecution” which triggers one’s right to counsel — that is, the precise argument rejected in Nyflot but adopted in today’s majority decision — and asserted that if the driver does not have such a right under the federal constitution he does have such a right under the state constitution. 369 N.W.2d at 519-25. Under the circumstances, it seems to me that it defies logic to contend that the holding in Nyflot that “a driver arrested for DWI has no right, statutory or constitutional, to consult with counsel before deciding whether to submit to chemical testing” addressed only the existence of a right under the federal constitution.
Not only does the Nyflot decision constitute controlling authority in the present case, but that decision comports with recognized principles of constitutional law. The sixth amendment to the United States Constitution and the corresponding provision of the Minnesota Constitution provide defendants in “criminal prosecutions” certain prosecution-related rights, rights which are invoked by the commencement of judicial proceedings. The police, by arresting a person for drunk driving, do not commit the state to prosecuting that person for driving while intoxicated. At the time of the arrest the officer has no knowledge whether the arrestee will be prosecuted for DWI. Neither does the police officer or trooper have authority to institute a prosecution but only to report the results of the test “to the commissioner of public safety and the authority having a responsibility for prosecution of misdemeanor offenses for the jurisdiction in which the acts occurred.” Minn.Stat. § 169.123, subd. 4 (1990); see also Minn. R.Crim.P. 4.02, subd. 3. The Minnesota Rules of Criminal Procedure provide that “the complaint, tab charge9 and indictment *843are the only accusatory pleadings by which a prosecution may be initiated and upon which it may be based.” Comment to Minn.R.Crim.P. 2. Accordingly, it seems clear to me that the court correctly determined in Nyflot that no “criminal prosecution” had been commenced at the time the officer invoked the provisions of the implied consent law and gave Ms. Nyflot the advisory and that, therefore, neither the right to counsel provided by the United States Constitution nor the right to counsel contained in the corresponding provision of the Minnesota Constitution, was activated.
Moreover, as the court pointed out in Nyflot, the legislature has the authority to require, as it has done, a person suspected of driving while intoxicated to submit to the testing provided pursuant to the implied consent law. 369 N.W.2d 512. Implicit in the determination that “there being no right under the constitution to consult with counsel in this context, the decision whether or not to provide that right is one for the legislature to make,” is recognition of the principle explicated in the Scott concurrence that testing for blood alcohol is a matter of search and seizure and that there is no constitutional right to consult a lawyer before a search is conducted. Id. Although the majority opinion in Nyflot did not address the question whether chemical testing for blood alcohol concentration was a “critical stage”, the decision comports with Justice Brennan’s declaration in Gilbert v. California, 388 U.S. 263, 267, 87 S.Ct. 1951, 1953, 18 L.Ed.2d 1178 (1967), that “putting aside the fact that the handwriting exemplars were taken before the indictment,” the taking of the exemplars was not a “critical stage” entitling the defendant to assistance of counsel because there was “minimal risk that the absence of counsel might derogate from his right to a fair trial.” Here, as in Gilbert, there is minimal risk that the absence of counsel at the time of testing will affect the arrestee’s right to a fair trial because, as this court pointed out in Nyflot, an attorney may not ethically advise the driver not to take the test, which is required by law. 369 N.W.2d at 517 n. 3. “In short, what the attorney may tell the driver is what the implied consent advisory tells the driver.” Id.
The majority’s decision to reject Nyflot presents one of those questions by which we, as judges, "define” ourselves and our understanding of our unique role in this system of government by law: When, if ever, is it proper for a judge of this court to vote to overrule a major constitutional decision of this court? 10
Dean Geoffrey R. Stone provides a persuasive analysis of this issue in Precedent, The Amendment Process, and Evolution in Constitutional Doctrine, 11 Harv.J. of L. & Pub.Pol. 67 (1988). Dean Stone rejects the two extreme positions, the position on the one hand that a court should never overrule a prior decision and the position on the other hand that every issue of constitutional law is a question of first impression. Stone then addresses the question by reference to the reasons for overruling a case and lists three reasons as worth discussing.
First is that the prior decision was “based on certain factual premises that have been proven incorrect” and that if the court in the prior case had known what the court now knows it would have reached a different result. Id. at 71. Inasmuch as no one has suggested that Nyflot rests on inaccurate factual premises, the first reason has no application here.
A second, related reason is that the prior decision “was premised on a state of affairs that has changed so much over time” that the court deciding the prior case would itself have reached a different result in the subsequent case in light of the new circumstances. Id. at 71. Neither has this second reason any application in this case:
*844(a) Nothing has happened on the legislative front that would prompt an ovérruler. Indeed, after our decision in Nyflot, the legislature amended the DWI law to make refusal to submit to testing a crime (a gross misdemeanor) if the person has certain prior license revocations, Minn.Stat. § 169.121, subds. 1(a), 3(c) (1989), an amendment the validity of which is decided today in McDonnell v. Commissioner of Public Safety, 473 N.W.2d 848 (Minn.1991) filed herewith.
(b) Neither has anything happened on the constitutional law front to suggest that this court’s decision in Nyflot was erroneous—
(i) The United States Supreme Court dismissed Ms. Nyflot’s appeal for want of a substantial federal question at 474 U.S. 1027, 106 S.Ct. 586, 88 L.Ed.2d 567 (1985). Justice White, joined by Justice Stevens, dissented from the dismissal, arguing that a substantial federal question, on which he did not express an opinion, was raised. Whereas a denial of certiorari says nothing about whether or not the United States Supreme Court agrees or disagrees with the decision below, a dismissal for want of a substantial federal question carries “the same practical consequences as summary affirmance” and “operates as an adjudication that the federal question was properly decided on the merits by the state court.” 16 Wright, Miller, et al., Federal Practice and Procedure § 4014 (1977). I can only assume that our decision in Nyflot on the federal constitutional law issue comports with the thinking of the United States Supreme Court.
(ii) Nor, contrary to what the majority argues, has anything happened on the state constitutional law front to suggest that the Nyflot decision is wrong. The majority says that what has changed since Nyflot is “the development of state constitutional law.” Maj. at 835. Interestingly, in notes 2 and 3 of its opinion the majority approvingly cites scores of decisions in which other states have interpreted their state constitutions more expansively than the United States Supreme Court has interpreted the federal constitution, id. at 830-831, but most of these decisions precededNyflot. Indeed, contrary to the impression created by the majority opinion, the overwhelming majority of courts that have addressed the issue since Nyflot was decided have agreed with the Nyflot holding that there is neither a federal nor a state constitutional right to consult with counsel before deciding whether to submit to testing. See, e.g., State v. Cichowski, 203 Conn. 97, 523 A.2d 503 (1987) (relying on Nyflot in rejecting claim of right to counsel under federal constitution); Brank v. State, 528 A.2d 1185 (Del.1987) (relying on Nyflot in rejecting claim under federal constitution); State v. Hoch, 500 So.2d 597 (Fla.App.1986) (relying on Nyflot in rejecting claim under both federal constitution and state law), pet. for rev. denied, 509 So.2d 1118 (Fla.1987); Commonwealth v. Brazelton, 404 Mass. 783, 537 N.E.2d 142 (1989) (relying on Ny-flot in rejecting claim under both federal and state constitutions); State v. Greene, 128 N.H. 317, 512 A.2d 429 (1986) (rejecting claim under both federal and state constitutions); Commonwealth v. West, 370 Pa.Super. 365, 536 A.2d 447 (1988) (rejecting claim under both federal and state constitutions); In re Kean, 520 A.2d 1271 (R.I.1987) (rejecting claim under both federal and state constitutions); McCambridge v. State, 725 S.W.2d 418 (Tex.App.1987) (relying on Nyflot in rejecting claim under both federal and state constitutions), affirmed, 778 S.W.2d 70 (Tex.Crim.1989), cert. denied, — U.S. —, 110 S.Ct. 1936, 109 L.Ed.2d 299 (1990).
It seems to me that only the membership of this court has changed. Of the six justices in the majority in Nyflot, only two are presently members of the court and one of these has recused from participation in this case.11 The recently appointed seventh justice, who has recused from participation *845here, was the author of the court of appeals’ decision in this case holding that the Minnesota Constitution does not give a driver the right to consult with an attorney prior to deciding whether to submit to a chemical sobriety test, Friedman v. Commissioner of Public Safety, 455 N.W.2d 93 (Minn.App.1990). The two dissenting justices in Nyflot are still members of the court and they have been joined by another new justice. It is undoubtedly the view of these justices that Nyflot was wrong at the time it was decided, but is that a valid basis for overruling Nyflot? I think not. On this, the third basis for overruling a prior constitutional decision, Dean Stone offers the following critical analysis:
[A] justice may conclude that a prior decision was simply “wrong” at the time it was decided. Had he been a justice at the time of the prior decision, he would have voted the opposite way. Now that he has found four other justices who share his view, he will overrule the “wrong” decision. This is the most problematic basis for overruling. Without the justification of either inaccurate factual premises or changed circumstances, the Justice in this situation is merely substituting his judgment for that of his predecessors. And although his predecessors may have no claim to greater interpretive authority than their successors, it is likewise true that the successors have no greater interpretive authority than their predecessors. Why, then, should the view of the successors prevail? Such a basis for overruling substitutes power for principle and generates instability, unpredictability, politicization, and all the other dangers sought to be avoided by the doctrine of precedent.
G. Stone, supra, at 72-73.
It is no doubt true, as the majority asserts, that this state is free to give drunk drivers the right to consult with counsel before deciding whether to fulfill their statutory obligation to comply with the implied consent law. But that does not mean that this court is free to do so. The court is not the state nor do its members constitute a continuing constitutional convention with a “roving commission” to substitute its will for the will of the people as expressed in the words of the state constitution. We are an interpretive body, free to interpret and apply the state constitution but not free, as one commentator has put it, to take the constitution out of constitutional law.12 Heretofore, this court has wisely rejected the majority’s result-oriented approach and has sought to anchor itself in a principled way to the text of the Minnesota Constitution itself, distinguishing those provisions which are identical to provisions of the federal constitution from those provisions which, by their different wording, expressly afford greater protection to the people of Minnesota.13 In this case, however, we are dealing with textually identical provisions.
Neither does contemporaneous history provide a legitimate neutral ground for interpreting article I, § 6 of the Minnesota Constitution more broadly than the sixth amendment to the United States Constitu*846tion. S. Twist & L. Munsil, The Double Threat of Judicial Activism: Inventing New “Rights” in State Constitutions, 21 Ariz.St.Law J., 1005, 1031 (1989). The majority’s evidence that “history” supports its decision consists in large measure of generalities such as that “[t]he right to counsel is a long-established principle in the nation,” maj. at 829, a statement with which no one disagrees but which helps not at all in answering the question of when the right to counsel attaches. The majority also assigns considerable importance to the fact that early on the legislature enacted what is now Minn.Stat. § 481.10, which requires an officer having a suspect in custody to allow the suspect to meet with counsel upon request “before other proceedings shall be had.” Id. at 830. But I am not aware that anyone has ever contended that this statute had the effect of putting a gloss on the right to counsel contained in the Minnesota Constitution — that the statutory reference to “other proceedings” was the equivalent of the constitutional reference to “criminal prosecution.” See, e.g., Palmer, 291 Minn. at 309, 191 N.W.2d at 192 (Otis, J., dissenting). In my opinion, then, history and precedent support the conclusion that our decisions in Palmer and Nyflot comport with the intent of the drafters with respect to the timing of the attachment of the right to counsel pursuant to the state constitution.
Moreover, if the dicta in Prideaux can be said to have posited the equivalency of the statutory “proceedings” and the “constitutional criminal prosecution,” the error of that assumption was corrected in Nyflot. To say now, as does the majority, that the constitutional right to counsel attaches under the Minnesota Constitution at the time of the arrest for drunken driving requires either overruler of Nyflot or a very different definition of the term “criminal proceeding” as it is used in the United States Constitution from the identical provision of the Minnesota Constitution. In either case the perils of the expansionist course on which the majority has today embarked (well illustrated by the string of citations appearing in note 2 of the majority opinion) suggests that very shortly the court will find itself in the position of the sorcerer’s apprentice.
Finally, the majority refuses to recognize that it is according a drunk driving arres-tee special treatment accorded no other criminal arrestee who is required to submit to a search. The majority justifies its position by declaring that it is “more than just a search” to require a person to submit to a breath test because the act of giving a breath sample “could produce the evidence leading to conviction before any trial is even necessary.” Maj. at 837. Obviously, the majority cannot mean that the evidence leads to “conviction before any trial is even necessary.” What the majority must mean is that the evidence seized, i.e., the breath sample, is so incriminating that it is pointless for the defendant to insist on his or her right to trial. But, of course, the same can be said of many other types of evidence discovered and seized during lawful searches conducted in the investigation of other crimes. For example, if police arrest a murder suspect moments after the commission of the offense and swab the suspect’s hands with a chemical substance in order to determine if the suspect recently fired a gun, no one would be heard to argue that the police had to let the defendant speak with counsel first because the test is “more than just a search” and the results of the test “could produce the evidence leading to conviction before any trial is even necessary.” See 2 W. LaFave, Search and Seizure § 5.3(c), at n. 99 (2d ed. 1987). Similarly, if police arrest a suspect moments after a rape is committed and seize the suspect’s underwear in order to subject the underwear to tests for the presence of semen and sperm, no one would be heard to argue that the police had to let the defendant speak with counsel first because the search resulting in the seizure' of the underwear is “more than just a search” and the results of the testing of the underwear “could produce the evidence leading to conviction before any trial is even necessary.”
The issue is not whether anyone should be denied the right to counsel but when that right attaches and to what stages of a *847criminal prosecution the right applies. Under a long line of decisions of both the United States Supreme Court and this court, the right to counsel attaches only to “critical stages” of a “criminal prosecution.” 14 Although persons arrested for murder, rape, arson, and other heinous crimes have a Miranda right to counsel when subjected to custodial interrogation, they do not have a sixth amendment right to counsel before deciding whether to submit to a search. What the majority has done, theréfore, is to hold that under the Minnesota Constitution a drunk driving ar-restee is entitled to special treatment, treatment that is not and has never been accorded by either the United States Constitution or the Minnesota Constitution to persons arrested for other kinds of offenses.
KEITH, Chief Justice
(dissenting).
I concur in the dissent of Justice Coyne. The majority’s holding represents a dramatic departure from this court’s and the federal courts’ right to counsel precedent involving DWI and other offenses, and Justice Coyne has articulated well the special treatment the majority accords to DWI suspects. I write separately to emphasize my concern about an anomaly created by the majority’s holding today. The majority provides for attachment of the right to counsel at the time of arrest for misdemeanor and DWI offenders, whereas under our established caselaw, felony and other gross misdemeanor offenders are not able to invoke their right to counsel until they appear in court for the first time.
The majority discards a workable, sensible, and bright-line test for the attachment of the right to counsel derived from a nearly identical clause of the federal Constitution. The United States Supreme Court has recognized that the sixth amendment right to counsel attaches at critical stages of the prosecution and “only at or after the initiation of adversary judicial proceedings against the defendant.” United States v. Gouveia, 467 U.S. 180, 187-89, 104 S.Ct. 2292, 2296-98, 81 L.Ed.2d 146 (1984) (emphasis added). The majority departs from the federal “commencement of adversary judicial proceedings” requirement and instead emphasizes that, if the offense may be tab-charged under the Minnesota Rules of Criminal Procedure, the criminal prosecution commences when the police arrest the suspect. In addition to muddying this court’s state constitutional law and criminal procedure jurisprudence, the majority misconstrues the tab-charging procedure and creates an unjustified distinction between attachment of the right to counsel in misdemeanor and DWI cases and in felony and other gross misdemeanor cases.
I agree with Justice Coyne that the Ny-flot court correctly determined that the criminal prosecution has not commenced at the time the officer reads the implied consent advisory. The DWI prosecution does not commence until the suspect appears in court and agrees to the tab-charging procedure, i.e., the in-court reading of a brief statement of the offense as a substitute for the complaint, or, if the defendant demands a complaint, until the complaint is issued. Minn.R.Crim.P. 4.02, subd. 5(3). The flaw in the majority’s reasoning occurs in its statement that “[t]he ticket or tab charge is the functional equivalent of a complaint.” The tab charge is a substitute for a complaint in misdemeanor and gross misdemeanor DWI cases; the issuance of the ticket alongside the highway is not.
To the extent the majority places significance on its view that DWI proceedings are formally commenced upon the issuance of the ticket at the roadside, the majority creates contradictory rules for when the right to counsel attaches in felony and gross misdemeanor cases in contrast to misdemeanor and DWI cases. The state may initiate a prosecution by tab charge for misdemeanor offenses and for gross misdemeanor DWI offenses. Minn.R.Crim.P. *84817.01. If ticketing a suspect for an offense that may be tab-charged triggers the attachment of the right to counsel under Minn. Const, art. 1, § 6, misdemeanor offenders and DWI offenders benefit from the right to counsel from the point of arrest. At the same time, defendants who are arrested for the most serious crimes do not have the right to counsel until they appear in court. I do not believe the federal or the Minnesota constitutions require this result. For this reason and the reasons stated in Justice Coyne’s opinion, I dissent.
. A 1988 amendment overturned this court’s decision in State v. Hamm, 423 N.W.2d 379 (Minn.1988), where this court interpreted the above provision as mandating 12 person juries in misdemeanor and gross misdemeanor prosecutions.
As amended, the provision now reads:
In all criminal prosecutions the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial by an impartial jury of the county or district wherein the crime shall have been committed, which county or district shall have been previously ascertained by law. In all prosecutions of crimes defined by law as felonies, the accused has the right to a jury of 12 members. In all other criminal prosecutions, the legislature may provide for the number of jurors, provided that a jury have at least six members. The accused shall enjoy the right to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation, to be confronted with the witnesses against him, to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor and to have the assistance of counsel in his defense.
. A suspect has no right under these provisions to consult with an attorney as a prerequisite to giving consent to search, at least before he has been formally charged. Schneckloth v. Bustamonte, 412 U.S. 218, 93 S.Ct. 2041, 36 L.Ed.2d 854 (1973); 3 W. LaFave, Search and Seizure § 8.2(k) (2d ed. 1987). A suspect does not have a right to consult with counsel before deciding whether to comply with an order, lawful under the fourth and fifth amendments, to allow a *840trained technician to remove a blood sample as part of a precharge criminal investigation. Schmerber v. California, 384 U.S. 757, 86 S.Ct. 1826, 16 L.Ed.2d 908 (1966). While an accused has a right to counsel at a post-charge lineup, Moore v. Illinois, 434 U.S. 220, 98 S.Ct. 458, 54 L.Ed.2d 424 (1977), and United States v. Wade, 388 U.S. 218, 87 S.Ct. 1926, 18 L.Ed.2d 1149 (1967), the suspect does not have a right to counsel at a lineup held before charges have been formally filed, Kirby v. Illinois, 406 U.S. 682, 92 S.Ct. 1877, 32 L.Ed.2d 411 (1972), State v. Eppler, 362 N.W.2d 315, 317 n. 1 (Minn.1985), and State v. Hyvare, 354 N.W.2d 835, 836 (Minn.1984).
. A suspect does not have a right to counsel at a photographic display, even a postindictment photographic display, because such a display does not fit the test of what is a "critical stage” in the way that a post-charge lineup fits the test. United States v. Ash, 413 U.S. 300, 93 S.Ct. 2568, 37 L.Ed.2d 619 (1973), and State v. Higginbotham, 298 Minn. 1, 6, 212 N.W.2d 881, 884 (1973). An accused has no right to counsel when lawfully directed to provide a handwriting exemplar, even after issuance of a formal charge, because the taking of such an exemplar is not a "critical stage” of the prosecution. Gilbert v. California, 388 U.S. 263, 87 S.Ct. 1951, 18 L.Ed.2d 1178 (1967).
. The distinction between the right to assistance of counsel guaranteed by the sixth amendment to the federal constitution and its Minnesota counterpart and what is called the fifth amendment Miranda right to counsel is well summarized in the following excerpt from this court’s recent unanimous decision in State v. Ronnebaum, 449 N.W.2d 722, 724 (Minn.1990):
The sixth amendment right to counsel attaches once the prosecution of the defendant is formally commenced, usually by the filing of the complaint. United States v. Gouveia, 467 U.S. 180, 187, 104 S.Ct. 2292, 2296, 81 L.Ed.2d 146 (1984). What some refer to as the fifth amendment right to counsel is a court-created right to counsel as part of the Miranda safeguards in connection with custodial interrogation. Id. at 188 n. 5 [, 104 S.Ct. 2297 n. 5]; Michigan v. Tucker, 417 U.S. 433, 444, 94 S.Ct. 2357, 2363, 41 L.Ed.2d 182 (1974). That right to counsel attaches only when a suspect invokes the right during custodial interrogation. Thus, a suspect has no right to counsel, even if he asks for it, if no charge has been filed against him and if he is not "in custody.” State v. Murphy, 380 N.W.2d 766, 769-70 n. 2 (Minn.1986) (addressed the issue under both federal and state constitutions).
. One has, of course, no right to resist a search or arrest, even an illegal one, and one can be prosecuted for any criminal offense committed in resisting a search or an arrest. City of St. Louis Park v. Berg, 433 N.W.2d 87, 89-91 (Minn.1988). See also 2 J. Cook, Constitutional Rights of the Accused § 7(3) (2d ed. 1986).
. See page 6 of appellant’s brief in Palmer on file at State Law Library.
. Minn.Stat. § 481.10 provides in pertinent part: "All officers or persons having in their custody a person restrained of liberty upon any charge or cause alleged, * * * upon request of the person restrained, as soon as practicable, and before other proceedings shall be had, shall notify any attorney residing in the county of the request for a consultation with the attorney * * *.”
. In Prideaux the court added that in this context the statutory right to counsel would be considered vindicated "if the person is provided with a telephone prior to testing and given a reasonable time to contact and talk with counsel.” 310 Minn, at 421, 247 N.W.2d at 394.
Subsequently, in State, Dept. of Public Safety v. Kneisl, 312 Minn. 281, 251 N.W.2d 645 (1977), this court expanded upon this aspect of Pri-deaux, holding that the arrested person’s limited statutory right to counsel in implied consent cases includes the right to a private conference with the attorney at the jail before he/she decides whether to submit to testing if the attorney, in response to the person's phone call, arrives at the jail in time to permit the administration of a valid test.
. A tab charge is a time-saving alternative which in a typical case permits the prosecuting authority to commit the state to prosecute a person for misdemeanor offense without filing a complaint. Minn.R.Crim.P. 4.02, subd. 5(3) provides as follows:
If there is no complaint made and filed by the time of the defendant’s first appearance in court as required by this rule for a misdemeanor charge or a gross misdemeanor charge under Minn.Stat. § 169.121 or Minn. Stat. § 169.129, the clerk shall enter upon the records a brief statement of the offense charged including a citation of the statute, rule, regulation, ordinance or other provision of law which the defendant is alleged to have violated. This brief statement shall be a sub*843stitute for the complaint and is referred to as a tab charge in these rules.
(Emphasis supplied).
. Those decisions cited in footnote 6 of the majority opinion (maj. slip op. at 14) are, of course, inapposite to this question; while they represent the evolution of the common law governing civil actions, none of them overrules a major constitutional decision of this court.
. In an analogous situation involving a member of this court who found it necessary to recuse we declined, "out of courtesy” to that justice, to reexamine at that time a prior decision in which the justice had participated; in other words, we deferred reexamination until such time as the full court could address and decide the issue. State v. Schwartz, 447 N.W.2d 422, 429 n. 6 (Minn.1989).
. C. Wolfe, How the Constitution Was Taken Out of Constitutional Law, 10 Harv.J. of L. & Pub.Pol. 597 (1987).
. Compare State v. Fuller, 374 N.W.2d 722, 726-27 (Minn.1985), in which we said that while it is "axiomatic” that we may interpret our state constitution to offer greater protection of individual rights than the federal constitution, that "does not mean that we will or should cavalierly construe our constitution more expansively than the United States Supreme Court has construed the federal constitution. Indeed, a decision of the United States Supreme Court interpreting a comparable provision of the federal constitution that, as here, is textually identical to a provision of our constitution, is of inherently persuasive, although not necessarily compelling, force.” and State v. Murphy, 380 N.W.2d 766, 769-70 n. 2 (Minn.1986) (interpreting provisions of Minnesota Constitution dealing with self-incrimination and right to counsel the same way the United States Supreme Court had interpreted it in identical language in fifth and sixth amendments of federal constitution) with State v. Hershberger, 462 N.W.2d 393 (Minn.1990) (interpreting provision of state constitution precluding interference with religious freedom as providing individuals with greater protection than that provided by the first amendment to federal constitution). See also M. Solimine & J. Walker, State Court Protection of Federal Constitutional Rights, 12 Harv.J. of L. & Pub.Pol. 127, 152 (1989).
. The majority argues that "We have held that a ‘ticket or tab charge’ is the functional equivalent of a complaint in a DWI setting, but our holding does not go beyond that.” Maj. at 837. This, however, ignores the fact that ticketing (that is, arresting) a person for DWI does- not constitute the filing of the tab charge, thereby formally initiating a prosecution. See discussion at pages 842-843 as well as at footnote 9 of this dissent. Dissent at 842-843.

=== CASE 9738910 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:05:08.819396+00 ===

WUEST, Justice.
While working for Imprimis Technology, Inc. (Imprimis) in Aberdeen, South Dakota, LaVina Heupel was exposed to certain chemical fumes which caused her serious difficulty in breathing. Heupel informed her manager of her difficulties and steps were taken to limit her exposure to the chemicals. However, Heupel continued to suffer difficulty breathing, and on December 4, 1987, she voluntarily terminated her employment with Imprimis. A voluntary termination document signed by Heupel cited “medical reasons” for her leaving.
Several months after Heupel terminated her employment, she was advised by Dr. David E. Williams of the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, that her lung problems were work-related. Heupel retained an attorney * in April 1988, to pursue her claim for workers’ compensation based upon her lung problems. However, it was not until April 1989, that Heupel gave Im-primis written notice of her claim for workers’ compensation.
Heupel filed a petition dated April 20, 1989, with the South Dakota Department of Labor, Division of Labor and Management (Department) seeking benefits for an occupational disease. Imprimis and its insurers, Aetna Insurance Company and Gulf Insurance Company (Insurers), denied Heu-pel suffered from a work-related disability and affirmatively alleged her claim was barred for failure to give written notice as required by statute. The Department acknowledged Heupel had not timely filed written notice of her claim with Imprimis, but permitted her to submit evidence that Imprimis and Insurers were equitably es-topped from asserting lack of written notice as a defense.
After accepting evidence in her case, the Department found Heupel had failed to timely file written notice pursuant to SDCL 62-8-13 and SDCL 62-8-29, set forth infra. Without specifically acknowledging that equitable estoppel was a defense, the Department also found Heupel had failed to establish the elements necessary to es-top Imprimis and Insurers from asserting the written notice defense. Accordingly, Heupel’s petition was dismissed with prejudice.
Heupel appealed the decision of the Department to circuit court, which affirmed. She appeals to this court and raises two issues:
I. Whether failure to serve written notice of an occupational disease pursuant SDCL 62-8-13 and 62-8-29 mandates dismissal of the claim, and
II. Whether Imprimis and its Insurers are equitably estopped from asserting lack of written notice as a defense to her claim for benefits.
Imprimis and Insurers cross-appeal; however, we deem it unnecessary to address their contentions under our holding.
I.
Two statutory provisions of SDCL ch. 62-8 are relevant to the written notice issue. SDCL § 62-8-13 provides:
An employer shall not be liable for compensation or other benefits under the provisions of this chapter for disability or death unless notice of disability and claim for compensation has been given and made to the employer in writing *466within the time fixed in §§ 62-8-29 to 62-8-32, inclusive. (Emphasis added).
SDCL 62-8-29 provides:
Unless written notice of an occupational disease shall be given by the worker to the employer within six months after the employment has ceased in which it is claimed that the disease was contracted, ... all rights to compensation for disability, ... from an occupational disease shall be forever barred.
It is clear Heupel failed to give timely written notice as contemplated by the occupational disease statutes. The voluntary termination document signed by Heupel when she left Imprimis does not meet the requisite notice criteria and cannot operate as the required statutory notice: The voluntary termination statement gives no indication of the medical problem suffered by Heupel, identifies no alleged causal connection between the workplace and her medical condition and, moreover, makes no claim for compensation. Heupel gave adequate notice when she filed her petition with the Department in April 1989, but this was well over a year after she terminated her employment with Imprimis.
Heupel argues Imprimis had actual knowledge of her occupational disease and, thus, she is excused from meeting the statutory notice requirements. Even assuming Imprimis knew of her disease and claim for compensation, the statutory language of SDCL 62-8-13 and -29 clearly and unambiguously requires written notice of an occupational disease be given by the employee to the employer within six months after employment has ceased. Notwithstanding the general rule that workers’ compensation statutes are to be construed liberally, South Dakota Medical Service, Inc. v. Minnesota Mut. Fire and Cas. Co., 303 N.W.2d 358, 361 (S.D.1981), we will not liberally construe a statute to avoid a seemingly harsh result where such construction would do violence to the plain meaning of the statute. Sioux Valley Hospital Ass’n v. Yankton County, 424 N.W.2d 379, 382 (S.D.1988); Simpson v. Tobin, 367 N.W.2d 757, 763 (S.D.1985); Wilhelm v. Narregang-Hart Co., 66 S.D. 155, 279 N.W. 549 (1938). Quite simply, Heupel failed to meet the clear command of the statutory notice requirement. We affirm the Department and circuit court on this issue.
II.
Heupel asserts that Imprimis and Insurers are equitably estopped from defending on the basis of the written notice requirement. The Department permitted Heupel to present evidence on this issue without specifically finding the doctrine of equitable estoppel was applicable. The Department found Heupel had not established the essential elements of equitable estop-pel, even if it were applicable. We agree.
In order to constitute equitable estoppel, false representations or concealment of material facts must exist; the party to whom it was made must have been without knowledge of the real facts; th[e] representations or concealment must have been made with the intention that it should be acted upon; and the party to whom it was made must have relied thereon to his prejudice or injury. There can be no estoppel if any of these essential elements are lacking, or if any of them have not been proved by clear and convincing evidence.
L.R. Foy Constr. Co., Inc. v. South Dakota State Cement Plant Comm’n, 399 N.W.2d 340, 344 (S.D.1987) (citing Taylor v. Tripp, 330 N.W.2d 542, 545 (S.D.1983)).
Heupel failed to prove these essential elements. There is simply no evidence that Imprimis concealed or falsely represented any material facts with respect to Heupel’s claim for compensation or the written notice requirement. Heupel argues Imprimis falsely represented or concealed its responsibilities to document and report work-related injuries. Even if this were true, there is still no evidence that Imprimis falsely represented or concealed Heupel’s responsibility to give timely written notice of her claim for compensation. Moreover, Heupel had knowledge of the real facts. She was informed by her doctor that her lung problem was work-related and hired an attorney to pursue her claim prior to the tolling of the statutory notice period. *467Therefore, even if equitable estoppel were available, Heupel has failed to make her case.
We affirm.
MILLER, C.J., and AMUNDSON, J., concur.
HENDERSON, J., concurs in part and concurs in result in part.
SABERS, J., concurs specially.
Claimant was not represented by appellate counsel at this time.

=== CASE 9738911 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:05:08.824499+00 ===

HENDERSON, Justice
(concurring in part; concurring in result in part).
I concur on issue one.
I concur in result on issue two because of the rationale in reaching the merits on equitable estoppel. It appears that this Court, in Moody v. L.W. Tyler Custom Combiners, 297 N.W.2d 179 (S.D.1980) recognized that the requirement of a timely filed claim cannot be avoided on a theory of waiver or equitable estoppel. Further, this writer has written on the Doctrine of Equitable Estoppel for a decade insisting that the early, and solid, cases in this Court did not require the element of false representation. See, majority opinion written by this special writer in Sander v. Wright, 394 N.W.2d 896 (S.D.1986) and similar expressions in other writings that there are times and factual scenarios which can trigger the Doctrine of Equitable Estoppel. See, concurrence in result by Henderson, J., in L.R. Foy Construction. See also, Willadsen v. Crawford, 75 S.D. 161, 60 N.W.2d 692 (1953) to support my continued position and Somers v. Somers, 27 S.D. 500, 504, 131 N.W. 1091, 1093 (1911). Later writings in this court have narrowed this hoary old doctrine to, unfortunately, eliminate its spiritual birth from the Lady of Equity.
SABERS, Justice
(concurring specially).
I concur specially on the basis that even assuming the employer had actual notice of Heupel’s medical disability, employer certainly had no timely notice in writing of any claim for compensation based on the disability as required by SDCL 62-8-13, or notice in writing of an occupational disease as required by SDCL 62-8-29.

=== CASE 2218090 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:40.836335+00 ===

8 Mass. App. Ct. 793 (1979)
397 N.E.2d 1138
COMMONWEALTH
vs.
RALPH CARTY, JR.
Appeals Court of Massachusetts, Norfolk.
November 8, 1979.
December 12, 1979.
Present: HALE, C.J., GOODMAN, & GRANT, JJ.
John F. Palmer for the defendant.
Charles J. Hely, Assistant District Attorney, for the Commonwealth.
HALE, C.J.
This is an appeal from the defendant's conviction on jury verdicts for the kidnapping (G.L.c. 265, § 26), and for the forcible rape of a child (G.L.c. 265, § 22A, as amended by St. 1974, c. 474, § 2).
The jury could have found the following facts. The victim, then fourteen years old, was hitchhiking with her boyfriend at about 11:00 P.M. on February 1, 1978, when they were picked up by the defendant, whom they had *794 never seen before. After a fifteen-minute stop at the home of the boyfriend's aunt the three drove around for some time, made at least two more stops, smoked a marihuana cigarette and discussed stealing a truck. They planned to find a truck and drop the boyfriend off to "hot wire" it while the defendant and the victim drove once around the block. They located a truck, and the boyfriend was let off. But the defendant, instead of circling the block, drove to a dirt road where he raped the victim.
The defendant then drove the victim to the home of an acquaintance of hers and left her there at about 4:30 A.M. She waited in an entryway for about two hours until she heard someone moving about in the house. There was no telephone in the house, and no one there attempted to notify the police of the incident. The victim's mother called the police when her daughter did not come home and suggested that they look for her at the acquaintance's house. The police did so, arriving at the house about 11:00 the following morning. The victim told them that she had been raped and of the events leading up to the rape.
The defendant asserts that the trial judge erred in three respects: (1) by refusing to permit the defendant's inquiry into the victim's juvenile record and into her mother's attitude concerning the victim's boyfriend and the victim's perception of that attitude; (2) by forbidding comment on the Commonwealth's failure to call the boyfriend as a witness and by inaccurately instructing the jury on that matter, and (3) by interrupting the defendant's direct examination of the victim's mother and eliciting hearsay testimony from her.
1. In the course of his cross-examination of the victim the defendant sought to introduce parts of her record as a juvenile offender to show her probationary status at the time she made a fresh complaint as well as at the time of trial. When this approach was denied him, the defendant made an offer of proof in the form of certified copies of three juvenile complaints, on each of which all *795 of the proceedings before the Juvenile Court are noted and the court's actions thereon are stated. The complaints were marked for identification, and we have them before us.
The basic question before us, as it was before the trial judge, is whether the victim's probationary status was such as to permit the jury to infer that she was motivated to fabricate a rape in order to disguise the true nature of her activities on the night she met the defendant. Two of these complaints show that she was adjudged delinquent on January 17, 1978, and was placed on probation until January 16, 1979. Thereafter she was before the court on several occasions for hearings on whether she had violated the terms of her probation. At the time of the present trial, October 16-24, 1978, final hearings on the violation question were pending, having been continued from September 8 to October 27, 1978. We note that the docket of this case indicates that she was in the custody of the Division of Youth Services at the time of trial. We conclude on the basis of the reasoning of Commonwealth v. Ferrara, 368 Mass. 182, 183-190 (1975), that the defendant was denied his constitutional right of confrontation, and that the "State's policy interest in protecting the confidentiality of a juvenile offender's record cannot require yielding of so vital a constitutional right as the effective cross-examination for bias of an adverse witness." Id. at 190, quoting from Davis v. Alaska, 415 U.S. 308, 320 (1974). Contrast Commonwealth v. Santos, 376 Mass. 920 (1978). Compare Commonwealth v. Hogan, 7 Mass. App. Ct. 236, 242 (1979); S.C. 379 Mass. 190 (1979).
The judge did not bar the defendant from exploring as a possible motive for fabrication the victim's concern about her mother's reaction to her being out all night when she was supposed to be home no later than 11:30 P.M. The questions which were excluded by the judge were irrelevant, and there was no error in excluding them.
*796 2. The judge's restriction of the defendant's argument on the failure of the Commonwealth to call the boyfriend as a witness and his statement to the jury on that point were proper. See Commonwealth v. Happnie, 3 Mass. App. Ct. 193, 195-198 (1975).
3. As the remaining question raised by the defendant concerns a matter which is unlikely to arise at retrial, we do not discuss it.
Judgments reversed.
Verdicts set aside.

=== CASE 9738912 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:05:09.757456+00 ===

Shepherd, J.
Plaintiffs appeal as of right the trial court’s opinion and order granting summary disposition to defendant on the ground that plaintiff Marilyn Tucker’s action, and, thus, plaintiff Michael Tucker’s claim of loss of consortium, were barred by the exclusive remedy provision of the Workers’ Disability Compensation Act, MCL 418.131; MSA 17.237(131), because defendant was Marilyn Tucker’s employer. Defendant cross appeals, claiming that even if the trial court erred in granting summary disposition on this ground, summary disposition could have been properly granted on several other grounds and its order should nonetheless be affirmed. We reverse and hold that employees of circuit court probation and parole departments are employees of the State of Michigan and that suits against the counties in which their offices are located are not barred by the exclusive remedy provision of the Workers’ Disability Compensation Act.
In this opinion we will refer to Marilyn Tucker as the plaintiff. Plaintiff claims that on February 18, 1986, while employed as a secretary for the Newaygo Circuit Court Probation and Parole Department, she slipped and fell in water located in a hallway of the government complex in which she worked. Plaintiff’s claim for damages resulting from the fall was premised on the public building exception to governmental immunity, set forth in MCL 691.1406; MSA 3.996(106).
In granting defendant’s motion, the trial court determined that plaintiff was an employee of both the State of Michigan and defendant. While the state was responsible for plaintiff’s salary, had the right to discipline or fire her, and was responsible *639for supervising her, the defendant county was statutorily responsible for providing the facilities, equipment, and supplies necessary for the probation and parole department to function. See MCL 791.223a; MSA 28.2293(1). The court concluded that defendant’s contribution to the functioning of the department was as necessary as the state’s in providing probation services to the circuit court and that plaintiffs duties were primarily designed to assist in providing such services.
This Court, in Derigiotis v J M Feighery Co, 185 Mich App 90, 94-95; 460 NW2d 235 (1990), recently summarized the standard of review and legal principles to be applied in cases such as this:
In Kenyon v Second Precinct Lounge, 177 Mich App 492, 497; 442 NW2d 696 (1989), a panel of this Court enunciated the standard for deciding motions for summary disposition on the issue whether a company is the employer of a worker under the wdca:
"Whether a company is a particular worker’s 'employer,’ as that term is used in the workers’ compensation act, is a question of law for the courts to decide if the evidence on the matter is reasonably susceptible of but a single inference. Nichol v Billot, 406 Mich 284, 302-303; 279 NW2d 761 (1979) (quoting Flick v Crouch, 434 P2d 256 [Okla, 1967]). Only where the evidence bearing on the company’s status is disputed, or where conflicting inferences may reasonably be drawn from the known facts, is the issue one for the trier of fact to decide. Id.”
The appropriate test for determining whether defendant . . . was plaintiffs employer is the economic reality test. Wells v Firestone Tire & Rubber Co, 421 Mich 641, 647; 364 NW2d 670 (1984). The economic reality test looks to the totality of the circumstances surrounding performed work. The relevant factors considered under the test have been summarized as: (1) control of a worker’s *640duties, (2) payment of wages, (3) right to hire, fire and discipline, and (4) performance of the duties as an integral part of the employer’s business toward the accomplishment of a common goal. Askew v Macomber, 398 Mich 212, 217-218; 247 NW2d 288 (1976); Andriacchi v Cleveland Cliffs Iron Co, 174 Mich App 600, 605; 436 NW2d 707 (1989), lv den 433 Mich 879 (1989); Parkkonen v Cleveland Cliffs Iron Co, 153 Mich App 204, 209; 395 NW2d 289 (1986), lv den 428 Mich 859 (1987); Lambard v Saga Food Service, Inc, 127 Mich App 262, 270; 338 NW2d 207 (1983), lv den 419 Mich 958 (1984). Under this test, all of the factors are viewed as a whole and no single factor is controlling. Farrell v Dearborn Mfg Co, 416 Mich 267, 276; 330 NW2d 397 (1982).
In the case at bar, the trial court considered each factor of the economic reality test but appears to have deemed the fourth factor controlling. This was error because no single factor controls. Farrell, supra. Furthermore, the primary function of the probation and parole department is, as the trial court correctly noted, to assist the circuit court. However, a circuit court is not part of county government but rather part of the state judicial system. MCL 600.151; MSA 27A.151. While it is true that the department could not function on a day-to-day basis without offices and office supplies, this fact alone does not establish an employment relationship between plaintiff and the county. The trial court erred in finding defendant was plaintiffs "co-employer” and in granting summary disposition to defendant on that ground.
We decline review of the issues raised by defendant in its cross appeal because, although raised below, they were never addressed by the trial court. Joe Dwyer, Inc v Jaguar Cars, Inc, 167 Mich App 672, 685; 423 NW2d 311 (1988).
Reversed.
*641Gribbs, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9738913 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:05:09.761378+00 ===

Michael J. Kelly, P.J.
(concurring in part and dissenting in part). I agree with the majority that the trial court erred in granting summary disposition in favor of defendant. I do not, however, agree that the matter should be summarily disposed of in plaintiffs favor. Accordingly, I would remand the case for trial.
I find that defendant has presented evidence which arguably would satisfy factor 4 of the economic reality test and that a triable issue therefore has been presented. As stated in the majority opinion, defendant is statutorily responsible for providing the facilities, equipment, and supplies necessary for the probation and parole department to function. Defendant, through its essential support of the department, is thus responsible, along with the state, for providing the circuit court with probation services. Plaintiffs role with the department was to assist in the delivery of such services. On the basis of this evidence, a reasonable trier of fact could find that the performance of plaintiffs duties was an integral part of defendant’s ability to provide the circuit court with probation services, thereby satisfying factor 4 of the test.
Having found evidence to support the fourth factor of the economic reality test, and given the significance of defendant’s contribution to the probation and parole department, I conclude that, when viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to defendant, a rational trier of fact could find that defendant was plaintiffs "co-employer.” Where differing inferences may reasonably be drawn from the known facts, the issue is one for the trier of fact. Nichol v Billot, 406 Mich 284, 302; 279 NW2d 761 (1979). Furthermore, I do not find it dispositive that defendant has met only one *642of the four test factors, because it is the totality of the circumstances surrounding the employment which must be considered, not the number of factors satisfied. See Farrell v Dearborn Mfg Co, 416 Mich 267, 276; 330 NW2d 397 (1982). Neither is it dispositive that the circuit court is part of the state judiciary, because court employees have been held to be employees of the county for purposes of the Workers’ Disability Compensation Act. See Nezdropa v Wayne Co, 152 Mich App 451; 394 NW2d 440 (1986).
I would remand for trial.

=== CASE 2218094 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:40.906784+00 ===

78 Ill. App.3d 238 (1979)
397 N.E.2d 117
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
MICHAEL B. HAMPTON, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 78-1072.
Illinois Appellate Court  First District (5th Division).
Opinion filed November 2, 1979.
*239 Hall Triplett, of Chicago, for appellant.
Bernard Carey, State's Attorney, of Chicago (Marcia B. Orr, Myra J. Brown, and Diane Michel Powell, Assistant State's Attorneys, of counsel), for the People.
Judgment affirmed.
*240 Mr. PRESIDING JUSTICE SULLIVAN delivered the opinion of the court:
After a jury trial, defendant was convicted of burglary and sentenced to two to six years imprisonment. On appeal, he contends that (1) he was not proved guilty beyond a reasonable doubt; and (2) he was denied a fair trial by objections to and interruptions of defense counsel's opening statement.
It appears that on July 14, 1976, at approximately 2:20 a.m., a breakin occurred at the Walgreen Drug Store located at 7901 Halsted Street, in Chicago. The front window was broken and a number of items of merchandise were missing from the display cases and open shelves inside the store.
A police officer testified that while he and his partner were traveling north on Halsted Street in their patrol car, approximately one-half block south of Walgreen's, he heard the sound of breaking glass; that after approximately five to six minutes, while traveling at an estimated speed of five to six m.p.h., he observed two men emerge from Walgreen's carrying what appeared to be black garbage bags in their hands; that he saw the men run south on Halsted toward the alley behind the drug store and then run east down the alley; that when the squad car followed them into the alley, both men dropped the bags near an underground staircase; that one of these men escaped, but the other (defendant) was placed under arrest; and that the police found a camera, film, alcohol, and electric clippers in the bags. On cross-examination, the officer stated that he did not dust the bags or merchandise for fingerprints nor did he examine defendant's hair for glass fragments.
John Poole, manager of Walgreen's at the time of the burglary, identified the items recovered by the police as store merchandise. He also testified that 14 other items were also missing after the break-in.
Defendant's brother (Ashley Hampton) and Pracilla Thompson (Ashley's sister-in-law) testified for the defense. Both stated that shortly before defendant was arrested they were riding in a car on Halsted Street when they saw the broken window in Walgreen's and observed defendant standing near the Glass House Lounge, a tavern separated from Walgreen's by an alley; both stated they saw him there again a few minutes later, as they were walking to the tavern. Ashley Hampton also testified that as he walked towards the tavern, he observed people running in and out of Walgreen's; that later, when he left the lounge, he followed defendant into the alley; that defendant was drunk at that time and was urinating in the alley when he (Ashley) saw a police car turn into the alley; that he then saw someone run "up out of the alley" carrying something in his arms; that the police car stopped in the alley behind Walgreen's and one officer started shooting as the second officer *241 approached defendant; that he saw a second man come up from the basement located behind Walgreen's and run past the police; and that the police then took a bag from the stairwell and arrested defendant.
Defendant testified on his own behalf that he was watching a portable hot dog stand for a friend in front of Walgreen's when he saw a man kick in the window of Walgreen's as two other men stood nearby; that these men walked to the other side of Halsted Street and then returned and entered the store; that they later exited, carrying plastic bags, and ran east down the alley; that after the owner of the hot dog stand returned, he walked across the alley toward the Glass House Lounge and then went halfway down the alley to urinate; that while there, a squad car came into the alley and, as it approached, he saw a man run out of the basement past him in a westerly direction toward Halsted; that after the police car stopped, one officer jumped out and fired shots at the fleeing man; and that the other policeman arrested defendant.
OPINION
Defendant first contends that his guilt was not proved beyond a reasonable doubt. We initially note that while a reviewing court will not disturb the jury's determination of guilt unless the evidence is so improbable as to raise a reasonable doubt of guilt (People v. Manion (1977), 67 Ill.2d 564, 367 N.E.2d 1313, cert. denied (1978), 435 U.S. 937, 55 L.Ed.2d 533, 98 S.Ct. 1513; People v. Smith (1979), 69 Ill. App.3d 704, 388 N.E.2d 184), the positive and credible testimony of a single occurrence witness is sufficient to support a conviction (People v. Williams (1975), 60 Ill.2d 1, 322 N.E.2d 819; People v. Clarke (1971), 50 Ill.2d 104, 277 N.E.2d 866), notwithstanding contrary evidence by the accused (People v. Sullivan (1970), 46 Ill.2d 399, 263 N.E.2d 38; People v. Rodriguez (1978), 58 Ill. App.3d 562, 374 N.E.2d 904).
 1, 2 It is the position of defendant that the testimony of the police officer was so self-contradictory and irreconcilable with fact that it must have been fabricated and, because there was no other evidence of his guilt, defendant urges that we find the officer's testimony so improbable as to leave a reasonable doubt concerning guilt. Defendant refers us to certain portions of the officer's testimony to support his position. First, noting that the officer testified that after hearing glass breaking he cruised at five to six m.p.h. until he saw the fleeing burglars because the distance was only about one-half block, defendant maintains that traveling at that speed it is impossible to travel less than a block in five or six minutes, as testified to by the officer. While it is true that if the police car was traveling at the speed mentioned it would have gone a much greater distance than one block, it appears that the officer's testimony reflects only his estimates of and not precise measurements as to times and distances. From our *242 consideration of the totality of the circumstances, we believe the variances went only to the credibility of the witness. Second, defendant contends that it is highly improbable that two persons would run toward the police car after burglarizing the drugstore. We note, however, that in addition to his testimony that two men ran toward the police car, the officer also said that they then turned and ran into the alley. Thus, the jury could just as readily have believed that the two men thought their escape would be best accomplished through the alley, which could be reached only by running in the direction of the police car. It is significant that defendant testified that the men he saw burglarize the store also ran down the same alley. Third, defendant urges the improbability that the stolen liquor bottles in the plastic bag which was dropped into the basement stairwell did not break. The record disclosed, however, that the officer did not testify that the bags of merchandise were dropped into the stairwell; rather, he said they were dropped near the underground staircase. In addition, it is not unreasonable to assume that the other items in the plastic bags may have cushioned the bottles when they were dropped  particularly when there appears to have been no testimony as to how far they fell or the manner in which they were dropped. Fourth, defendant suggests that the recovery by the police department of only a portion of the items missing from Walgreen's is further indication that the officer's testimony was fabricated. We see no merit in this conclusion, as the items unaccounted for could have been taken from the store after the time of the break-in and before the store inventory was completed. Furthermore, defendant's brother testified that he saw a number of people going in and out of the store before defendant was arrested and, finally, it is quite possible that other persons could have entered the store while the police were in pursuit of the two men who ran down the alley. Fifth, defendant argues that the failure of the officer to dust the recovered merchandise and the plastic bags for fingerprints suggests a police coverup, because if the fingerprints had been taken, innocence might have been established. At trial, the police officer testified that the items were not dusted for prints because one of the individuals seen holding the bag was already in custody. The appellate court, in People v. Mimms (1976), 40 Ill. App.3d 942, 944, 353 N.E.2d 186, 188, confronted with similar facts, stated:
"When the State offers eyewitness testimony, its failure to provide additional evidence in the form of fingerprints to substantiate the eyewitness is unnecessary if that evidence would be only cumulative. (People v. Hickman (1973), 9 Ill. App.3d 601, 291 N.E.2d 872; People v. Jones (1964), 30 Ill.2d 186, 195 N.E.2d 698.) The absence of fingerprint evidence should only affect the weight to be given the identity testimony as a whole and that *243 determination is for the trier of fact. People v. Abrams (1974), 21 Ill. App.3d 734, 316 N.E.2d 5; People v. Wooden (1972), 9 Ill. App.3d 310, 292 N.E.2d 236."
We believe that the Mimms reasoning is applicable here.
 3 Defendant relies on a number of cases in which the reviewing courts reversed judgments because the evidence was so unsatisfactory as to raise a reasonable doubt of defendant's guilt. They are not persuasive, however, as they all appear to involve unbelievable testimony; whereas, in the instant case, other portions of the officer's testimony were uncontroverted and even corroborated to some extent by defense witnesses. The officer's testimony as to hearing glass breaking generally coincides with the time of the Walgreen break-in testified to by other witnesses. All witnesses testified to a burglary having occurred, and both defendant and the officer testified that men carrying bags left the Walgreen store and ran east down the alley adjacent to the store. There is no question that the police car followed the men down the alley and that plastic bags containing merchandise taken from the store were later found in the alley near the place of defendant's arrest. Considering the totality of the evidence, we do not believe that the testimony of the police officer is so unsatisfactory or improbable as to leave a reasonable doubt of defendant's guilt.
We next consider defendant's contention that he was deprived of a fair trial when the trial court erroneously sustained State objections to remarks of his counsel during his opening statement. It appears that on four occasions the State objected on the ground that defense counsel was testifying. The first three of these objections were sustained and, after the fourth, the jury was excused, and the trial court informed defense counsel that further comments as to the evidence should identify the witness who was going to give the anticipated testimony.
 4 An opening statement should contain an outline of facts which a party in good faith intends to prove and should not be a long, narrative, evidentiary recitation. (People v. Weller (1970), 123 Ill. App.2d 421, 258 N.E.2d 806.) While its scope and latitude is largely within the discretion of the court (Hughes v. Medendorp (1938), 294 Ill. App. 424, 13 N.E.2d 1015), the accused has the right to have his attorney present in opening statement the facts which he intends to prove, without unreasonable restrictions (People v. McDowell (1918), 284 Ill. 504, 120 N.E. 482).
 5, 6 It is a general rule that in an opening statement counsel should not be permitted to relate the testimony at length. (Pietsch v. Pietsch (1910), 245 Ill. 454, 92 N.E. 325.) There are situations, however, in which detailed references to the facts should be permitted. While we agree with defendant that he should not be required to identify the witnesses who would give anticipated testimony, we believe that when a lengthy *244 opening statement is made, prefacing comments should be made from time to time by counsel to inform the jury that the remarks were an expectation of what the evidence would show.
 7 Here, we see no merit in the contention of defendant that he was somehow denied a fair trial because the court sustained three objections that he was testifying and, after the fourth objection, excused the jury. It appears that the objections were made during a detailed scene-setting which was of such nature and length that we cannot say that the court abused its discretion in acting as it did. In any event, we see no prejudice to defendant, as his counsel was eventually able to make a full presentation in the opening statement. In the light thereof, we cannot say that there was an abuse of discretion by the trial court.
For the reasons stated, the judgment is affirmed.
Affirmed.
LORENZ and WILSON, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2218097 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:40.965736+00 ===

77 Ill.2d 473 (1979)
397 N.E.2d 830
In re CHARLES C. PORCELLI, Attorney, Respondent.
No. 51772.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
Opinion filed November 21, 1979.
*474 John C. O'Malley, of Chicago, for the Administrator of the Attorney Registration and Disciplinary Commission.
William J. Martin, Ltd., of Chicago, for respondent.
Respondent suspended.
MR. JUSTICE MORAN delivered the opinion of the court:
A disciplinary proceeding was brought against respondent, Charles C. Porcelli, by the Administrator of the Attorney Registration and Disciplinary Commission.
The respondent had been indicted for bribery and found not guilty by the trial court on April 27, 1976. On November 15, 1977, the Administrator filed a two-count complaint charging respondent with unethical conduct involving fraud and deceit. Proceedings were held before a hearing panel of the Attorney Registration and Disciplinary Commission which found that the Administrator had *475 proved the allegation of count I. The panel declined to make a finding as to count II. In its report, the panel recommended that respondent be suspended from the practice of law for one year. The Review Board filed its report recommending, based on count I, that respondent be suspended from the practice of law for a period of one year and until further order of the court.
Count I of the complaint alleged that respondent had paid $300 in cash to Officer Strutz of the Glencoe Police Department in order to assure Strutz's accurate completion of an alcohol-influence report on respondent's client, Anthony Ormiston, who had been arrested for driving while under the influence of alcohol. The complaint recited that respondent believed that if he did not pay the officer, the report would be inaccurately completed in a manner that would reflect adversely upon his client. Count II of the complaint charged that respondent failed to report the officer's conduct to the proper authorities.
Other than respondent's character witnesses, only the respondent testified before the hearing panel. The respondent testified that Ormiston, 72 years of age, contacted him on September 27, 1972, and related that Strutz had arrested him on September 9, 1972, for driving while under the influence of alcohol. Ormiston indicated that he felt Strutz had something of a vendetta against him inasmuch as the same officer had issued a traffic citation to him during the previous week. Although Ormiston had retained another lawyer to represent him at trial, he engaged the respondent to review the case and determine the seriousness of the charge. Respondent agreed to make this evaluation, at which point Ormiston voluntarily gave respondent $300 in cash.
Respondent contacted Strutz and requested that a copy of the alcohol-influence report be mailed to him. When the officer refused, respondent agreed to go to the Glencoe police station that evening to obtain the report. *476 At the station, the officer showed respondent a copy of an alcohol-influence report and two green cards which registered breathalizer results. The readings on those cards were .08 and.10. (A statutory presumption of intoxication applies to results of .10 or over.) These breathalizer findings had not been entered on the appropriate space of the alcohol-influence report. On the observation-report section, boxes were checked indicating that Ormiston's breath was both "moderate" and "strong." Respondent admitted that this report was one made out by Dr. Minnema, rather than by Strutz, and that several of the questions thereon had been left unanswered.
Strutz told respondent that he had not prepared his own alcohol-influence report because he had been on vacation and had been busy. Strutz stated that his report would vary somewhat from Dr. Minnema's in that Ormiston should have been marked "`sure' on turns" and "`sure' on the finger-to-nose test." When respondent asked when his report would be ready, Strutz replied, "What is there in this for me?" and explained that he did not like Ormiston and that "My report can be one way or another." Respondent asked what he would do about the breathalizer cards and Strutz replied, "I will turn in the card that instead of having a .08 will be .18, instead of .10 will be a .20." Strutz said that he wanted $300 for himself or he would prepare a report that was totally unfavorable to Ormiston. Respondent agreed to pay the money and left with the understanding that Strutz would contact him.
On the following day, September 28, 1972, Strutz telephoned the respondent asking him to pick up the report that he had prepared. During this conversation, respondent admitted, that, in referring to Strutz's report, he asked for "one more `sure' and one `hesitant' on the finger to nose" and "Give me a `sure' on the turning." Respondent told Strutz that there would be $300 for him as agreed.
*477 Respondent met with Strutz in a small room at the Glencoe Police Department on that evening. Strutz left the room and returned with two alcohol-influence reports, one a copy of Dr. Minnema's and the other the report that Strutz had prepared. Strutz handed respondent his report and put Dr. Minnema's in his pocket. Respondent gave the officer the $300 in cash. Respondent testified that, at the time, he believed or understood that Dr. Minnema's report would be destroyed. Respondent left the police station and was arrested shortly thereafter.
Relying on In re Horwitz (1935), 360 Ill. 313, the respondent argues that dismissal should have been granted on the basis that respondent was entrapped. In Horwitz, an attorney was drawn into an elaborate scheme in which he filed a false personal injury claim based on information given to him by his client. He was not aware of the falsity of the claim or of the underlying scheme until disciplinary action was instituted against him. The court refused to impose any discipline.
In In re Howard (1977), 69 Ill.2d 343, however, this court flatly refused to allow the defense of entrapment. Attorney Howard faced a disciplinary proceeding on charges that he had on two occasions paid an arresting officer $50 to testify "to the truth" as listed on an alcoholic-influence report. This court found that Howard could not avail himself of the defense of entrapment because, at the time the acts were committed, he, unlike Horwitz, "must have been completely cognizant of their unsavory quality." (In re Howard (1977), 69 Ill.2d 343, 352.) Certainly, the respondent in this case cannot be equated to the innocent attorney in Horwitz. No undue, prolonged or persistent pressures were urged on this respondent by the officer (People v. Hall (1962), 25 Ill.2d 297, 301); nor can the single statement made by the police officer to the respondent be labeled "undue pressure." In re Howard (1977), 69 Ill.2d 343, 353.
*478 We add, as pointed out by the Administrator, that the respondent took an active part in the preparation of Strutz's report when he asked for "a `sure' on the turning" and "one more `sure' and one `hesitant' on the finger to nose." This conduct negates the idea that extreme pressure was forced upon the respondent. Additionally, respondent was aware that the "truth" was available through an independent party, Dr. Minnema, who had prepared a report on Ormiston on the day of his arrest. Respondent not only failed to rely on this independent source but admitted that he believed the physician's report was to be "disposed of." We hold that this case is not one in which the defense of entrapment may be applied. As in Howard, the respondent's ready negotiations evidence a willingness to join in the illegal conduct which is inconsistent with the defense of entrapment.
It would be difficult to imagine circumstances in which the defense of entrapment would be available to an attorney in a disciplinary proceeding. Attorneys are versed in the law and should be keenly aware of what activities constitute a breach of the law. This knowledge is inconsistent with the central premise of entrapment, i.e., an implantation of criminal intent in the mind of an innocent person. (Sorrells v. United States (1932), 287 U.S. 435, 77 L.Ed. 413, 53 S.Ct. 210.) Therefore, in only the rarest of circumstances may an attorney label himself innocent and shield himself with the defense of entrapment.
The respondent next contends that the Review Board's recommendation that he be suspended from the practice of law for one year and until further order of the court is excessive in light of the circumstances in which his actions occurred and the evidence in mitigation. Both the respondent and the Administrator agree that In re Howard 69 Ill.2d 343, and In re Kien (1977), 69 Ill.2d 355, are relevant and important to this issue. This court, in Howard, stated that "[t]he discipline to be imposed in *479 each case must be judged individually, based on the specific circumstances and conduct involved." (In re Howard (1977), 69 Ill.2d 343, 354.) However, the court is keenly aware of the necessity for consistency in the imposition of discipline in similar cases.
The respondent seeks to distinguish Howard, urging that close analysis reveals that a substantially different discipline is warranted here than the two-year suspension imposed in Howard. In that case, the respondent paid the arresting officer $50 on two occasions to testify "to the truth" as listed on his alcoholic-influence report. In addition, respondent remarked, "I am probably going to have to spend some money with the State's Attorney," and stated that he had things "pretty well set with the judge." In re Howard (1977), 69 Ill.2d 343, 348.
The respondent argues that Howard involved three separate transgressions over a period of several months, rather than the single momentary lapse of judgment involved here. We decline to characterize the respondent's act as a single momentary lapse. The offer made by Strutz occurred on the evening of September 27, 1972, but the money was not paid nor the report exchanged until the following evening. Thus, the respondent had ample time to reflect on the dialogue which had taken place at the Glencoe police station and to contemplate its implications. Respondent, who was not the defense counsel, must have realized that he could serve as a witness for Ormiston to impeach Strutz's testimony. More importantly, respondent had ample time to report the transgressions of Strutz to the proper authorities, but he failed to do so. This negates the idea of a momentary lapse in judgment.
Respondent also contends that in Howard the visual report with which the officer allegedly threatened to "bury" Howard's client was extremely damaging to Howard's client, whereas in the case at bar the report completed by Dr. Minnema was favorable to Ormiston, but *480 Strutz threatened to complete a false unfavorable report. However, there is no indication in Howard that the report was damaging to Howard's client. The respondent there had testified that he wanted the officer to testify in accordance with the visual report because "the responsive answers on the visual were so extreme that [he] couldn't believe it." (69 Ill.2d 343, 348.) However, in Howard, the hearing panel specifically stated that it did not believe respondent's suggestion that he paid the money to the officer in order to get him to tell the truth. (In re Howard (1977), 69 Ill.2d 343, 350.) In the case at bar, the panel's report found "that Respondent only wanted the Glencoe Police reports to be truthful and accurate" and that "Respondent's actions were solely motivated by concern that his client be treated fairly." Nonetheless, this court in Howard declared:
"Whether it was to influence his testimony to be truthful or otherwise, such acts have the clear appearance of impropriety, bring law officers, the legal profession, and the court into disrepute, and hinder the administration of justice." In re Howard (1977), 69 Ill.2d 343, 351.
While there may be some shades of difference between Howard and the case at bar, especially in Howard's remark implicating the State's Attorney and the trial judge, the general nature of the offense and circumstances surrounding each are remarkably similar. It may be assumed that both the hearing panel and the Review Board recommended a one-year suspension in light of the similarities of Howard and took the very facts of distinction between the two into consideration in recommending a one-year suspension for this respondent instead of the two-year suspension imposed in Howard.
The respondent also argues that In re Kien (1977), 69 Ill.2d 355, is distinguishable. In Kien, the attorney was given an 18-month suspension for paying $50 to a *481 testifying police officer after a hearing on a motion to suppress a gun found by the officer when respondent's client was stopped for a traffic violation. Immediately before the suppression hearing, attorney Kien met with the arresting officer and conversed as to the circumstances surrounding the discovery of the gun. The officer stated, "I can find the gun wherever I want" and "You get what you pay for." (69 Ill.2d 355, 359.) Kien agreed to pay $50. After the hearing, Kien met with the officer, paid him the $50 and was immediately arrested.
The respondent attempts to distinguish Kien in that the attorney there was a young attorney whose reputation for honesty and integrity cannot be equated to the respondent's here, who had an unblemished record after 27 years in the profession. While evidence of a respondent's reputation for honesty is no defense to charges of misconduct, it may be considered in mitigation. (In re Kien (1977), 69 Ill.2d 355, 362.) We feel that the respondent's unmarred record for 27 years in the legal profession, along with the character witnesses' testimony as to his outstanding reputation, are factors in mitigation which influenced both the hearing panel and the Review Board in leniently recommending a one-year suspension rather than the 18-month suspension received by attorney Kien.
From our review of the record, we conclude that the recommended discipline be modified to the extent that the respondent be suspended from the practice of law for a period of one year.
Respondent suspended.

=== CASE 9738914 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:05:12.748451+00 ===

OPINION
CRIPPEN, Judge.
Appellant Edward Corazalla challenges summary judgment against him in his action for fraud in the sale of real estate. Corazalla asserts he relied to his detriment on false representations regarding the character of a parcel of land.
FACTS
In April 1986, appellant entered into an agreement to pay $180,000 for a 55-acre rural home site owned by respondent Albert Quie.1 The parties closed the transaction two months later.
Appellant alleges he purchased the property in reliance on advertising material disseminated by the owner and his real estate agent, respondent John Hansen. This sales literature described the property as “[a] perfect wildlife sanctuary, with all types of waterfowl, songbirds and deer.” It stated that the property covered 55 acres, including “35 wooded acres with PRIVATE 7 acre lake.” Newspaper advertisements for the property likewise featured the private lake.
In his affidavit, appellant stated Hansen showed him the property twice, and “on both occasions Mr. Hansen represented the property as containing a ‘private lake.’ ” These statements were allegedly made on May 10 and June 7,1986, after execution of the purchase agreement, but before closing. Respondents argue their representations were true.
Appellant states he became aware in early July 1986 that the neighboring landowner had a right to use the lake. He discovered letters, maps, and an aerial photograph of the property left in the home. One of the letters was to the owner from Commissioner of Natural Resources Joseph Alexander. Another was to Alexander from the attorney general’s office. Both letters were dated October 1985. They explained that any owner whose land abuts a lake has a right to reasonable use of the entire surface of the lake. The letter from Commissioner Alexander stated:
The information I gave you was correct. Your neighbor (or their guests) may use the surface of the questioned water if they do not step on land.
The maps show that the lake abuts the property of the adjoining landowner to the north, Milton Vosejpka.
According to appellant’s brief, gunfire erupted on the lake at noon on October 4, 1986, surprising the buyer and approximately 20 guests. He claims only then did he discover his neighbor used the lake for duck hunting.
Corazalla filed a complaint against Quie, his wife, Hansen, and Hansen’s agency in March 1990. The trial court entered summary judgment for respondents in October *3491990. No memorandum or other observations on facts or law accompanied the judgment.
ISSUE
Does an issue of material fact exist concerning alleged misrepresentations about the character of the property?
ANALYSIS
A district court may award summary judgment
if the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that either party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.
Minn.R.Civ.P. 56.03; see Hunt v. IBM Mid America Employees Federal Credit Union, 384 N.W.2d 853, 855 (Minn.1986). The trial court may not decide factual issues on a motion for summary judgment. Its sole function is to determine whether fact issues exist. Nord v. Herreid, 305 N.W.2d 337, 339 (Minn.1981). On review of a summary judgment, the appellate court also must determine whether theré are any genuine issues of material fact and whether the trial court erred in its application of the law. Offerdahl v. University of Minn. Hosps. & Clinics, 426 N.W.2d 425, 427 (Minn.1988).
The moving party has the burden of proof and the courts must take the view of the evidence most favorable to the nonmov-ing party. Sauter v. Sauter, 244 Minn. 482, 484-85, 70 N.W.2d 351, 353 (1955). Thus, the moving party “must demonstrate no genuine issue of material fact exists.” Thiele v. Stich, 425 N.W.2d 580, 583 (Minn.1988). In Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 106 S.Ct. 2548, 91 L.Ed.2d 265 (1986), the United States Supreme Court interpreted this summary judgment burden where the nonmoving party later carries the burden of persuasion at trial. The moving party need not support its motion with affidavits negating the opponent’s claim. Celotex, 477 U.S. at 324, 106 S.Ct. at 2553. However:
[A] party seeking summary judgment always bears the initial responsibility of informing the district court of the basis for its motion, and identifying those portions of “the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any” which it believes demonstrate the absence of a genuine issue of material fact.
Celotex, 477 U.S. at 323, 106 S.Ct. at 2553; see Thiele, 425 N.W.2d at 583 n. 1 (referring to Celotex). Although Celotex interpreted the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, its reasoning is persuasive on this topic because the federal and state rules are substantially the same.
1. Scope of review.
We note initially the limited breadth of the trial court’s decision and the scope of this review. Respondents’ motion for summary judgment was premised primarily on the claim that their representations were true.2 Thus, for example, the issues before us do not concern the troubling absence of evidence in the record to show how appellant could establish the property he bought was worth less than $180,000 at the time of purchase. Appellant makes numerous references to a tax assessment valuing the property at $112,000. This assessment, however, is not in the record, nor does the record contain any indication of its reliability. This issue was wholly omitted from respondents’ summary judgment claim.
2. Misrepresentation.
To establish liability for fraudulent misrepresentation, a plaintiff must prove a false representation of fact.3
*350It is axiomatic that fraud cannot be predicated on the truth. A true representation is not actionable.
Rien v. Cooper, 211 Minn. 517, 523, 1 N.W.2d 847, 851 (1942).
It is normally within the province of the trier of fact to determine whether a party has misrepresented material facts and whether the misrepresentation proximately caused the other party’s injury. Barr/Nelson, Inc. v. Tonto’s, Inc., 336 N.W.2d 46, 51 (Minn.1983).
Respondents’ motion for summary judgment was based on the assertion that their statements were true. They argue that the terms “private lake” and “wildlife sanctuary” each have one irrebuttable meaning. Respondents assert their characterization of the lake as private was indisputably true because the Minnesota Supreme Court has used the term “private” when referring to lakes without public access, where multiple landowners have riparian rights. Bartlett v. Stalker Lake Sportsmen’s Club, 283 Minn. 393, 399, 168 N.W.2d 356, 360 (1969); Johnson v. Seifert, 257 Minn. 159, 167, 100 N.W.2d 689, 695-96 (1960). They contend the property is a “wildlife sanctuary” despite the hunting because “the acreage [is] abundant in flora and fauna.”
Appellant argues that “private” and “wildlife sanctuary” have alternative meanings that are not true if used to describe the property. This contention has merit.
According to Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 1804-05 (1966), private means:
la: intended for or restricted to the use of a particular person or group or class of persons: not freely available to the public * * * b: belonging to or concerning an individual person, company, or interest * * *.
A reasonable jury could find that the advertisement falsely asserted the lake was private to owners of the property. We observe that the representation should be given the ordinary meaning attributed to it by a prospective purchaser, not the technical meanings given to the words by lawyers, judges, or law professors. The advertisement's layout implied the “PRIVATE 7 acre lake” was included within the 55-acre tract. The subsequent characterization of the property as a “perfect wildlife sanctuary, with all types of waterfowl” solidified an impression of personal privacy with respect to the lake. Representations of an ideal sanctuary also may imply the owner’s prerogative to exclude any use by game hunters.
Because the advertisement can reasonably be interpreted as having been false, an issue of material fact exists as to its truth or falsity.
3. Negligent nondisclosure.
In addition, summary judgment was inappropriate on the second count of appellant’s complaint, alleging negligent failure to disclose the neighbor’s right to use the lake or the neighbor’s actual exercise of that right in the form of extensive hunting. It is unclear whether respondents raised this issue in their summary judgment motion, but they did argue that appellant could have learned about his legal rights without further disclosures by the sellers.
A claim of fraud may not be based on failure to disclose a certain fact unless there is a duty to disclose that fact. Richfield Bank & Trust Co. v. Sjogren, 309 Minn. 362, 365, 244 N.W.2d 648, 650 (1976).
As a general rule, one party to a transaction has no duty to disclose material facts to the other. However, special circumstances may dictate otherwise. For example: (a) those who speak must say enough to prevent their words from misleading the other party; (b) those who have special knowledge of material facts to which the other party does not have access may have a duty to disclose these facts to the other party; and (c) those who stand in a confidential or fiduciary relation to the other party to a transaction must disclose material facts. Klein v. First Edina Nat’l Bank, 293 Minn. 418, 421, 196 N.W.2d 619, 622 (1972).
*351Appellant alleges that once respondents made misleading statements, they had a duty to correct any misunderstanding by informing appellant that the neighbor had and exercised a right to hunt on the lake’s surface. He also argues respondent Quie had special knowledge of his neighbor’s right to use the lake and of the exercise of that right. If appellant can establish the allegations in his complaint, a duty may have arisen on the sellers’ part to inform appellant of the neighbor’s rights, use, or both. See Johnson v. Urie, 405 N.W.2d 887, 891 (Minn.1987) (summary judgment inappropriate absent facts on circumstances surrounding relationship that might give rise to duty).
Material issues of fact remain as to whether special circumstances exist creating a duty to inform appellant of the neighbor’s right to use the lake or of the neighbor’s actual use of the lake for hunting.
4. Reliance.
It is similarly unclear whether the issue of reliance was addressed in the summary judgment motion. Respondents concluded their arguments on the meaning of the privacy advertisement with the added contention that appellant had ample opportunity to learn if his use of the lake would be exclusive.
Appellant stated by affidavit that he relied on an alleged misrepresentation of respondents. Other affidavits claim that inspections and disclosures were sufficient to alert appellant to the rights and practices of the nearby landowner. These topics of disclosures, inspections and reliance constitute genuine issues of material fact.
5. Briefing.
While briefing the elements of misrepresentation law, appellant asserts that his justification for reliance was enlarged by respondent Albert Quie’s stature as a political leader. Respondents contend that this reference represents an attempt to exploit respondent’s public life to create duties and collect money without warrant. We fault neither party for comments on this dimension of the facts, a circumstance of the case that may have relevance in trial proceedings but must not upset an objective application of the law to the evidence.
DECISION
Genuine fact issues preclude summary judgment.
Reversed and remanded.
EDWARD D. MULALLY, J., dissents and files opinion.
. Respondents purchased the property in 1982 for 593,000. In his affidavit, he reported spending an additional $169,931 on improvements.
. As indicated later in this opinion, we conclude two additional issues were raised.
. The party alleging fraudulent misrepresentation must prove the existence of a false representation of past or present material fact which is susceptible of knowledge, which is known to be false or asserted without knowledge of its truth or falsity, and upon which reliance is intended or justified. The alleging party must also prove he was induced to act or justified in acting in reliance on the representation. Finally, damages and proximate causation must be shown. See Weise v. Red Owl Stores, Inc., 286 Minn. 199, 202-03, 175 N.W.2d 184, 187 (1970); *350Davis v. Re-Trac Manufacturing Corp., 276 Minn. 116, 117, 149 N.W.2d 37, 38-39 (1967).

=== CASE 9738915 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:05:12.75273+00 ===

EDWARD D. MULALLY, Acting Judge
(dissenting).
I respectfully dissent.
The trial court properly granted summary judgment in favor of respondents. There are no genuine issues of material fact, and the trial court did not err in its application of the law. Appellant’s primary claim is that in the advertisement relating to the property, respondents misrepresented the nature of the property by the use of the term “private lake.” Respondents admit that the property was advertised as containing a “private lake.” Black’s Law Dictionary 1194 (6th ed. 1990) defines private as:
1. Belonging to some particular person or persons; private property.
2. Confined to or intended only for the person or persons immediately concerned.
3. Not open or accessible to the general public: a private beach.
The Minnesota Supreme Court has used the term “private” as applicable to lakes to which the public does not have access and to which multiple owners have riparian rights. Johnson v. Seifert, 257 Minn. 159, 167, 100 N.W.2d 689, 695-96 (1960); Bartlett v. Stalker Lake Sportsmen’s Club, 283 Minn. 393, 168 N.W.2d 356, 360 (1969) (discussing the Johnson holding).
The fact that there was another owner of shoreline was apparent from observation and reasonable record examination. It was not incumbent upon respondents to educate appellant in the law of riparian rights before the purchase.
While it is likely that there are as many slightly different definitions of the word “private” as there are dictionaries, running *352through them, and running through the supreme court decisions, is the simple basic concept that “private” means “not public.” Where property is concerned, it means lack of public access. Such is the case here. There was no misrepresentation as to the nature of the property either in the advertisement, or orally by Hansen or the Quies. The lake is, in fact, a “private lake.” Appellant’s mistaken interpretation or strained construction of an accurate advertisement cannot give rise to a cause of action for fraud. A claim of fraud or misrepresentation cannot be predicated on a true statement. See Rien v. Cooper, 211 Minn. 517, 523, 1 N.W.2d 847, 851 (1942).
The nature, extent and configuration of the property was open and apparent to appellant at all times, both visually and through public records. Appellant visited and walked the property several times before purchasing it. He had every opportunity to determine for himself whether the property met the advertised claim of “perfect wildlife sanctuary, with all type of waterfowl, songbirds and deer.”
Appellant’s attempt in his brief to somehow impose upon Albert Quie a higher or different legal duty because he is a former Governor of the State of Minnesota and a former United States Congressman is, to put it kindly, ill-conceived.
To successfully oppose a motion for summary judgment, a party cannot rely upon mere general statements of fact, but rather must demonstrate at the time the motion is made that specific facts are in existence which create a genuine issue for trail. Thiele v. Stich, 425 N.W.2d 580, 583 (Minn.1988); Minn.R.Civ.P. 56.05. Here, there are no genuine issues of material fact, and respondents are entitled to summary judgment as a matter of law.
I would affirm the trial court.

=== CASE 2218101 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:41.032806+00 ===

397 N.E.2d 259 (1979)
George D. MURPHY, Appellant (Petitioner below),
v.
INDIANA PAROLE BOARD ET AL., Appellees (Respondents below).
No. 476S101.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
November 27, 1979.
Harriette Bailey Conn, Public Defender, Kyle M. Payne, Deputy Public Defender, Indianapolis, for appellant.
Theodore L. Sendak, Atty. Gen., Wesley T. Wilson, Deputy Atty. Gen., Indianapolis, for appellees.
PRENTICE, Justice.
This is an appeal from the denial of relief sought by Appellant, Petitioner below, (Murphy) upon a writ of habeas corpus. The petition and subsequent proceedings are perplexing, to say the least, and fit no pattern known to us. Although the petition contains a conclusory allegation that Murphy is being unlawfully restrained of his *260 liberty, the factual allegations relate the events of his hearing for parole release, before the Indiana Parole Board (Board), the denial of parole by the Board and the conclusory allegation that the action of the Board denied him due process of law.
Considered as a petition for a writ of habeas corpus, the writ should not have issued, because it disclosed upon its face that Murphy was not entitled to immediate release. Hawkins v. Jenkins, (1978 Ind. 374 N.E.2d 496; Young v. Duckworth, (1979) Ind., 394 N.E.2d 123. The court and the parties, nevertheless, proceeded to an evidentiary hearing, apparently considering the petition as one for relief under Indiana Rules, Post Conviction 1, § 1(a)(5); at the conclusion of the hearing, the trial judge ruled that the "relief demanded" be denied and that the writ be dissolved. In essence, the determination was that the Board had complied with the statutory mandate for parole release hearings.
As an appeal from the denial of post conviction relief, this appeal should have been filed with the Court of Appeals, inasmuch as Murphy's minimum sentence is less than ten years. Ind.R.P.C. 1, § 7; A.P. 4(A)(7). As an appeal from the denial of release in a habeas corpus, it also should have been filed with the Court of Appeals, as the denial of relief arose out of parole release hearing, which is not a criminal proceeding. Ind.R.A.P. 4(A)(9) and 4(B)(4). To avoid further delay of the matter, however, we shall entertain the appeal under our discretionary authority. Young v. Duckworth, supra.
Murphy was convicted of voluntary manslaughter, Ind. Code § 35-13-4-2 (Burns 1975), from a guilty plea, and was sentenced to imprisonment for not less than two nor more than twenty years. For that crime, he was incarcerated at the Indiana State Prison in Michigan City on August 6, 1974. On May 8, 1975, he was brought before the Board for parole consideration, pursuant to Ind. Code § 11-1-1-9 (Burns Supp. 1978) which requires that every new inmate be considered for parole within his first year of incarceration. During the 30 days prior to an inmate's appearance before the Board, the Board members are able to study the inmate's institutional file, which includes his precommitment investigation report, his admission summary, a psychologist's report, a report by the reception-diagnostic center, his progress report at the prison, and any letters of recommendation which the inmate may possess. At Murphy's hearing, he was identified, and was asked whether he was a friend of the man he had killed and whether they had been drinking at the time of the killing. Murphy was informed that he would not be paroled at that time because of the seriousness of the crime which he had committed. He was then asked if he had anything to say, but no response is evident in the record before us. The entire hearing lasted two to five minutes. A week later, Murphy received written confirmation that his parole had been denied because of the seriousness of his offense.
Murphy then filed a pro se petition for a writ, as hereinbefore mentioned, in the LaPorte County Circuit Court, challenging the Parole Board's actions. A public defender was appointed to represent him. A hearing was had upon the petition, at which Appellant testified as to the events of his parole release hearing and then called upon John Raschka, a parole officer and secretary to the Parole Board Commission, who described the entire process by which an inmate is considered for parole. The Board presented no evidence. The trial court made findings of fact and conclusions of law, denied the relief prayed for, and dissolved the writ.
By this appeal, Appellant has framed five specific issues for our consideration:
(1) Did the Board violate Murphy's right to due process of law, by failing to give adequate and sufficient reasons for the denial of parole?
(2) Does due process require that an inmate have access to the information contained in the institutional file, which information is considered by the Board in determining eligibility for parole?
*261 (3) Does the statute providing for the possibility of parole give adequate standards and guidelines for the determination of parole decisions?
(4) Is the "seriousness of the offense" for which the inmate was committed a valid criteria for denial of parole?
(5) Did the Parole Board consider "all pertinent information" as required by Ind. Code § 11-1-1-9?
JURISDICTION
The Board contends that this Court is without jurisdiction to review the actions of the Indiana Parole Board, citing Ind. Code § 11-1-1-8 (Burns 1973) which states in part:
"There shall be no appeal from the decision in any matter concerning parole."
Furthermore, the State relies on Terry v. Byers, (1903) 161 Ind. 360, 68 N.E. 596, wherein this Court, in discussing the discretionary powers of the Board of Managers  the predecessor of the Parole Board, stated:
"* * * the punishment to be adjudged in each case of conviction is for the maximum time prescribed by the statute. This term may be shortened by the good behavior of the person in custody, and the Board of Managers of the reformatory is authorized, in its discretion, to terminate such imprisonment when the rules and requirements of the reformatory have been faithfully observed. This discretion of the board is not subject to the supervision or control of the courts. It resembles that usually exercised by a board of pardons, or by the Governor of this state under the authority committed to him by the Constitution to grant reprieves, commutations of sentences, and pardons. The law confers upon the person imprisoned in the reformatory no absolute right of discharge under any circumstances until the maximum term of imprisonment prescribed as the punishment for the crime of which such inmate has been adjudged guilty has expired." (Emphasis added.)
We do not entirely agree with the State's position. It is true that there is no right to an appeal, in the usual sense, from the decision of the Parole Board, but Due Process requires that judicial review be available to insure that the requirements of Due Process have been met and that the Parole Board has acted within the scope of its powers. Cf. Warren v. Indiana Telephone Co., (1939) 217 Ind. 93, 105, 26 N.E.2d 399. We emphasize that the courts of this state can not act as a "Super-Parole Board."
LAW
The primary question involved in this case is whether the requirement of procedural due process applies to parole release determinations, and if so, the procedure that due process requires.
It has long been the law in Indiana that the Parole Board has almost absolute discretion in carrying out its duties and that it is not subject to the supervision or control of the Courts. Hawkins v. Jenkins, supra; Dowd v. Basham, (1954) 233 Ind. 207, 116 N.E.2d 632; Terry v. Byers, supra.
Parole release procedures were the subject of a recent decision of the United States Supreme Court in the case of Greenholtz v. Nebraska Penal Inmates, (1979) 442 U.S. 1, 99 S.Ct. 2100, 60 L.Ed.2d 668. Greenholtz involved a class action by inmates claiming that they were unconstitutionally being denied parole by the Nebraska Parole Board, in that Nebraska's parole statute and the Board's procedures denied them procedural due process. In the majority opinion, authored by Chief Justice Burger and concurred in by four other Justices, the Court stated:
"There is no constitutional or inherent right of a convicted person to be conditionally released before the expiration of a valid sentence * * *.
* * * * * *
"A state may, as Nebraska has, establish a parole system but it has no duty to do so. Moreover, to insure that the state-created parole system serves the public interest purposes of rehabilitation and deterrence, the state may be specific or general in defining the conditions for release *262 and the factors that should be considered by the parole authority. It is thus not surprising that there is no prescribed or defined combination of facts which, if shown, would mandate release on parole. Indeed the very institution of parole is still in an experimental stage. In parole releases, like its siblings probation release and institutional rehabilitation, few certainties exist. In each case, the decision differs from the traditional mold of judicial decisionmaking in that the choice involves a synthesis of record facts and personal observation filtered through the experience of the decision-maker and leading to a predictive judgment as to what is best both for the individual inmate and for the community. This latter conclusion requires the Board to assess whether, in light of the nature of the crime, the inmate's release will minimize the gravity of the offense, weaken the deterrent impact on others and undermine respect for the administration of justice. The entire inquiry is, in a sense, an `equity' type judgment that cannot always be articulated in traditional findings." Id. at 7, 99 S.Ct. at 2104.
2104.
Thus, the Supreme Court rejected the argument that there is a constitutional right to parole release. The Court also rejected the argument that a constitutionally protected interest is created whenever a state provides a possibility of parole, expressly distinguishing the case of Morrissey v. Brewer, (1972) 408 U.S. 471, 92 S.Ct. 2593, 33 L.Ed.2d 484, wherein it was held that a parole revocation determination must meet certain due process standards.
The Nebraska inmates argued, in the alternative, that the Nebraska statute itself creates a protectable expectation of parole. The Supreme Court responded:
"Since respondents elected to litigate their due process claim in federal court, we are denied the benefit of the Nebraska courts' interpretation of the scope of the interest, if any, its statute was intended to afford to inmates. See Bishop v. Wood, 426 U.S. 341, 345, 96 S.Ct. 2074, 48 L.Ed.2d 684 (1976). We can accept respondent's view that the expectancy of release provided in this statute is entitled to some measure of constitutional protection. However, we emphasize that this statute has unique structure and language and thus whether any other state statute provides a protectible entitlement must be decided on a case-by-case basis. We therefore turn to an examination of the statutory procedures to determine whether they provide the process that is due in these circumstances." Id., 442 U.S. at 12, 99 S.Ct. at 2106. (Emphasis added.)
Thus, the Court held that an expectancy of release must emanate, if at all, from state law; and that, if such an expectancy does emanate from state law, it is entitled to "some measure" of constitutional protection. The Court's decision appears to have been dictated, at least in part, by the language in Nebraska's parole release statute to the effect that the Parole Board "shall" order an inmate's release unless the Board determines that parole should be deferred on the basis of a finding of one of four specifically enumerated exceptions. In sharp contrast to the Nebraska parole statute, the Indiana statutory scheme attempts to vest complete discretion with the Parole Board:
"11-1-1-8 [13-1608]. Seal of parole board  Decisions of board  Report to governor.  The Indiana parole board shall adopt an official seal of which the courts shall take judicial notice. Decisions may be by majority vote. There shall be no appeal from the decision in any matter concerning parole.
"The members shall keep a record of their decisions and shall notify the department of their decisions relating to the persons who have been confined. At the close of each fiscal year they shall submit to the governor a report showing the number of paroles rescinded. [Acts 1961, ch. 343, § 8, p. 1051.]"
"11-1-1-9 [13-1609]. Paroles  Procedure  Rules and regulations  Not applicable to persons imprisoned for misdemeanor.  (a) The Indiana parole board is *263 authorized to release on parole, pursuant to the laws of Indiana, any person confined in any penal or correctional institution in this state except persons under sentence of death. It shall conduct hearings at each correctional institution at such time as may be necessary for a full study of the cases of prisoners eligible for release on parole and to determine when and under what conditions and to whom parole may be granted. All paroles shall issue upon order of the board, duly adopted. Notwithstanding this subsection, prisoners who are sentenced under IC 35-50 [XX-XX-X-X - XX-XX-X-X] shall be released on parole in accord with IC 35-50 [XX-XX-X-X - XX-XX-X-X].
(b) Within one [1] year after his admission and at such intervals thereafter as it may determine, the Indiana parole board shall secure and consider all pertinent information regarding each prisoner, except prisoners under sentence of death, including the circumstances of his offense, his previous social history and criminal record, his conduct, employment and attitude in prison, and the reports of such physical and mental examinations as have been made.
(c) Before ordering the parole of any prisoner, the Indiana parole board shall have the prisoner appear before it, and shall interview him. A parole shall be ordered only for the best interest of society, not as an award of clemency; it shall not be considered to be a reduction of sentence or pardon. A prisoner shall be placed on parole only when arrangements have been made for his proper employment, or for his maintenance and care, and only when the Indiana parole board believes that he is able and willing to fulfill the obligations of a law-abiding citizen. Notwithstanding this subsection, prisoners who are sentenced under IC 35-50 [XX-XX-X-X - XX-XX-X-X] shall be released on parole in accord with IC 35-50.
(d) Every prisoner while on parole shall remain in the legal custody of the warden or superintendent of the institution from which he was paroled but shall be subject to the orders of the Indiana parole board.
(e) The Indiana parole board may adopt such other rules not inconsistent with law as it may deem proper or necessary, with respect to the conduct of parole hearings or conditions to be imposed upon parolees. Whenever an order for parole is issued it shall recite the conditions thereof.
(f) This chapter does not apply to persons committed to imprisonment for commission of a misdemeanor. Such persons shall be discharged by the state agency having their custody, according to law. [Acts 1961, ch. 343, § 9, p. 1051; 1978, P.L. 2, § 1101, p. 2.]"
"11-1-1-9.1. Eligibility of felons for parole.  (a) Every prisoner sentenced upon conviction of a felony to an indeterminate term of imprisonment in a correctional institution shall be eligible for release on parole upon completion of his minimum term. Every prisoner sentenced upon conviction of a felony to a determinate term of imprisonment in a correctional institution shall be eligible for release on parole upon completion of one half [1/2] of his determinate term or at the expiration of twenty [20] years, whichever comes first. This subsection does not apply to a person who is sentenced under IC 35-50 [XX-XX-X-X - XX-XX-X-X].
(b) Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a person imprisoned for a felony under IC 35-50 [XX-XX-X-X - XX-XX-X-X] shall be released on parole in accord with IC 35-50 [XX-XX-X-X - XX-XX-X-X]. [IC 11-1-1-9.1, as added by Acts 1974, P.L. 43 § 2, p. 181; 1977, P.L. 340, § 147, p. 1533.]"
Our parole release statute creates no expectancy of release as envisioned in the Nebraska statutory scheme; rather, our Legislature has invested the Parole Board with almost total discretion in such matters. Having no constitutional or inherent right to parole release, if an inmate in this State has any rights with regards to such release, they must emanate from the parole release statute itself. In this light, we will examine the particular issues raised by Murphy in the case at hand.
*264 ISSUE I
The first issue raised by Murphy is whether the Parole Board violated his due process rights by failing to give adequate and sufficient reasons for the denial of parole. Specifically, he contends that the Board, in merely stating that parole was denied because of the "seriousness of the offense," failed to give any factual reasons for the denial, failed to give Murphy any indication of what he should do to make himself a more likely candidate for parole, and overlooked the positive aspects of his record. In support of his argument, he cites several pre-Greenholtz cases which held that the reason given for denial must be sufficiently specific so as to allow meaningful judicial review. However, those cases were decided under the erroneous assumption that the due process clause is applicable to parole release in the same manner as it is applicable to parole revocation. The United States Supreme Court held in Greenholtz that an inmate's parole release rights, if any exist, must have their origins within the parole release law of that state. Our Legislature has delegated to the Parole Board the responsibility of determining the conditions of early release, without further specification. We conclude that, when the Parole Board advised Murphy that they were denying early release because of the "seriousness of his offense," they correctly stated their reason for the denial. Such advisement met the requirement of procedural due process said to be owing in Young v. Duckworth, supra.
ISSUE II
Murphy's next contention is that the Parole Board violated his due process rights by failing to allow him access to information contained in his institutional file. However, he does not state, nor does the record reflect, that he ever requested access to this information. Nor does the record reveal what the Parole Board's policy is with respect to such inmate access, but we can perceive bona fide reasons for denying penal institution inmates such access. Due process permits a weighing of the state's interests of security and inmate management against the interest of the inmate hoping for parole release.
ISSUE III
Murphy contends that Ind. Code § 11-1-1-9 (Burns Supp. 1978) is unconstitutional in that it fails to give the Parole Board reasonable and adequate guidelines for reaching its parole release determinations. This contention is without merit. Again, quoting from the Greenholtz case, the United States Supreme Court, stated that a state's parole release statute may be "specific or general in defining the conditions for release and the factors that should be considered by the parole authority." Id. at 8, 99 S.Ct. at 2104. Furthermore, the Court stated:
"Here, as we noted previously, the Parole Board's decision as defined by Nebraska's statute is necessarily subjective in part and predictive in part. Like most parole statutes, it vests very broad discretion in the Board. No ideal, error-free way to make parole release decisions has been developed; the whole question has been and will continue to be the subject of experimentation involving analysis of psychological factors combined with fact evaluation guided by the practical experience of the actual parole decisionmakers in predicting future behavior. Our system of federalism encourages this state experimentation. If parole determinations are encumbered by procedures that states regard as burdensome and unwarranted, they may abandon or curtail parole." Id. at 13, 99 S.Ct. at 2107.
ISSUE IV
Murphy contends that the Parole Board's denial of parole because of the "seriousness of the offense" violates the Eighth Amendment prohibition against cruel and unusual punishment, the double jeopardy provisions of the Fifth Amendment and Section 14 of Article I of the Indiana Constitution, the proscription against vindictive justice of Article I, Section 18 of the Indiana Constitution, as well as the general *265 concept of indeterminate sentencing. In Greenholtz, the United States Supreme Court stated that the parole determination must necessarily include, inter alia, consideration of the gravity of the offense. Id. at 8, 15, 99 S.Ct. 2100. We agree and note that Murphy has cited no authority to the contrary.
ISSUE V
Murphy contends that the Board did not consider all of the pertinent information concerning him prior to reaching their decision. In essence, it is his argument that the Board did not consider all of the data in his institutional file because, if they had, they would have granted parole. This amounts to a plea for an appeal from a negative verdict, which clearly could not be required. To repeat a portion of our earlier quote from Greenholtz v. Nebraska Penal Inmates, supra, "The entire inquiry is, in a sense, an `equity' type judgment that cannot always be articulated in traditional findings." Elsewhere, therein, it was written, "The decision turns on a `discretionary assessment of a multiplicity of inponderables, entailing primarily what a man is and what he may become rather than simply what he has done.'" Accordingly, there being no standards established with respect to the factors that the Board may consider, it could never be said that they were without conflict and lead unerringly to a conclusion different than the one reached.
Additionally, it must be noted that the Nebraska statute created an expectancy of release, requiring release "unless it (the Board) is of the opinion that his release should be deferred because: * * *," listing four reasons justifying denial. Our statute, however, expressly provides that "A parole shall be ordered only for the best interest of society, not as an award of clemency; it shall not be considered to be a reduction of sentence or pardon."
The judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
GIVAN, C.J., and DeBRULER, HUNTER and PIVARNIK, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2218102 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:41.058622+00 ===

473 N.W.2d 329 (1991)
In re the Marriage of Coryne Lucille SCHNEIDER, Petitioner, Respondent,
v.
Dale Francis SCHNEIDER, Appellant.
No. C0-91-57.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
July 9, 1991.
*331 Michael A. Fahey, Carver County Atty. Chantal Sorenson, Asst. County Atty., Chaska, for respondent.
Rebecca H. Frederick, Messerli and Kramer, Minneapolis, for appellant.
Considered and decided by CRIPPEN, P.J., and FOLEY and DAVIES, JJ.
OPINION
CRIPPEN, Judge.
The trial court ordered appellant to pay $280 per month child support although he was unemployed and not receiving unemployment compensation. Appellant contends that the trial court did not make the required finding that his continued unemployment constituted a bad faith self-limitation of income. We reverse and remand.
FACTS
The parties were divorced in April 1989. Respondent Coryne Schneider was awarded custody of the couple's minor child, now 16. The trial court ordered appellant to pay child support of 25 percent of his net monthly income with a minimum payment of $280 per month.
In June 1989, appellant lost his job. He brought a motion to reduce his child support obligation. The trial court amended the decree to provide that appellant:
pay 25 percent of his net monthly income as * * * child support with a minimum payment of $280 except when unemployed when his child support shall be 25 percent of his unemployment compensation.
Pursuant to this modification, appellant paid $254 per month in child support while he was receiving unemployment compensation.
In December 1989, appellant's unemployment compensation benefits were terminated. He paid no child support after the termination of benefits.
After the payments ended, Carver County Community Social Services brought a motion to amend the decree to require appellant to pay a specific dollar amount in child support and thus eliminate the wage percentage alternative. The trial court ordered appellant to pay respondent $280 per month child support. The court characterized its order as an interpretation, and not a modification, of the original decree. The trial court found that the decree's exception for unemployment "must assume that [appellant] will maintain employment to the best of his ability" and concluded "that [appellant] has not shown that he has maintained employment to the best of his ability." The trial court also found that appellant had "survived" by selling his collector cars and obtaining loans from his family.
ISSUES
1. Could the trial court clarify the prior decree's child support language to create an obligation despite appellant's continued unemployment?
2. Did the trial court make adequate findings to demonstrate that appellant's unemployment was in bad faith?
3. Could the trial court assume appellant's bad faith absent evidence of bad faith?
ANALYSIS
The decision to modify a child support order lies in the "broad and sound discretion of the trial court, and an appellate court will reverse for an abuse of that discretion only where it finds a `clearly erroneous conclusion that is against logic and the facts on the record.'" Moylan v. Moylan, 384 N.W.2d 859, 864 (Minn.1986) (citation omitted).
1. Appellant contends the trial court modified his child support obligation based on his earning capacity without properly determining that he remained unemployed in bad faith. See Beede v. Law, 400 *332 N.W.2d 831, 835 (Minn.App.1987) (earning capacity not an appropriate measure of income in modification proceeding unless impracticable to determine obligor's present income or obligor's actual income is unjustifiably self-limited). Respondent contends, as did the trial court, that the decree was not modified but merely clarified.
Regardless of the trial court's characterization of the order, it constitutes a modification. The order imposes an ongoing obligation notwithstanding appellant's unemployment. This obligation contradicts the language of the prior decree which only provided for the sharing of unemployment compensation during times of unemployment.
More important, whether the trial court's order is a modification or a clarification, it raises the question of whether it is lawful to establish a child support obligation during the obligor's unemployment absent a finding that continued unemployment is in bad faith toward the child support obligation. We hold that creation of such an award is not lawful.
The obligation to pay child support is premised on the obligor's ability to pay. See County of Nicollet v. Larson, 421 N.W.2d 717, 720 (Minn.1988) (reimbursement of county for past public assistance payments to support child is based on an ability to pay standard). Notwithstanding this general proposition, a child support obligation can be based on earning capacity if the obligor's unemployment is in bad faith. Beede, 400 N.W.2d at 835.
Absent such a finding of bad faith, a trial court may not order child support from an individual currently unable to pay support due to unemployment.
2. To conclude that an unemployed obligor has acted in bad faith, the trial court must find that the obligor has unjustifiably self-limited personal income. Beede, 400 N.W.2d at 835. The trial court must look at the obligor's ability to work, opportunity to find gainful employment, disposition and will to earn money and contribute a reasonable amount to the family's support, and diligence in seeking employment. Garcia v. Garcia, 415 N.W.2d 702, 705 (Minn.App.1987).
Here, the trial court found that appellant had not maintained employment to the best of his ability. The court did not consider or make findings on the availability of jobs or on appellant's qualifications or education. Moreover, the record does not contain adequate evidence to sustain a finding of bad faith. The trial court found that appellant had supported himself by selling off assets and borrowing from family members. Appellant testified he had applied for employment and would continue to apply. Until he was no longer receiving unemployment insurance, appellant complied completely with the decree, reporting all earnings and paying 25 percent of all his unemployment benefits.
It is also significant that bad faith was never alleged during the trial court proceedings and appellant was never questioned about whether his unemployment was justified. If appellant had been asked to respond to a bad faith allegation, his response might have justified a finding of bad faith.
3. Because the trial court found appellant had not shown he had maintained employment to the best of his ability, it apparently reasoned that bad faith could be presumed absent his initial showing of good faith. Under some circumstances, it is arguable that a trial court may presume bad faith unemployment. When an obligor attempts to defeat enforcement of a child support award on the grounds of inability to pay, the obligor has the burden of showing the inability to pay is in good faith. See Hopp v. Hopp, 279 Minn. 170, 175-77, 156 N.W.2d 212, 217-18 (1968) (in civil contempt proceeding brought for failure to pay child support, obligor must show reasons for failure to comply). Similarly, when an obligor seeks to modify an existing support award based on inability to pay, the obligor must prove good faith. Anderson v. Anderson, 450 N.W.2d 384, 386 (Minn.App.1990).
Appellant does not seek to modify or defeat an existing obligation. Rather, he is responding to the county's attempt to recreate his unconditional obligation to pay $280 per month for child support. The previous decree did not address whether appellant's obligation would continue after *333 he no longer received unemployment compensation. In these circumstances, he had no initial burden to demonstrate good faith, and bad faith could not be presumed.
Even more significant, appellant received no notice and was not confronted about a claim that he had an obligation even when unemployed. As a result of this approach to the case, appellant was only questioned about whether he remained unemployed. Appellant responded that he was unemployed and that he had been and would continue to seek employment. He was not asked any other questions about his employment status. Under these circumstances, it was particularly inappropriate to presume appellant's ability to pay support.
DECISION
We reverse the trial court's order and remand for further findings of fact on appellant's ability to pay support.
Reversed and remanded.

=== CASE 9738916 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:05:16.039472+00 ===

*401Holbrook, Jr., P.J.
Defendant was arrested and charged with one count of possession of cocaine with intent to deliver in an amount greater than 650 grams, MCL 333.7401(2)(a)(i); MSA 14.15(7401) (2)(a)(i), and one count of conspiracy to possess with intent to deliver 650 grams or more of cocaine, MCL 750.157a; MSA 28.354(1). Pursuant to a plea and sentence bargain, defendant pleaded guilty of one count of possession with intent to deliver 225 grams or more, but less than 650 grams of cocaine, MCL 333.7401(2)(a)(ii); MSA 14.15(7401)(2)(a)(ii), and the prosecutor recommended a minimum sentence not to exceed ten years. At the time of sentencing, defense counsel argued that there were "substantial and compelling” reasons for the court to depart from the mandatory minimum sentence of ten years and to impose a lesser sentence. The sentencing court did not find the reasons to be substantial and compelling and declined to depart from the statutorily mandated minimum sentence, sentencing defendant to a term of imprisonment of ten to thirty years.
Defendant now appeals as of right, arguing that (1) he had demonstrated reasons which were "substantial and compelling,” (2) the sentence is excessively severe and is disproportionate to both the offense and the offender, and (3) the mandatory sentence constituted cruel and unusual punishment. We affirm.
i
At the time of sentencing, defendant’s counsel argued that, because defendant was only nineteen years old, had no prior criminal record except two juvenile convictions, suffered the trauma of attending seven or ten different schools, and grew up in *402an economically deprived environment, there were "substantial and compelling” reasons for departing from the mandatory minimum sentence. In rejecting defendant’s argument, the sentencing court said, "It is not because somebody comes from a poor background who has gone astray but it must be something that is basic, something that will compel a judge to deviate from the particular law.”
In People v Downey, 183 Mich App 405, 417; 454 NW2d 235 (1990), this Court created an "objective and verifiable” litmus test for determining if proffered reasons are "substantial and compelling.” While the legislative intent in adopting the "substantial and compelling” language was clearly to give the sentencing judge broad discretion to depart from the mandatory minimum sentences, the effect of the "objective and verifiable” test was to severely restrict this discretion.
For this reason, the "objective and verifiable” test was rejected by this Court in People v Troncoso, 187 Mich App 567; 468 NW2d 287 (1991).1 The Troncoso panel found that because the Legislature’s expressed intent in adopting the "substantial and compelling” language was to "expand sentencing discretion,” id., p 574, the terms contemplated a far broader scope of criteria than that afforded by the Downey test. Inasmuch as the Legislature accorded no special meaning to the words "substantial and compelling,” they are to be construed according to their "common and approved usage.” Id., p 573. Troncoso retained Downey’s nonexhaustive list of factors to be considered, but rejected its "objective, verifiable, and prearrest conduct limitations.” Id., p 577. Troncoso *403recognized that while the sentencing court’s discretion is not unfettered, it exists nonetheless and is limited to the extent that the reasons for deviation are "substantial and compelling. The perimeters of the limited judicial discretion afforded by the statute will become more clearly defined through our case by case review.” Id.
Upon our review of the record below, we find no error in the sentencing court’s failure to find "substantial and compelling” reasons warranting deviation from the statute. We believe the sentencing judge captured the essence of the statute when he stated his belief that "it must be something that is basic, something that would compel a judge to deviate” from the statute. There was clearly no abuse of discretion in the determination that the factors urged upon the court by defendant were not "substantial and compelling.”
ii
The second part of defendant’s argument attempts to apply our Supreme Court’s recently adopted proportionality standard of review for sentencing issues by arguing that a statutorily mandated minimum sentence fails to take into account the nature of the offense and the offender’s background. While facially appealing, upon examination defendant’s argument must fail.
When adopting the proportionality standard of review in People v Milbourn, 435 Mich 630; 461 NW2d 1 (1990), the Court’s fulcrum was a belief that in developing its sentencing scheme, the Legislature itself employed the principle of proportionality:
First, the Legislature has endeavored to provide the most severe punishments for those who com*404mit the most serious crimes. The crime of murder, for example, is punishable by a longer term than is the lesser included crime of assault. Second, offenders with prior criminal records are likewise subject to harsher punishment than those with no prior convictions, as reflected in the general and specific habitual offender provisions of the penal statutes. These two elements combine to form what might be called the "principle of proportionality.” Id., p 650.
The Court noted that the Legislature, with only a few exceptions, has provided a range of punishment for each felony. Because the Legislature subscribed to the principle of proportionality in developing the sentencing scheme, the Court concluded that it was the Legislature’s intent to allow for proportionality in the crafting of individual sentences. "We believe that judicial sentencing discretion should be exercised, within the legislatively prescribed range, according to the same principle of proportionality that guides the Legislature in its allocation of punishment over the full spectrum of criminal behavior.” Id., p 651.
Implicit in this holding, we believe, is a presumption not only of proportionality for a legislatively mandated sentence, but of validity as well.2 Thus, we hold that the ten-year mandatory minimum sentence does not violate the principle of proportionality set forth in Milbourn.
hi
Lastly, defendant’s argument that a mandatory *405minimum sentence for possession with intent to deliver 225 grams or more, but less than 650 grams of cocaine constitutes cruel and unusual punishment has been considered by this Court and rejected. See People v Anderson, 180 Mich App 781; 448 NW2d 361 (1989), and People v Marji, 180 Mich App 525; 447 NW2d 835 (1989). Nothing in defendant’s argument dictates a different conclusion.
Affirmed.
Cavanagh, J., concurred.
We note that pursuant to Administrative Order No. 1990-6, 436 Mich lxxxiv, the decision in Troncoso is now the controlling authority in this Court.
This presumption of validity in no way diminishes Judge Holbrook’s belief that a mandatory life sentence for offenses involving 650 grams or more of a controlled substance violates federal and state constitutional bans on cruel and unusual punishment. See People v Harding, 163 Mich App 298; 413 NW2d 777 (1987) (Holbrook, Jr., P.J., dissenting), vacated and remanded on other grounds 430 Mich 859 (1988).

=== CASE 9739763 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:20:32.826348+00 ===

Lanphier, J.,
concurring.
I do not agree with the majority’s decision that a directed verdict cannot be granted when there is expert testimony offered into evidence. Furthermore, I would not have permitted the instruction on intervening cause.
DIRECTED VERDICT
I disagree with the majority decision to the extent that it holds that the testimony of an expert witness, without more, serves to preclude a directed verdict. This court has held that where there is evidence from expert testimony, a directed verdict should not be granted, because the trier of fact must weigh the evidence and resolve the contradiction. See, Cassio v. Creighton University, 233 Neb. 160, 446 N.W.2d 704 (1989); Lane v. State Farm Mut. Automobile Ins. Co., 209 Neb. 396, 308 N.W.2d 503 (1981). However, where there is uncontroverted evidence and the court determines that reasonable minds can draw but one conclusion from the evidence, the introduction of expert testimony, alone, should *60not bar the court from granting a directed verdict in favor of the plaintiff. If the court can grant a directed verdict where there is uncontroverted lay testimony, there is no reason to apply a different standard to expert testimony.
A directed verdict is proper where reasonable minds can draw but one conclusion from the evidence. There is no reason to exempt cases involving expert testimony from this rule. If, in light of all the evidence, including testimony, the trial court finds that a directed verdict is warranted because reasonable minds cannot differ and can draw but one conclusion from the evidence, the fact that the evidence includes expert testimony should not bar the directed verdict.
Verdicts cannot be based solely on possibility, conjecture, or speculation. Wessel v. City of Lincoln, 145 Neb. 357, 16 N.W.2d 476 (1944). See, also, Mustion v. Ealy, 201 Neb. 139, 266 N.W.2d 730 (1978). In holding that the mere presence of expert testimony prevented a directed verdict for plaintiff, this court permits a jury to entertain defendant’s theory, although it has no basis in the evidence.
EFFICIENT INTERVENING CAUSE
As to the instruction on intervening cause, I believe this is the “appropriate time” and “appropriate case,” as stated in Mundt v. Northwestern Bell Tel. Co., 230 Neb. 192, 197, 430 N.W.2d 530, 533 (1988), in which this court should allow the intervening cause instruction to “pass from the scene,” id. In Mundt, we found that the trial court had committed error in failing to give an instruction on intervening, or superseding, cause, partly because the phrase “intervening cause” was included in the proximate cause instruction. Failure to define “intervening cause” therefore constituted error. In addition, the defendant had pled the issue of intervening cause and introduced facts which justified giving the instruction to the jury.
The proximate cause instruction given to the jury in this case does not contain the words “intervening cause.” It states: “A proximate cause is a cause that produces a result in a natural and continuous sequence and without which the result would not have occurred.” In addition, no facts were introduced which would require the instruction on intervening cause.
*61The Nebraska Supreme Court Committee on Civil Practice and Procedure suggests that the instruction on proximate cause, NJI2d Civ. 3.41; the instruction on concurring cause, NJI2d Civ. 3.42; and the instruction on the conduct of a nonparty third person as the sole and proximate cause, NJI2d Civ. 3.44, are sufficient instruction for the jury. NJI2d Civ. 3.43 comment. The committee recommends that the instruction on superseding or efficient intervening cause be treated as part of the plaintiff’s proof of proximate cause or concurring cause.
The plaintiff must prove that the incident under litigation was “a” proximate cause of his or her injury. When the trier of fact decides that a “superseding” cause is “the” proximate cause, it has decided that the plaintiff has not met this burden of proof, has not proved that the incident under litigation was “a” proximate cause. Approaching it from the other direction, the plaintiff has the burden of proving that the defendant’s acts were a proximate cause; if the plaintiff does that, then he or she has proved that subsequent acts were not the sole proximate cause. If there was a so-called superseding cause, then the act under litigation was not a proximate cause. However you look at it, the burden is on the plaintiff.
NJI2d Civ. 3.43 comment at 185.
I agree with the committee that superseding or efficient intervening cause should be considered as part of a plaintiff’s proof of proximate cause. Furthermore, the instruction on intervening cause in this case was unnecessary and prejudicial. By instructing the jury on intervening cause, the court allowed the jury to absolve defendant of his liability regarding the shoulder impingement syndrome because of defendant’s totally unsubstantiated theory regarding the occurrence of an accident in October 1986.
White, J., joins in this concurrence.

=== CASE 9738919 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:05:19.003236+00 ===

SCHLEGEL, Judge
(dissenting).
I must respectfully dissent to a portion of the majority opinion in this case.
First, to hold that because there is “some evidence” of the violations, while the proper test of our rule to uphold the finding of violation of prison rules, it would be helpful to set out what evidence is sufficient to render the improper use of Bradley’s refusal to submit to a lie detector test harmless. The raw statement of the majority that the existence of some other evidence (without some explanation) renders it harmless leaves us without any rule by which to measure its effect. It may well be that the reference to that refusal caused no prejudice in view of the evidence in the record. If so, we should explain why.
Perhaps of a more serious nature, the majority, for all its explanation, seeks to find that a warning of a prisoner’s rights is not necessary. To me, to determine that one being imprisoned is not “in custody” is ludicrous. Miranda was designed not to make life difficult for police and security officials. It was based upon the fact that all people have a right against self-incrimination and that they may give up that right if they are appropriately warned. Those rights apply to a prisoner in a jail or penitentiary. I cannot agree that to extend the Miranda warnings to prisoners by a per se rule would extend to them a greater right than is extended to those who are not prisoners. If a routine requirement of the assurance of the rights existed, it would only produce a set procedure that all involved would understand.
If there are no criminal charges anticipated from this interrogation, then we should not be pronouncing a rule which is, for the purposes of this case, unnecessary. We should be careful in our effort to distinguish Mathis.
I believe that this case can be affirmed on different grounds. On the basis of the majority opinion, however, I can but dissent.
SACKETT, J., joins this dissent.

=== CASE 9738920 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:05:21.897638+00 ===

HENDERSON, Justice.
John Morrell & Company (Employer) appeals from a circuit court judgment affirming a Department of Labor (Department) order that Employer reimburse Steven D. Krier (Krier) for a weight-loss program. We affirm.
FACTS/PROCEDURAL HISTORY
When Krier began to work with Employer in 1979 he weighed approximately 195 pounds. After about six months on the job, he suffered an injury to his left knee which was determined to be compensable under worker’s compensation. He was given lighter duty work, but his knee did not improve. Krier began to gain weight. Testimony established he gained weight because the knee injury caused his life to become more sedentary but did not change his eating habits. Krier’s knee continued to deteriorate despite four corrective knee surgeries. Employer eventually terminated Krier for alleged misconduct. Krier continued to gain weight and eventually reached 260 pounds.
Dr. William Watson, his authorized treating physician, determined that weight-loss was necessary before the knee could recover. He decided that Krier had two options; a total knee replacement or weight-loss that might aid in recovery of the knee. In December, 1988, Doctor Watson prescribed a physician-supervised weight-loss plan (Opti-Fast). Krier was back down to approximately 195 pounds by June of 1989. Department entered an order for Employer to pay the costs of the weight-loss program ($1873.28) under SDCL 62-4-1.1 Employer appealed and the circuit court affirmed. Employer initiated this appeal.
ISSUE
We are not confronted with the compens-ability of Krier’s knee injury. Rather, the only issue is: Does Employer have an obligation to reimburse Krier for the costs of the weight-loss program prescribed by his treating physician.
DECISION
This case is unlike prior cases involving necessary treatment arising out of conditions which existed before the worker’s compensable injury. See, e.g., Rank v. Lindblom, 459 N.W.2d 247 (S.D.1990). This case involves a condition that arose after and because of the compensable injury to Krier’s knee.
Treatment which becomes necessary because the worker’s compensable injury is aggravated by medical or surgical treatment may be compensable. See gen*498erally, 1 Larson, Workmen’s Compensation Law § 13.21(a). Various cases have also held that treatment of a drug or alcohol addiction may be compensable when the addiction is caused by the treatment of the worker’s compensable injury. 1 Larson, at § 13.21(e).. Such holdings are in keeping with the universally accepted concept that worker’s compensation laws are to be liberally construed. Wilcox v. City of Winner, 446 N.W.2d 772, 775 (S.D.1989). With this rule of liberal construction in mind and recognizing past precedent on the specific statute in question, we cannot say that a medically necessary weight-loss program is never compensable. Various courts have ordered an employer to pay for weight-loss programs in appropriate circumstances. Van Blokland v. Or. Health Services U., 87 Or.App. 694, 743 P.2d 1136 (1987); Primous v. Flagler Systems, Inc., 477 So.2d 1057 (Fla.Dist.Ct.App.1985); Castro v. Florida Juice Division, 400 So.2d 1280 (Fla.Dist.Ct.App.1981).
Krier’s treating physician prescribed the Opti-Fast weight-loss plan in an effort to alleviate the stress on Krier’s deteriorating knee. This Court has specifically stated, concerning SDCL 62-4-1:
Once notice has been provided and a physician selected or, as in the present case, acquiesced to, the employer has no authority to approve or disapprove the treatment rendered. It is in the doctor’s province to determine what is necessary, or suitable and proper. When a disagreement arises as to the treatment rendered, or recommended by the physician, it is for the employer to show that the treatment was not necessary or suitable and proper, (emphasis added).
Hanson v. Penrod Const. Co., 425 N.W.2d 396, 399 (S.D.1988).
Penrod unequivocally establishes that the Employer has the burden to demonstrate that the treatment rendered by the treating physician was not necessary or suitable and proper.2 Department heard the testimony of all of the witnesses and judged their credibility. SDCL 15-6-52(a). Insurance Agents, Inc. v. Zimmerman, 381 N.W.2d 218 (S.D.1986). Department decided that Employer had not met its burden of proof.3 The record before Department supports that determination. Krier testified that he weighed 190-195 pounds when he began working for Employer. He weighed 190-195 pounds at the time of the injury to his knee. He was forced into a more sedentary life style after his knee injury and was unable to engage in the same physical activities he could undertake before the injury. He began to gain *499weight. He had always been a big eater as he had been physically active and done vigorous physical work. After the knee injury, his eating habits remained unchanged until going on the Opti-Fast program. After losing weight, the pain in his knee began to decrease. Employer did not present any evidence to controvert any of this testimony.
Krier also called Laurie Mumford, the program director for the Opti-Fast program at McKennan Hospital. She is a registered dietitian and holds a master’s degree in food science and nutrition. She testified that Opti-Fast is a weight-loss program only available to people who need to lose weight for medical reasons. No one can enter the program unless prescribed by a physician. Each participant is monitored carefully by a physician. Mumford testified that most insurance companies will pay for the Opti-Fast program because it is not a cosmetic weight-loss program.
The Department’s record also contains an affidavit by Dr. William Watson, Krier’s physician. This affidavit was received into evidence by virtue of a Prehearing Order issued by Department of Labor. In the affidavit, Dr. Watson states that if called he would testify that Krier continued to:
experience degeneration and associated problems secondary to the injury to his knee that occurred on December 2, 1979. When I last saw him to re-examine his knee on December 13, 1988, I recommended that he lose weight (approximately 70 pounds). This would reduce his pain by reducing the amount of weight that his knee joint would have to bear.
A medically supervised weight-loss program would be the safest and surest way to obtain permanent weight loss, so I recommended that Steve participate in the Optifast (sic) program.
Employer did not introduce any testimony or evidence to controvert the affidavit. The only witness presented by Employer was the director of another weight-loss plan, who only testified about the nature of her program.
Based on this record we cannot say the Department erred in ordering that Employer pay the costs of the weight-loss program in the amount of $1,873.28. Under the authorities cited above, the program was “necessary or suitable and proper.” SDCL 62-4-1. Penrod, 425 N.W.2d at 399.
SABERS, J., and HERTZ, Acting J., concur.
MILLER, C.J., concurs specially.
WUEST, J., disqualified.
AMUNDSON, J., not having been a member of the Court at the time this action was submitted did not participate.
. SDCL 62-4-1 provides, in pertinent part:
The employer shall provide necessary first aid, medical, surgical, and hospital services, or other suitable and proper care including medical and surgical supplies, apparatus, artificial members and body aids during the disability or treatment of an employee within the provisions of this title.
. Employer argues that the Department should have required that Krier prove that his weight gain was caused by his knee injury. Employer relies exclusively on Rank v. Lirtdblom, 459 N.W.2d 247 (S.D.1990). Employer’s reliance on Rank is misplaced. The employee in Rank had long-standing pulmonary problems. The employee suffered a compensable knee injury. We noted that generally employers are not to pay for treatment of preexisting conditions that are "discovered in the course of treatment or surgery for a compensable condition.” Id. at 250. Rank’s pulmonary problems had “existed for quite some time and [were] not the result of his knee injury.” We held that the employer was not obligated to pay for the treatment of the preexisting pulmonary problems and adopted the language of the circuit court that:
There may be instances where preoperative care must be covered under workers’ compensation insurance, such as in emergency situations or where the treatment for nonwork related disease would be unnecessary but for the work related injury.
Id. at 250.
Rank discusses the rule for compensability for treatment of preexisting conditions. There was no testimony that Krier had a preexisting weight problem. Thus, Rank is not applicable to this case.
. • The standard of review in this case is as follows:
In appeals from decisions of administrative agencies, this court makes the same review of the agency’s decision as did the circuit court. Lee v. Dept, of Health, 411 N.W.2d 108 (S.D.1987); Barkdtill v. Homestake Mining Co., 411 N.W.2d 408 (S.D.1987) (Barkdull II). ’“When the issue is a question of law, the decisions of the administrative agency and the circuit court are fully reviewable. (citations omitted). When the issue is a question of fact, we ascertain whether the administrative agency was clearly erroneous.’ ” Permann v. Dept, of Labor, Unemployment Insurance Division, 411 N.W.2d 113, 116 (S.D.1987). We review the factual findings in light of the entire evidence in the record.
Penrod, 425 N.W.2d at 397.

=== CASE 9738921 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:05:21.901763+00 ===

MILLER, Chief Justice
(concurring specially).
I agree with the majority that Hanson v. Penrod Const. Co., 425 N.W.2d 396 (S.D.1988), controls this case.* Since Hanson controls this case, I concur, albeit with trepidation.
I think it is proper to note that if a claimant, such as Krier, puts on weight again, his employer will not necessarily have to pay again.
SDCL 62-4-37 provides:
No compensation shall be allowed for any injury or death due to the employee’s willful misconduct, including intentional self-inflicted injury, intoxication, illegal use of any schedule I or schedule II drug, or willful failure or refusal to use a safety appliance furnished by the employer, or to perform a duty required by statute. The burden of proof under this section shall be on the defendant employer. (Emphasis added.)
Johnson v. Chicago & N.W. Ry. Co., 69 S.D. 111, 7 N.W.2d 145 (1942) (an injury aggravated by the willful or unreasonable conduct of an employee is not compensable as to the additional period of disability).
Furthermore, as stated in 1A Larson, Workmen’s Compensation Law § 13.00 (Supp.1990):
*500When the primary injury is shown to have arisen out of and in the course of employment, every natural consequence that flows from the injury likewise arises out of the employment, unless it is the result of an independent intervening cause attributable to claimant’s own intentional conduct. (Emphasis added.)
Given the unique facts of this case, I concur specially.
Employer has failed to argue that this is not a compensable "injury" under our worker’s compensation statutes. Lather v. Huron College, 413 N.W.2d 369 (S.D.1987).

=== CASE 2218131 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:41.59879+00 ===

473 N.W.2d 500 (1991)
Pete DUBBELDE, Plaintiff and Appellee,
v.
JOHN MORRELL & CO., Defendant and Appellant.
Nos. 17150, 17170.
Supreme Court of South Dakota.
Considered on Briefs January 9, 1991.
Decided August 7, 1991.
Bradley G. Bonynge, Sioux Falls, for plaintiff and appellee.
David J. Vickers and Michael S. McKnight of Boyce, Murphy, McDowell & Greenfield, Sioux Falls, for defendant and appellant.
MEIERHENRY, Circuit Judge.
Facts and Procedural History
This appeal stems from a worker's compensation proceeding and appeal to circuit court. On January 8, 1985, Claimant Pete Dubbelde (Dubbelde) sustained an injury to his right shoulder arising out of and during the course of his employment with John Morrell & Company (Morrell). As a result of the injury, Morrell paid Dubbelde worker's compensation at a rate of $227.98 per week. Following an appeal hearing before the State of South Dakota, Department of Labor, Division of Labor and Management (Department), the Department entered a decision determining that Dubbelde was entitled to compensation at a rate of $247.00 per week. The $19.02 increase resulted from the Department including overtime hours in the calculation. Morrell's calculation was based upon a straight 40 hour work week. The Department determined that Dubbelde regularly worked 44.6 hours per week based upon his wage history over the previous year. Morrell appealed the Department's decision to circuit court contending that the Department erred in including overtime hours in its calculation. Morrell argued that no part of Dubbelde's overtime earnings, hours or premium pay, should be considered in calculating the weekly compensation rate.
*501 The Department considered "earnings" defined in SDCL 62-1-1(3) to include all of the hours worked by an employee on a regular and continuous basis, including overtime hours calculated at a regular or straight-time rate. The circuit court concluded that overtime hours may be considered at the straight-time rate when overtime hours are commonly regarded as a day's work. Although the Department and the circuit court used different rationale in their application and interpretation of the statutes, they both found ambiguity in the statute and basically arrived at the same conclusion, i.e. that overtime hours at a regular pay rate may be included in calculating compensation rates.[1]
We reverse.
DECISION
The agency and circuit court erred in determining that overtime hours should be included at the straight-time pay rate under the definition of what constitutes earnings under SDCL 62-1-1(3). Dubbelde's case hinges on an interpretation of South Dakota worker's compensation statutes which set forth a procedure for calculating disability benefits.
An interpretation of a statute or question of law in an administrative appeal is fully reviewable. Beville v. Univ. of S.D./Bd. of Regents, 420 N.W.2d 9 (S.D.1988). "Questions of law, such as statutory interpretation, are reviewable by the court de novo. No deference is given to the conclusions of law by the trial court or the agency." Beville at 9. See Permann v. Dept. of Labor, Unemp. Ins. D., 411 N.W.2d 113 (S.D.1987); West v. John Morrell & Co., 460 N.W.2d 745 (S.D.1990).
In South Dakota the weekly compensation rate for disability compensation is equal to sixty-six and two-thirds percent of an employee's weekly wages, not to exceed the state average weekly wage which was $247.00 at the time of Dubbelde's injury. An injured employee's average weekly wage is the employee's earnings computed "as provided in §§ 62-4-24 to 62-4-28, inclusive." SDCL 62-1-1(1). Since Dubbelde had been employed at Morrell's continuously for the previous fifty-two weeks, SDCL 62-4-24 analysis applies and his average weekly wage is determined by dividing the total earnings during the previous fifty-two weeks by fifty-two.
"Earnings" are defined in SDCL 62-1-1(3) as "the amount of compensation for the number of hours commonly regarded as a day's work for the employment in which the employee was engaged at the time of this injury and shall exclude overtime earnings," ... (emphasis added). Generally, in the absence of specific statutory exclusion, overtime earnings are usually included in "wages" if they are "regular" or "customary," although not necessarily guaranteed. Larson's Workman's Compensation Law, Vol. 2, § 60.12(d) at 10-646. The South Dakota Legislature specifically excludes overtime in the definition of earnings. Although some states have softened the effect of an express exclusion by holding that regularly worked overtime hours could be included at straight-time pay, we find those cases distinguishable because the statutes of those states are worded differently than the one here at issue. See R.C. Durr Co., Inc. v. Chapman, 563 S.W.2d 743 (Ky.App.1978); Coles v. Seven-Eleven Stores, 217 Mont. 343, 704 P.2d 1048 (1985).
The wording of SDCL 62-1-1(3) is specific. Even applying a liberal construction in favor of the claimant as both the agency and circuit court strained to do by finding an ambiguity, we cannot overlook the plain *502 meaning of the words, "excluding overtime earnings." See Wold v. Meilman Food Industries, 269 N.W.2d 112, 116 (S.D.1978) This Court can only assume that the legislature meant what the statute clearly says, that is, to base worker's compensation benefits only upon regular hours at straight time pay.[2]
Dubbelde's regular working day was commonly regarded as eight hours for which he earned regular pay of $8.55 per hour. He is entitled to $227.98 weekly worker's compensation benefits as originally paid by his employer. The decision of the circuit court and the agency is reversed.
MILLER, C.J., and HENDERSON, and SABERS, JJ., and HERTZ, Acting J., concur.
AMUNDSON, J., not having been a member of the court at the time this action was submitted did not participate.
MEIERHENRY, Circuit Judge, for WUEST, J., disqualified.
NOTES
[1]  The Department found an ambiguity in the statute and because of the remedial nature of the worker's compensation laws interpreted the statute liberally to include overtime hours at straight-time pay. The circuit court found ambiguity in the statute because of the conflict in the definition of earnings. The circuit court determined that what is "commonly regarded as a day's work for employment in which the employee was engaged" could include overtime hours thus conflicting with the provision excluding "overtime earnings" and creating an ambiguity. To resolve the ambiguity and to give effect to both provisions of the statute, the circuit court concluded that overtime hours may be considered at straight time rate if included in what is "commonly regarded as a day's work."
[2]  The established precedent of statutory construction is "to give words and phrases their plain meaning and effect.... This Court assumes that statutes mean what they say and that legislators have said what they meant...." (cites omitted) Petition of Famous Brands, Inc., 347 N.W.2d 882, 885 (S.D.1984).

=== CASE 2218132 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:41.627547+00 ===

77 Ill.2d 507 (1979)
397 N.E.2d 801
LEE A. SCOTT, Appellee,
v.
JAMES M. ROCHFORD, Superintendent of Police, et al., Appellants.
No. 51582.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
Opinion filed November 21, 1979.
*508 William R. Quinlan, Corporation Counsel, of Chicago (Robert Retke, Kathleen Ransford and Daniel Pascale, Assistant Corporation Counsel), for appellant.
Steven M. Levin and Allan A. Ackerman, of Chicago, for appellee.
Judgment affirmed.
MR. CHIEF JUSTICE GOLDENHERSH delivered the opinion of the court:
Plaintiff, Lee A. Scott, appealed from the judgment of the circuit court of Cook County entered in favor of defendants, James M. Rochford, superintendent, John J. Thomas, administrator of personnel services, and John E. Sheerin, supervisor of the employment section, respectively *509 of the Chicago Police Department, entered upon allowance of their motion to dismiss. The appellate court reversed (66 Ill. App.3d 338), and we allowed defendants' petition for leave to appeal.
Plaintiff was appointed to the Chicago Police Department on April 26, 1976. On February 10, 1977, while off duty, he was involved in an incident in a tavern. On April 5, 1977, plaintiff received written notice from the defendant superintendent that with the consent of the department of personnel, effective April 5, 1977, he was discharged. The parties agree that no hearing was conducted prior to the discharge and that plaintiff, at that time, had been employed by the police department for more than 9 months and less than 1 year.
The Illinois Municipal Code provided in pertinent part:
"Original appointment shall be on probation for a period not to exceed 6 months to be fixed by the rules; provided that in municipalities with a population of more than 500,000 inhabitants, original appointment to the police department shall be on probation for a period not to exceed nine (9) months to be fixed by the rules of the department." Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 24, par. 10-1-14.
"In any municipality of more than 500,000 population, no officer or employee of the police department in the classified civil service of the municipality whose appointment has become complete may be removed or discharged, or suspended for more than 30 days except for cause upon written charges and after an opportunity to be heard in his own defense by the Police Board." Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 24, par. 10-1-18.1.
On October 24, 1975, pursuant to its home rule powers, the city of Chicago enacted chapter 25.1-5 of the Municipal Code. It provided for the establishment of the department of personnel and the appointment of a director of personnel and further:
"The Director of Personnel shall issue personnel rules with the approval of the Personnel Board. Prior to the *510 effective date of such rules, the Director of Personnel shall give public notice in one or more newspapers of general circulation, and in no case shall such publication be less than ten (10) days before the effective date of the proposed rule or amendment to the rule. Such public notice shall include information concerning where the rules can be reviewed and where comments may be directed. * * * The rules shall provide:
*   *   *
(7) For probationary periods after original appointment not to exceed one year."
On January 14, 1976, the director of the department of personnel proposed to amend certain of the rules of the department of personnel. As amended, Personnel Rule IV, paragraph 5, read in part:
"Probation. * * * Any person appointed from a career service original entrance eligible list will serve a probationary period determined by the Director. Such probationary period shall in no case exceed one year from the date of original appointment."
On January 30, 1976, the director of personnel issued a memorandum which read:
"In accordance with Chapter 25.1-5 of the Municipal Code and the Rules of the Department of Personnel, the probationary period for all persons appointed from an original entrance eligible list into the Career Service on and after January 1, 1976, shall be for a period of one year."
In his complaint plaintiff sought injunctive relief, reinstatement and back pay. He alleged that failure to grant him a hearing deprived him of due process and violated provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 24, par. 1-1-1 et seq.). The circuit court held that under the ordinance and the rule promulgated by the director of personnel plaintiff was subject to a probationary period of one year and that his discharge without a hearing was not improper. The appellate court, holding that the rule was not properly promulgated and *511 did not serve to extend the probationary period for police officers, reversed.
Defendants contend here that the decision of the appellate court was based on the erroneous conclusion that publication of notice of the extension of the probationary period from 9 months to 1 year occurred for the first time on November 21, 1977. (See 66 Ill. App.3d 338, 341.) They have attached to their brief and ask that this court take judicial notice of a certificate showing that on January 19, 1976, there was a publication, which met the requirements of the ordinance, in a newspaper published in the city of Chicago. Section 1 of "An Act in relation to judicial notice" (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 51, par. 48a) requires that the circuit court take judicial notice of all general ordinances of the municipal corporations within the circuit, and section 2 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 51, par. 48b) provides that on review this court take judicial notice of all matters of which the circuit court was required to take judicial notice. It would appear that a reasonable interpretation of these sections would require that we take notice of rules promulgated in accordance with the provisions of a municipal ordinance and of the certificates evidencing their publication.
Defendants argue that the memorandum effected the extension of the probationary period to a period of 1 year and that it was issued in compliance with the requirement of the ordinance that publication be made not less than 10 days before the effective date of a proposed rule or an amendment thereto. Plaintiff argues that acceptance of the defendants' position would lead to unfair and irrational results. He contends that if the director of personnel is permitted to enact rules by means of unpublished memoranda specifying the length of a probationary period, changes could be made on a day-to-day basis presumptively without publication and applicable not only to different classes, but to specific employees.
*512 The authority of the director of personnel to issue personnel rules is conferred by the ordinance, and its exercise must be in compliance with its provisions. The purported amendment to section 5 of Rule IV published on January 19, 1976, contained only the language of the ordinance and made no specific provision for the length of probationary periods after original appointment.
We are of the opinion that the publication on January 19, 1976, did not serve to effectuate the change in the probationary period applicable to plaintiff. The language of the ordinance should be given its plain meaning unless to do so would defeat its intent. (City of Chicago v. Pennsylvania R.R. Co. (1968), 41 Ill.2d 245; City of East St. Louis v. Union Electric Co. (1967), 37 Ill.2d 537; cert. denied (1968), 390 U.S. 948, 19 L.Ed.2d 1136, 88 S.Ct. 1034.) The ordinance provides for the adoption of rules which fix probationary periods, subject to the limitation that they not exceed 1 year. It also provides that the "public notice shall include information concerning where the rules can be reviewed and where comments may be directed * * *." The obvious reason for this provision in the ordinance is that the publication be seen by persons likely to be affected by the proposed rules and that they be given an opportunity to comment thereon. The publication here gave no notice of the intent to provide by rule that all probationary periods would be extended to 1 year and defeated the purpose of the publication provision of the ordinance.
We conclude, therefore, that the purported rule change did not become effective prior to the completion of plaintiff's probationary period, and the judgment of the appellate court is affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.

=== CASE 9738922 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:05:24.697273+00 ===

OPINION
CRIPPEN, Judge.
The trial court granted judgment for respondent Rural American Bank of Green-wald following a special jury verdict favoring appellant Ben Herickhoff. The trial court concluded that Minn.Stat. § 513.33 (1988), the statute requiring credit agreements to be in writing, barred a breach of contract defense based on respondent’s breach of an agreement to first apply proceeds from farm operations to appellant Ben Herickhoff’s loan before applying them to the loan of appellants Mark and Donna Herickoff.
FACTS
Appellant Ben Herickhoff is a retired farmer. His son and daughter-in-law, appellants Mark and Donna Herickhoff, operate the Herickhoff family farm once farmed by Ben.
Throughout the 1980s, Mark and Donna received loans to finance their farming operation from the State Bank of Greenwald, the predecessor to respondent Rural American State Bank of Greenwald. In 1986, Mark and Donna needed more than the bank’s $175,000 lending limit. To allow Mark and Donna to exceed the limit, Ben agreed to borrow $175,000 from the bank to be used to finance the farming operation.
Bank officials told Ben that the proceeds from the farming operation would first be *362used to pay off his loan and only after his loan was paid off would the proceeds be used to pay off Mark’s and Donna’s loan. This assurance also was contained in a document typed by bank vice-president Doug Winter. This document was typed on bank letterhead and was signed by Mark and Donna Herickhoff.
In 1987, proceeds from the farming operation were used to completely pay off Mark’s and Donna’s loan. Meanwhile, Ben’s loan balance remained at $175,000.
Respondent sued Ben for repayment. Ben claimed breach of contract and fraud. The jury returned a special verdict, finding that respondent breached the loan agreement. Responding to appellants’ alternative claim, the jury found that respondent did not fraudulently induce Ben to enter into the loan agreement. After the jury verdict, the trial court granted “summary judgment” for respondent, finding that the loan agreement was not enforceable under Minn.Stat. § 513.33, subd. 2 (1988), which requires a “credit agreement” to be in writing.1
ISSUE
Does Minn.Stat. § 513.33 (1988) bar appellants’ breach of contract defense?
ANALYSIS
Section 513.33, subdivision 2 states:
A debtor may not maintain an action on a credit agreement unless the agreement is in writing, expresses consideration, sets forth the relevant terms and conditions, and is signed by the creditor and the debtor.
Subdivision 1(1) describes a credit agreement as:
an agreement to lend or forbear repayment of money, goods, or things in action, to otherwise extend credit, or to make any financial accomodation.
The trial court found that the agreement to pay Ben’s loan first was a credit agreement that ran afoul of section 513.33 because it was not confirmed by a properly executed written document. We conclude to the contrary that an agreement to apply farm proceeds to one loan before another is not an agreement to lend or forbear repayment of money nor an agreement to extend credit.
The agreement to pay Ben’s loan first was also not the type of “financial accomo-dation” envisioned by the statute. In construing the statute, “[gjeneral words are construed to be restricted in their meaning by preceding particular words.” Minn. *363Stat. § 645.08(3) (1988). Here, the meaning of the general phrase “any financial acco-modation” is restricted by the preceding particular phrases “agreement to lend or forbear repayment of money” and “agreement * * * to otherwise extend credit.” The phrase does not expand application of the statute to all agreements favoring the debtor. Rather, the phrase “any financial accomodation” must be interpreted to mean a financial accomodation in the nature of lending or forbearance agreement or some other agreement for extension of credit. Here, the agreement was not a lending agreement, a forbearance agreement, or an extension of credit. See Carlson v. Estes, 458 N.W.2d 123, 127 (Minn.App.1990) (although an underlying mortgage agreement is a credit agreement within the definition of section 513.33, subdivision 1(1), a promise not to record the mortgage, because it is not an extension of credit nor any other financial accomodation, is not a credit agreement).2
This interpretation of the statute is supported by its legislative history. The legislation was intended to regulate only those agreements extending credit or promising repayment or forbearance. When S.F. 1067, the bill that eventually became section 513.33, was introduced on the Senate floor, its author, Senator Randolph Peterson, described it as an effort to prevent borrowers from using an ongoing lending relationship with a lender to enforce unwritten agreements for future loans. Comments of Sen. Peterson, Senate Committee of the Whole, May 6, 1985 (tape). This purpose is not served by applying section 513.33 to agreements, like the one here, that address the rights and obligations of the parties under a completed loan transaction.
This construction of the statute is further compelled by its language on remedies. The statute applies only to actions brought by the debtor to enforce a loan agreement. Subdivision 2 states that “[a] debtor may not maintain an action on a credit agreement unless the agreement is in writing.” This language is fitting for a debtor’s claim to enforce extension of credit. Here, the creditor has brought the action, and the debtor asserts his agreement to support a claim that the creditor erred in handling repayment of a loan.
Because we hold that section 513.33 does not apply here, we need not decide whether respondent’s letterhead was sufficient to satisfy the statute’s signing requirement nor whether respondent could be required to comply with an agreement it did not sign. We also need not decide whether Ben Herickoff’s signature on the written agreement was needed to fully comply with the statute.
DECISION
We reverse the trial court’s post-verdict judgment in favor of respondent and order reinstatement of the jury’s verdict.
Reversed.
. The trial court judgment was in response to respondent’s “directed verdict” motion immediately before trial began, premised on Minn.Stat. § 513.33. Two weeks before trial, respondent’s complaint was amended to assert rights under this statute. The pretrial motion was taken under advisement by the trial court and decided as a "summary judgment" after the jury verdict. The motion and the trial court’s judgment were premised on matters of law, and we need not explore whether they were properly considered under a directed verdict or summary judgment motion.
We observe that during the course of trial, appellants also claimed the agreement to pay off Ben's loan first should be enforced under the doctrine of promissory estoppel. Because the trial court asked the jury to assume the agreement was a valid contract, the court did not allow the jury to consider the estoppel issue. After the jury verdict, the trial court concluded that the contract was unenforceable under Minn.Stat. § 513.33. The trial court erred in ruling that the contract was unenforceable after asking the jury to assume that the contract was valid. Jury instructions, if not objected to, become the law of the case. O'Brien v. Wendt, 295 N.W.2d 367, 370 (Minn.1980).
The trial court’s post-trial ruling had two consequences. First, the court mistakenly eliminated a possibly valid promissory estoppel defense. See Del Hayes & Sons, Inc. v. Mitchell, 304 Minn. 275, 284-85, 230 N.W.2d 588, 594 (1975) (promissory estoppel may be used to remove an oral contract from the statute of frauds). Second, because the jury found that respondent breached the contract, the validity of the fraud verdict was thrown into question. Because breach of contract and fraud were alternative claims, once the jury found breach of contract, their decision on fraudulent inducement became irrelevant. Thus, we cannot conclude, as respondent contends, that the fraud issue already has been determined against appellants. Likewise, the process employed by the trial court constitutes one of several bases for rejecting respondent's argument that an estoppel claim is barred by the jury’s verdict that the contract was not fraudulently induced. Because we reinstate the jury’s contract verdict, we need not further explore the fraud or promissory estoppel allegations.
. In Carlson, the question was raised whether the agreement not to record the mortgage, although not a credit agreement, might be barred as evidence under the parol evidence rule. Carlson, 458 N.W.2d at 127. Neither party raised a parol evidence issue here, and we decline to address this question.

=== CASE 9738924 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:05:25.353255+00 ===

MR. JUSTICE RYAN delivered the opinion of the court: This is a direct appeal to this court under Rule 302(b) (58 Ill. 2d R. 302(b)) from an order of the circuit court of Peoria County declaring the city of Peoria tax on admissions to amusements unconstitutional. On October 22, 1976, plaintiffs, who are principally owners of theaters in Peoria, filed a complaint for declaratory judgment challenging the validity of an ordinance of the city of Peoria (a home rule city) imposing a 2% tax on admissions to amusements. The ordinance placed the incidence of the tax on the consumer. The complaint alleged inter alia the unconstitutionality of four categories of exemptions from the tax. On November 9, 1976, the Peoria city council amended the ordinance, deleting the four categories of exemptions and providing in the amended ordinance for two categories of exemptions. Plaintiffs then filed an amended complaint seeking relief covering two periods of time, namely, (1) from August 31, 1976, to November 9, 1976 (the period during which the original ordinance was in effect), and (2) after November 9, 1976 (the period the amended ordinance was in effect). After the trial court’s decision on June 9, 1978, holding the ordinance invalid, the Peoria city council passed a new ordinance imposing its admissions tax. The new ordinance is not involved in this litigation. The amended complaint was in six counts. Count I alleged that the tax was in fact a nonuniform special assessment and therefore invalid. Count II alleged that the ordinance in effect from August 31, 1976, to November 9, 1976, contained arbitrary and discriminatory exemptions. Count III alleged that after November 9, 1976, the amended ordinance was administered in an arbitrary and discriminatory manner. Count IV alleged that the ordinance in effect after November 9, 1976, contained arbitrary and discriminatory exemptions. Count V alleged that as applied and enforced after August 31, 1976, the ordinance was in fact an illegal occupation tax. Count VI alleged that a home rule unit has no authority to assess a tax against certain basic human rights — the right to witness an amusement. The trial court granted the defendants’ motion for summary judgment as to count I (special-assessment theory) and count VI (basic-human-rights theory). Following a hearing on the remaining counts, the circuit court entered judgment in favor of the plaintiffs, holding the ordinance to be unconstitutional. The defendants appealed from the order declaring the ordinance unconstitutional and the plaintiffs cross-appealed from the summary judgment order as to counts I and VI. The ordinance enacted August 31, 1976, provided: “(a) There is hereby levied and imposed upon privilege of participating in or witnessing an amusement within the City of Peoria a tax of two percent (2%) of the admission fee charged to said amusement exclusive of other state or federal taxes; provided however, that said tax shall not apply to or be imposed upon the privilege of participating in or witnessing of any amusement the proceeds of which, after payment of reasonable expenses, inure exclusively to the benefit of: (1) not-for-profit religious, educational, charitable institutions, societies or organizations; or (2) societies or organizations maintained for the prevention of cruelty to children or animals; provided, however, that no part of the net earnings under Paragraphs (1) and (2) inure to the benefit of an owner; (3) governmental units, boards, commissions and bodies duly organized under the laws of the City of Peoria, State of Illinois or United States of America; (4) a resident society, organization, association, corporation, entity or person advancing the cultural interests of the City of Peoria through the local production of live theatrical and dramatic presentations to a seated audience of any open-air or enclosed theater, auditorium or the like which has a seating capacity, including balconies, not exceeding 700 persons. (b) The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of said tax shall be borne by the person who seeks participation or admission to any such amusement, said person hereinafter referred to as ‘consumer’. (c) The tax herein levied shall be paid in addition to any and all other taxes and charges. It shall be the duty of the owner, manager or operator of every amusement in the City to act as trustee for and on account of the City, and to secure said tax from the consumer and pay over to the City Comptroller said tax under procedures prescribed by the City Comptroller or as otherwise provided in this ordinance. (d) Every person required to collect the tax levied by this ordinance shall secure said tax from the consumer at the time he collects the admission or participation fee charged for the amusement. Upon the invoice receipt or other statement or memorandum of the rent given to the renter at the time of payment, the amount due under the tax provided in this ordinance shall be stated separately on said documents.” On November 9, 1976, after the complaint was filed, that part of paragraph (a) of the ordinance set out above, which provided for the exemptions from its application, was amended so that there were only two subparagraphs providing for exemptions: “(1) not-for-profit religious, educational, or charitable institutions, societies or orgainzation, provided, however, that no part of the net earnings are retained or retainable by the owner. (2) grammar, junior high and high schools located within the City of Peoria.” It is contended by the plaintiffs that the four exemptions from the tax contained in the original ordinance, and the two exemptions contained in the amended ordinance are unreasonable, arbitrary and not related to the purposes of the ordinance. This court, in Williams v. City of Chicago (1977), 66 Ill. 2d 423, 432-33, summarized the general principles of law relating to classification for purposes of taxation, stating: “It is well established that legislative bodies have very broad powers in establishing classifications defining the objects of taxation which will withstand constitutional attack so long as the classifications are reasonable. [Citations.] The legislative determination as to those persons who are to be taxed and those not taxed must not be arbitrary [citation], and the classification must bear some reasonable relationship to the object of the legislation [citation]. However, it is equally well settled that there is a presumption favoring the validity of classifications made by legislative bodies in taxing matters and that one who attacks them has the burden of proving such classifications to be arbitrary and unreasonable. [Citations.] ” The plaintiffs acknowledge that they have the burden of proving the classifications to be arbitrary and unreasonable but state they have met this burden, contending that the record establishes that there is no administrative, fiscal or accounting justification for the exemptions. While plaintiffs presented evidence to this effect, they have not established the invalidity of the classifications contained in the two ordinances. Although the tax is placed on the consumer, the exemptions are based on the nature of the entity to which the net proceeds of the amusement inures. This court has, on several occasions, upheld classifications where the exemptions have taken their character from an entity other than that upon which the incidence of the tax has been placed. In People ex rel. Holland Coal Co. v. Isaacs (1961), 22 Ill. 2d 477, this court considered the validity of exemptions contained in the Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1953, ch. 120, par. 441). Although the incidence of the tax was placed upon the retailer, the exemptions were based upon the nature of the purchaser. These exemptions were granted primarily to governmental, religious and charitable bodies. In Jacobs v. City of Chicago (1973), 53 Ill. 2d 421, this court considered an ordinance of the city of Chicago which, as in this case, placed the incidence of the tax upon the consumer (upon the use and privilege of parking a motor vehicle in or. upon any parking lot or garage). However, certain exemptions from the tax were based upon the nature of the parking facility in which the vehicle was parked. In Williams v. City of Chicago (1977), 66 Ill. 2d 423, this court upheld an ordinance which placed the incidence of the tax upon the lease of personal property but defined the types and categories of personal property the lease of which was subject to the tax so that the leasing of many types of personal property was not subject to the tax. Therefore the exemptions in the ordinance of the city of Peoria, based upon the nature of the entity to which the proceeds of the amusement inures, are not objectionable if such classification is otherwise reasonable. The exemptions set out in the amended ordinance are classifications that essentially parallel those exemptions contained in the Revenue Act of 1939 (see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 120, par. 500.1 et seq.), which are authorized by article IX, section 6, of the Illinois Constitution of 1970. The classifications contained in the August 31, 1976, ordinance, though broader than those contained in the later amended ordinance, nonetheless are limited to entities which provide services and perform functions similar in nature to those of the entities exempt from taxation under the Revenue Act of 1939. They are not commercial enterprises but are governmental and nongovernmental organizations the purposes of which are to serve, benefit and improve the community in general. Thus, there is a difference between the organizations stated in the exemptions and those that are generally delegated to collect the tax from the consumer and pay it over to the city, and this difference would appear to constitute a basis for classifying the exempt bodies differently from the others. Placing the consumers of these exempt bodies in a different class from the patrons of other amusements and exempting these consumers from taxation would appear to be reasonable. There was evidence presented in the trial court that those who attend functions presented by the exempt bodies often do so not only for the purpose of entertainment, but also for the purpose of supporting the organization presenting the amusement. This may not be universally true; however, the evidence shows that it is not uncommon. Although the tax is on the consumer, the ordinance places substantial obligations upon the organization which furnishes the amusement. It must collect the tax from the consumer, hold it as trustee for the city, and pay it over to the city at specified times. These duties involve a certain amount of bookwork, administrative duties and financial burdens which the city has seen fit not to impose upon the exempt organizations. These organizations perform many functions and services which the city itself might otherwise be called upon to furnish. By relieving these exempt bodies from the burden of collecting, paying over and accounting for the tax, the city could well have reasoned that more effort and money could thereby be devoted to the beneficent purposes of the organizations. Because of these differences, which we find to constitute a reasonable basis for the classifications contained in the ordinances, we hold that the plaintiffs have not sustained the burden of establishing that the classifications were arbitrary or unreasonable. We find that the trial court’s holding that the classifications were unreasonable was against the manifest weight of the evidence. It is contended that the manner in which the amended ordinance was administered was arbitrary, capricious and unreasonable. It is contended that after the ordinance was amended the city continued to not collect the tax from the organizations that were formerly exempt under the original ordinance. This, it is argued, resulted in an unequal application of the tax. The plaintiffs rely upon Yick Wo v. Hopkins (1886), 118 U.S. 356, 30 L. Ed. 220, 6 S. Ct. 1064, where the court considered an ordinance of the city of San Francisco which was enforced in a discriminatory manner. The case involved a writ of habeas corpus. The petitioner had applied for a permit to conduct his laundry business but the application was refused, although all of the requirements had been complied with. The petitioner had been arrested for conducting his laundry business without a permit. The Supreme Court held that the arbitrary denial of the permit to the petitioner and also the denial of permits to about 200 other Chinese, while granting permits to 80 others who were not Chinese, constituted illegal discrimination and a denial of equal protection. Yick Wo is recognized as the landmark case on arbitrary application and enforcement of laws. However, subsequent decisions of the Supreme Court and the application of Yick Wo in State and lower Federal courts have refined the doctrine of that case. It is now generally recognized that the doctrine reaches only intentional or purposeful discrimination. Mere laxity in enforcement does not constitute a denial of equal protection. There must be some conduct which, in effect, amounts to an intentional violation of practical uniformity. (Sunday Lake Iron Co. v. Township of Wakefield (1918), 247 U.S. 350, 62 L. Ed. 1154, 38 S. Ct. 495; Mackay Telegraph & Cable Co. v. City of Little Rock (1919), 250 U.S. 94, 63 L. Ed. 863, 39 S. Ct. 428; Tieger, Police Discretion and Discriminatory Enforcement, 1971 Duke L.J. 717, 724-29; Comment, The Right to Nondiscriminatory Enforcement of State Penal Laws, 61 Columbia L. Rev. 1103, 1113-15 (1961).) Although the evidence in our case may indicate laxity in the enforcement of the Peoria amusement tax ordinance, the plaintiffs have not established the intentional or purposeful discrimination necessary to the application of the Yick Wo doctrine. In Jacobs v. City of Chicago (1973), 53 Ill. 2d 421, 427, this court held that the failure to apply the taxing ordinance uniformly would not render the ordinance in that case invalid. It is also contended that the Peoria amusement tax is in fact an illegal occupation tax. Article VII, section 6(e), of the Illinois Constitution of 1970 permits a home rule unit of local government to impose taxes upon occupations only as provided by the General Assembly. This same argument was urged in challenging the validity of the Chicago cigarette tax ordinance which this court considered in S. Bloom, Inc. v. Korshak (1972), 52 Ill. 2d 56. In that case it was held that the incidence of the tax was on the consumer, although the tax ordinance placed responsibility for collecting and remitting the tax on the wholesaler and retailer. The tax in that case was held not to be an occupation tax. This court has likewise sustained the validity of home rule tax ordinances against similar charges in Paper Supply Co. v. City of Chicago (1974), 57 Ill. 2d 553, and Mulligan v. Dunne (1975), 61 Ill. 2d 544. Also, in Town of Cicero v. Fox Valley Trotting Club, Inc. (1976), 65 Ill. 2d 10, an amusement tax ordinance of the town of Cicero, a home rule unit, was upheld. In that ordinance the incidence of the tax was not specifically placed upon the consumer as in our case, but was assessed on the basis of the number of individuals witnessing or participating in the amusement. Nonetheless, this court held that the tax was not a tax on an occupation. Under the previous decisions of this court, it is clear that the tax levied by the Peoria city ordinances was not a tax on an occupation. The trial court granted summary judgment for the defendants on two counts. In count I of the amended complaint, it was contended that the tax was in fact a special assessment designed to finance Peoria’s civic center. The ordinance does not specify that the proceeds from the tax are to be used for that purpose or for any specific purpose; thus the proceeds of the tax may be applied by the city council to any corporate purpose of the municipality. The command of uniformity (Ill. Const. 1970, art. IX, sec. 2) governs the assessment and the collection of a tax and not the distribution of the proceeds. The rule applicable to the use of the proceeds requires that tax revenues be used for corporate purposes of the municipality levying the tax. (Board of Library Directors v. City of Lake Forest (1959), 17 Ill. 2d 277.) It is not argued here that an expenditure to finance the Peoria civic center would not be for a corporate purpose of the city of Peoria. Thus, although some, or even a substantial portion, of the proceeds from the amusement tax may be used to finance the civic center, that fact would not render the tax invalid. Plaintiffs here argue only that a material issue of fact existed which precluded the entry of summary judgment on count I, but they do not state what the material issue of fact is. We conclude that the trial court properly entered summary judgment in favor of the defendants on count I. Count VI of the amended complaint alleged that the tax was a tax on a basic human right and is therefore invalid. This is a revenue not a license ordinance. It is an exercise of the power to tax given to a home rule unit by article VII, section 6(a), of the Illinois Constitution of 1970. It is a tax on the privilege of witnessing and participating in amusements. This court has upheld similar taxes on the privilege of purchasing cigarettes (S. Bloom, Inc. v. Korshak), on the privilege of parking automobiles (Jacobs v. City of Chicago), and on the privilege of leasing certain personal property (Williams v. City of Chicago). Under the Revenue Act of 1939 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 120, par. 482 et seq.), our homes are taxed, as is any real estate that may be used in earning a livelihood. This would seem to involve taxation of some rather basic rights. We see no merit in plaintiffs’ contention and find that the trial court properly entered summary judgment in favor of the defendants on count VI. For the reasons stated above, the judgment of the circuit court of Peoria County is reversed as to the judgment entered in favor of the plaintiffs on counts II, III, IV and V of the amended complaint and is affirmed as to the judgment entered in favor of the defendants on counts I and VI of the amended complaint. Affirmed in part and reversed in part.

=== CASE 9738925 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:05:25.358339+00 ===

MR. JUSTICE CLARK, concurring in part and dissenting in part: I am aware that the burden of proving classifications of a tax burden to be arbitrary and unreasonable is placed on the one who attacks the classifications (Williams v. City of Chicago (1977), 66 Ill. 2d 423, 433), and that the burden is a heavy one. The majority decision, however, effects two results: the burden is now an insurmountable one; and a court must go to any lengths in order to find classifications reasonable. The lengths gone to here defy reason, ignore the party bearing the incidence and burden of the tax, and contravene the 1970 Constitution. There is no question that the “ultimate incidence of the tax [may be] imposed on the participant, observer or purchaser” of an amusement; in other words, an amusement tax may be levied on a consumer. (Board of Education v. City of Peoria (1979), 76 Ill. 2d 469, 474-75; and see cases there cited, including Jacobs v. City of Chicago (1973), 53 Ill. 2d 421, 424.) Clearly the ordinance attempts to do just that. The issue here focuses on the classes of amusement operators — “collectors” who are exempt from the burden of collection from the consumer-taxpayer. Section 2 of article IX of the 1970 Constitution provides: “In any law classifying the subjects or objects of non-property taxes or fees, the classes shall be reasonable and the subjects and objects within each class shall be taxed uniformly. Exemptions, deductions, credits, refunds and other allowances shall be reasonable.” This court has frequently stated that legislative bodies have very broad powers to establish reasonable classifications in defining the subjects and objects of taxation. (Williams v. City of Chicago (1977), 66 Ill. 2d 423, 432; accord, Klein v. Hulman (1966), 34 Ill. 2d 343, 346.) “The legislative determination as to those persons who are to be taxed and those not taxed must not be arbitrary [citation], and the classification must bear some reasonable relationship to the object of the legislation.” (Williams v. City of Chicago (1977), 66 Ill. 2d 423, 432.) “Such classification must, however, be based on real and substantial differences between persons taxed and those not taxed.” Klein v. Hulman (1966), 34 Ill. 2d 343, 347. Despite the presumption of validity of such legislation (Williams v. City of Chicago (1977), 66 Ill. 2d 423, 432; Lehnhausen v. Lake Shore Auto Parts Co. (1973), 410 U.S. 356, 364, 35 L. Ed. 2d 351, 358, 93 S. Ct. 1001, 1006), I believe the plaintiffs have successfully rebutted that presumption. The ultimate incidence of the tax is on the consumer. (For that reason I agree with the majority that the tax is not on an occupation. Also, not everyone who presents an amusement for gain is necessarily in the occupation of producing or conducting amusements. (Town of Cicero v. Fox Valley Trotting Club, Inc. (1976), 65 Ill. 2d 10, 22.)) Because the consumer of the amusement bears the incidence of the tax (as well as the economic burden (see S. Bloom, Inc. v. Korshak (1972), 52 Ill. 2d 56, 63)), I believe that the exemptions from the tax must be based on that class of taxpayer (and not on the collector-operator). In other words, classifications within the taxpaying group of consumers of amusement must “be based on real and substantial differences between persons taxed and those not taxed” (Klein v. Hulman (1966), 34 Ill. 2d 343, 347; People ex rel. Holland Coal Co. v. Isaacs (1961), 22 Ill. 2d 477, 481), and “must bear some reasonable relationship to the object of the legislation” (People ex rel. Holland Coal Co. v. Isaacs (1961), 22 Ill. 2d 477, 480). (Exemptions and classifications are separate concepts under section 2 of article IX of the 1970 Constitution. (Head v. Korshak (1976), 62 Ill. 2d 226, 229.)) The exemptions here are not reasonable as required by the Illinois Constitution (art. IX, sec. 2). The rationale in Board of Education v. City of Peoria, above, is helpful. In that case, the circuit court held that ordinances providing for an amusement tax (the successor to the ordinance at issue here) and a tax “upon the privilege of purchasing food or alcohol” were unenforceable against the school district and park district of Peoria. After carefully noting that certain exemptions from nonproperty taxes would apply to the school and park district (e.g., retailer sales made to governmental bodies are exempt from a retailers’ occupation tax, and governmental bodies are exempt from paying the use tax on personal property purchased at retail), we held that the districts were not free to disregard collection of the taxes at issue because they fell “on the consumer, and cannot be considered as taxes imposed on another governmental unit.” (76 Ill. 2d 469, 475.) As against the school district, however, we did hold that the tax ordinances constituted “an unauthorized regulation” contrary to section 1 of article X of the 1970 Illinois Constitution. (76 Ill. 2d 469, 478.) Had the tax incidence been on the districts themselves and a specific exemption existed on that basis, even though the economic burden would remain on the consumer (S. Bloom, Inc. v. Korshak (1972), 52 Ill. 2d 56, 63), the districts would have been exempt from payment. That is the case here: had the incidence of the tax, which is controlling (52 Ill. 2d 56, 63), been on the operators or sponsors, the exemptions would be reasonable, even though the economic burden of the taxes is passed on to the consumer. The exemptions here simply have no nexus to the taxpayers. If one views the question here as an attempt to classify the taxpayer or consumer, then the conclusion must be that the classification is unreasonable. There is no substantial difference — no difference whatsoever (except perhaps the intent) — between the taxpaying consumer of a movie at the Rialto and the nontaxpaying consumer of a movie sponsored by one of the exempt bodies in the defendant’s tax ordinance (Klein v. Hulman (1966), 34 Ill. 2d 343, 347). The classification of a consumer on the basis of what entity is amusing him or her is specious, especially if one considers whether there is a “reasonable relationship to the object of the legislation” (People ex rel. Holland Coal Co. v. Isaacs (1961), 22 Ill. 2d 477, 480). Here, according to testimony by the mayor of Peoria and the corporation counsel, the object of the amusement-tax ordinance was to raise revenue; and both the incidence and economic burden of the tax were on the consumers of amusement. Yet the consumer, classified as attending a nonprofit group’s movie, did not have to contribute to the city’s coffers. The city argues that the activities of nonprofit associations lessen the city’s burden of providing activities for the citizens and should therefore be encouraged by not requiring the associations to collect a tax from their patrons. This is not persuasive. I do not see how, so long as the tax and burden remain on the consumer, the nonprofit groups (or others “exempted” by the ordinance) would be harmed or discouraged from their good works. A taxpaying boxing enthusiast will attend a match (of equal caliber) whether sponsored by local, profit-seeking merchants or by the booster club of the local high school. The city also suggests that some of the “exempt” organizations might be incapable of actually collecting this tax. Overwhelming testimony, not refuted by the city, suggests the opposite. I believe the “exemptions” set out in the ordinance, in its original form and as amended, are virtually inseparable from the ordinance as a whole. Moreover, because the ordinance required that the tax be collected “from the consumer at the time he [Le., the operator] collects the admission or participation fee charged for the amusement,” I must conclude the whole of the amusement tax ordinance is invalid under the Illinois Constitution (Ill. Const. 1970, art. IX, sec. 2). I agree with the majority that the circuit court properly entered summary judgment in favor of the defendants on counts I and VI of the complaint. Testimony by the city’s mayor and corporation counsel evidenced that the ordinance was enacted for revenue purposes. It was within the circuit court’s competence to conclude the ordinance was not a special assessment. Plaintiffs’ argument that a basic human right to witness an amusement was violated is frivolous. They fail to show how, to cite cases or constitutional provisions, or to do anything more than say so in a 6V2-line paragraph. (Does the plaintiff suggest that property taxes violate the right to own property?) For these reasons, I would affirm the judgment of the circuit court of Peoria County, and I concur in part and dissent in part.

=== CASE 9738926 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:05:26.051225+00 ===

Boyle, J.
This is a dispute over the assessed value of Meadowlanes Limited Dividend Housing Association’s federally subsidized low-income housing complex. The issue before the Court is whether the Michigan Tax Tribunal properly computed the true cash value of petitioner’s property for the purposes of assessing ad valorem taxes for the years 1981, 1982, and 1983. We hold that although it is proper for the Michigan Tax Tribunal to take into account the value, if any, of a federal government mortgage subsidy, the tribunal and the Court of Appeals adopted a wrong principle by determining the true cash value of the subject real property under a flawed appraisal method. Thus, we reverse the decisions of the Tax Tribunal and the Court of Appeals and remand this case to the Tax Tribunal for redetermination of the true cash value of Meadowlanes’ real property consistent with this opinion.
i
A. BACKGROUND AND FACTS
This appeal originated with petitioner-appel*477lant’s challenge to the real property tax assessments imposed by the City of Holland on its 22-building, 118-unit, federally subsidized housing complex for the tax years 1981 through 1983.1
In 1973, Meadowlanes purchased the housing complex from its original developer, HollandZeeland Area Nonprofit Housing Association. It paid $31,532 in cash, contributed $400,000 in equity into reserve accounts, and assumed the complex’s underlying mortgage with the Michigan State Housing Development Authority (mshda), which carried a 6.35 percent interest rate and had a balance of $2,232,537. Mshda also approved a $400,000 increase in the mortgage amount so Meadowlanes would have additional funds to correct prior construction defects. Thus, Meadowlanes’ total mortgage indebtedness at the time of purchase was $2,624,500.
The Meadowlanes housing complex was financed, built, and operates under §236 of the National Housing Act, 12 USC 1715z-l; 24 CFR 236.1 et seq. It also receives a rental assistance subsidy under § 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937, 42 USC 1437f, for some of its units.2 The rent subsidies are not at issue in this appeal. Both of these programs were designed to induce and assist developers in constructing and operating quality housing for low- and moderate-income families.
In return for various benefits, the property *478owner voluntarily entered into a regulatory agreement which subjects it to federal regulations and restrictions which include (1) a maximum return of six percent on initial equity investment in the property,3 and (2) rent4
5and operating restrictions.6 The Meadowlanes property is also subject to mshda regulations because it is financed with a mshda mortgage.
The benefits that accrue to the owner of a § 236 property include: (1) federal mortgage insurance of a private, long-term (forty-year) mortgage loan in an amount not in excess of ninety percent of the FHA-determined certified cost of the project,6 and *479(2) monthly interest reduction payments made by hud directly to the private mortgagee-lender on behalf of the mortgagor-owner for all interest due under the mortgage in excess of one percent (the "interest subsidy”).7 12 USC 1715z-l(c). The Internal Revenue Code was also amended to provide several tax benefits.8
B. PROCEEDINGS
Meadowlanes filed a petition with the Michigan Tax Tribunal, challenging the City of Holland’s assessment of the value of its housing complex for the tax years 1981 through 1983. Following an evidentiary hearing, the Michigan Tax Tribunal *480issued its opinion and judgment which determined that the true cash value of the property was $800,000 for 1981, $1,000,000 for 1982, and $1,100,000 for 1983.9 In reaching its decision, the tribunal approved the valuation approach utilized by Meadowlanes’ appraiser, Laurence Allen, and adopted his final estimates of true cash value for the years at issue. Allen described his valuation approach as a variant of the traditional income approach using a "mortgage/equity” component formula.
The city appealed the Tax Tribunal’s 1984 decision raising four issues.10 The Court of Appeals rejected the city’s first three arguments, but reversed on the fourth, and remanded the case to the tribunal for reconsideration and directed it to "take into account the value, if any, of the 5.35 percent mortgage interest subsidy.” 156 Mich App 238, 252; 401 NW2d 620 (1986) (Meadowlanes I).
This Court denied Meadowlanes’ application for leave to appeal from Meadowlanes I stating: "[T]he Court [is] not persuaded that the questions presented should now be reviewed . . . .” 428 Mich 866 (1987).
On remand, the Tax Tribunal issued a supplementary judgment which once again adopted Meadowlanes’ appraiser’s mortgage/equity component *481method, but recomputed the value of the mortgage component to include, rather than exclude, the value of the §236 interest subsidy.11 Thus, the tribunal determined that the true cash value of the subject real property was $1,600,000 in 1981, $1,800,000 in 1982, and $1,900,000 in 1983.12
The Tax Tribunal denied the parties’ motions to vacate the supplementary judgment and their motions for rehearing. Both parties then appealed in the Court of Appeals.13 The Court of Appeals affirmed the tribunal’s supplementary judgment on remand.14
This Court granted Meadowlanes’ application for leave to appeal from the Court of Appeals decision after remand in 176 Mich App 536; 440 NW2d 71 (1989) (Meadowlanes II), "[l]imited to the issue whether, in computing the true cash value of real property, the Michigan Tax Tribunal may take into account the value, if any, of a federal government mortgage subsidy.” 434 Mich 900 (1990).
*482II
This case presents issues similar to those addressed by this Court in Antisdale v City of Galesburg, 420 Mich 265; 362 NW2d 632 (1984). Once again we must evaluate the ad valorem taxation of a federally subsidized housing complex. Before we can address the issue on which leave was granted, we must first evaluate the valuation method adopted by the Tax Tribunal and the Court of Appeals.15 This approach deviates from the three traditional approaches to valuation of real property and is proper only if it is accurate and is reasonably related to the fair market value, or true cash value, of the subject real property. Safran Printing Co v Detroit, 88 Mich App 376, 380; 276 NW2d 602 (1979); Presque Isle Harbor Water Co v Presque Isle Twp, 130 Mich App 182, 190; 344 NW2d 285 (1983).
After we analyze the appropriateness of the valuation approach, we must determine whether, in computing the true cash value of real property, the Tax Tribunal may rely on an approach that takes into account the value, if any, of a federal government mortgage subsidy.
A. APPELLATE SCOPE OF REVIEW
We begin by acknowledging that appellate review of Tax Tribunal decisions, as set forth in Const 1963, art 6, § 28, is limited. All factual findings are final if supported by competent and substantial evidence. When fraud is not alleged, appellate courts are limited to determining *483whether the tribunal made an error of law or adopted a wrong principle. Antisdale, supra at 277. Our review here addresses whether the tribunal committed an error of law or adopted a wrong principle by accepting a method of valuation which deviates from the three traditional approaches to value and whether it adopted a wrong principle when it adopted a valuation approach which values the interest reduction subsidy under a § 236 property.
B. APPLICABLE VALUATION PRINCIPLES
The basic principles of valuation apply to the assessment of value of federally subsidized housing complexes in the same manner as they apply to all other real property. In this case, as in all other appeals from the Tax Tribunal, the fundamental principles concerning ad valorem taxation set out in art 9, § 3 of the Michigan Constitution provide the appropriate analytical framework.16 This section mandates: (1) that the Legislature is to provide a uniform system of real property taxation, (2) that the tax must be assessed on the basis of the true cash value of the property, and (3) that the Legislature is to provide a determination of true cash value.
The Legislature complied with this constitutional mandate by enacting MCL 211.27(1); MSA 7.27(1), which provides in pertinent part:
”[C]ash value” means the usual selling price at *484the place where the property to which the term is applied is at the time of assessment, being the price that could be obtained for the property at private sale, and not at auction sale .... In determining the value, the assessor shall also consider the advantages and disadvantages of location; quality of soil; zoning; existing use; present economic income of structures .... [Emphasis added.]
As evidenced above, the Legislature has provided a broad definition of true cash value and has listed a variety of factors to be considered in the valuation determination. The Legislature did not direct that specific methods be used. Thus, the task of approving or disapproving specific valuation methods or approaches has fallen to the courts. Antisdale, supra at 276. This Court has acknowledged that it is
the goal of the assessment process to determine, in the abstract, the usual selling price of a given piece of property between a willing buyer and a willing seller and to develop methodologies that make it possible to achieve uniformity in making such determinations .... [Washtenaw Co v State Tax Comm, 422 Mich 346, 363; 373 NW2d 697 (1985).]
There are three traditional methods of determining true cash value, or fair market value,17 which have been found acceptable and reliable by the Tax Tribunal and the courts. They are: (1) the cost-less-depreciation approach,18 (2) the sales-com*485parison or Diarket approach,19 and (3) the capitalization-of-income approach.20 Variations of these approaches and entirely new methods may be useful if found to be accurate and reasonably related to the fair market value of the subject property.21 Antisdale, supra at 277, n 1. It is the Tax Tribunal’s duty to determine which approaches are useful in providing the most accurate valuation under the individual circumstances of each case. Antisdale, supra at 277. Regardless of the valuation approach employed, the final value determination must represent the usual price for which the subject property would sell. Safran Printing, supra at 380.
Under each approach, the appraiser analyzes data mathematically to determine an estimate of the fair market value of both the physical real estate and all the interests, benefits, and rights inherent in ownership of that real property.22 All three approaches should be used whenever possible, and an appraisal which disregards an approach by mere statements and without research justifying nonuse is considered incomplete.23 The values derived under the various approaches are *486correlated, reconciled, and weighed in order to reach a final estimate of value.24 The ultimate goal of the valuation process is a well-supported conclusion that reflects the study of all factors that influence the market value of the subject property.
C. VALIDITY OF THE ALLEN "MORTGAGE/EQUITY” COMPONENT APPROACH
Before we can address the interest-subsidy question, we must first evaluate whether the Tax Tribunal and the Court of Appeals adopted a wrong principle when it decided the true cash value of the subject property could be determined by the valuation approach advocated by Meadowlanes’ appraiser, Laurence Allen. We hold that the Tax Tribunal and the Court of Appeals did in fact adopt a wrong principle when they determined the true cash value of the Meadowlanes property using Allen’s mortgage/equity component approach.
Under this approach, two components of value, an "equity” component and a "mortgage” component, were separately calculated and then separately discounted to present value and finally added together to arrive at the true cash value of the subject property. Allen’s "mortgage/equity” component method of valuation is to be distinguished from a variant used under the capitalization-of-income approach. Under the latter approach, the appraiser uses a mortgage/equity technique to develop an overall capitalization rate.
There are two basic steps under the traditional capitalization-of-income approach: (1) calculate net operating income, and (2) develop an appropriate capitalization rate. True cash value is generally *487derived by dividing net operating income by the capitalization rate. One method of developing an overall capitalization rate is the "mortgage/ equity” method which blends
six factors . . . together in an algebraic formula. The factors are: (1) Holding period, a limited term of ownership before selling, refinancing or exchanging the property; (2) Equity-yield rate, the rate of return to maturity on dollars actually invested; (3) Loan term, the dollar amount of the mortgage as a percentage of the value or purchase price; (4) Loan term, length of loan in terms of years; (5) Loan interest rate; and (6) Appreciation/ depreciation, estimated percentage of possible change in property value within the projected holding period. See I. Johnson, Instant Mortgage-Equity, (Lexington, Mass: DC Heath & Co, 1980), p 73. The six component parts are derived from the market that the property falls into .... [Dowagiac Ltd Dividend Housing Ass’n v Dowagiac, 166 Mich App 232, 239; 420 NW2d 114 (1987).]
The approach described above was originally developed by L. W. Ellwood, an investment analyst, and is "based on the theory that mortgage financing strongly influences real property prices and values”; thus, this factor is considered when developing an overall capitalization rate.25 Allen’s "mortgage/equity” component approach does not follow the Johnson or Ellwood technique. It is not used to derive an overall capitalization rate. Instead, it separately calculates the value of the equity and mortgage components of the real property and then discounts each component separately, using different methods and rates to arrive at their present value.
Under Allen’s approach, the owner’s equity component is determined by adding together the pres*488ent value of (1) the property’s maximum allowed cash flow from operations, which Allen determined was the maximum six percent return on the owner’s initial equity investment, (2) the value to the investor of tax shelter benefits, and (3) the value of the property’s reversionary interests which the appraiser determined was a negative value in the instant case; thus, he subtracted the anticipated tax cost the owner would incur upon disposition of the property.26 Each element of the equity component was discounted using a capitalization rate of 20.5 percent.27
Under the mortgage component of his valuation approach, Meadowlanes’ appraiser simply calculated the cash-equivalent value of the real property’s underlying mortgage in the current mortgage paper market assuming it carried a one percent interest rate. He adjusted the mortgage balance ($2,456,207 on December 31, 1982) and derived the value of the mortgage component
essentially ... by determining the amount of [cash] a prospective purchaser would need to invest [in a government-insured investment] as of each tax date in order to produce enough income to pay off [Meadowlanes’ portion of] the mortgage .... [Meadowlanes I, supra at 244.][28]
*489Using this approach, Allen concluded that the value of the mortgage component was $659,000 for 1983. Added together, the mortgage and equity components derived a true cash value for 1983 of $1,100,000.
The mortgage component of Allen’s method is premised on the faulty notion that true cash value is not represented by the likely selling price of the subject property if a sale involves the assumption of a low-interest mortgage.29 Stated otherwise, Allen discounted the value of the assumable mortgage, and assumed true cash value is determined *490by the cash or cash equivalent of the likely selling price, i.e., the cash down payment and the cash equivalent value of the assumable mortgage. This approach ignores the fact that the "touchstone of uniform assessment is the true cash value or usual selling price of the property,” not the cash equivalent of that selling price. CAF Investment Co v Saginaw Twp, 410 Mich 428, 463; 302 NW2d 164 (1981). Allen’s approach, in discounting the underlying mortgage paper, also ignores the principle of leverage which recognizes that the ability to invest the smallest amount necessary of one’s own funds, borrow the rest, and use the earnings from the purchased property to pay off the loan enhances the subject property’s value.30
Allen testified that he would not discount a new mortgage. Therefore, under his approach, if the mortgage is new, the true cash value of the real property will reasonably approximate its selling price. If the mortgage is assumed, however, the true cash value of the real property will be the equivalent of its cash down payment added to the discounted value of its underlying mortgage. We find no reason to distinguish, as Meadowlanes appraiser does, between new and assumed mortgages. Carrying Allen’s approach to its logical end, the only persons required to pay ad valorem taxes predicated upon a value approaching the usual selling price of their property will be those unfortunate owners who either got new mortgages or paid cash. The resulting lack of uniformity in the assessment of real property for ad valorem tax purposes violates Const 1963, art 9, § 3.
Meadowlanes’ appraiser justified discounting the mortgage component by claiming it was necessary to do so to comply with this Court’s decision in *491Washtenaw, supra. In Washtenaw, this Court held that if market data shows the sales price of a comparable property includes both (1) the value of real property, and (2) the value of a creative or atypical financing arrangement between the buyer and the seller, then the sales price of the comparable property must be adjusted to exclude the value attributable to the creative financing arrangement. Thus, the value of the underlying financing in a sales transaction is relevant to the property’s true cash value only if the market data shows that the sales price of a comparable property includes a dollar amount for both of the above features.31
In his application of a cash-equivalency analysis in discounting or determining the present cash value of the subject property’s underlying mortgage, the appraiser failed to acknowledge several important principles. First, contrary to accepted procedures, Allen used a cash-equivalency analysis outside its normal application, i.e., the sales-comparison approach. The theory behind the concept of cash equivalency is similar to this Court’s rationale and holding in Washtenaw, i.e., that the financing terms of a sale may influence the stated sales price of comparable real property.32 Under *492the mortgage component of his "mortgage/equity” approach, however, Allen did not analyze comparable properties for evidence of "atypical” financing. Instead, Allen erroneously assumed that mortgage assumptions in and of themselves are conclusive evidence of creative financing arrangements between the buyer and seller which affect the property’s usual selling price and thus require that a sales price be adjusted.
Second, under this cash-equivalency analysis, Meadowlanes’ appraiser violated a basic principle under the comparable-sales approach by adjusting the value of the subject property rather than the sales price of a comparable property. To elaborate, under the sales-comparison approach, true cash value is derived by analyzing recent sales of similar properties, comparing those properties with the subject property, and adjusting the sales price of the comparable properties to reflect differences. The adjusted sales prices should fall within a range and allow the appraiser to estimate the true cash value of the subject property. Once ascertained, the true cash value of the subject property itself is not adjusted.
As evidenced above, Allen’s approach is flawed because it values the property in large part by valuing its underlying mortgage in a theoretical commercial paper market. The primary and overriding influence in this method of valuation is the current mortgage interest rate. The second most important value influence is the stated interest *493rate on the property’s underlying mortgage note. By placing such great weight on the discounted value of the underlying mortgage note, two identical properties, one built at a time when interest rates are high and the other when interest rates are low will have vastly disparate estimates of value under Allen’s approach. Thus, it violates the constitutional mandate of uniformity in real property taxation.33
We find further evidence that Allen’s valuation approach is flawed because it derives a value for ad valorem tax purposes that fails to parallel a likely valuation estimate derived for other purposes, i.e., a sales price, financing, insurance, calculating net worth in a financial statement, or federal income tax purposes. This is contrary to basic valuation principles which emphasize the appraisal conclusion, i.e., the estimate of value, is not adjusted to accommodate the use of the appraisal. "Whatever the circumstances, the numbers associated with the defined value [i.e., market value] will be the same.”34 In fact, in the context of federally subsidized housing, the tax courts and the Internal Revenue Service generally require independent verification that the purchase price does not exceed the property’s market value as a means of ensuring that the buyer is not overpaying so that he may take inflated tax deductions.35 With this in mind, we note that the Meadowlanes housing complex did sell in 1984 for $3.7 million.36
*494For the above reasons, we find that the portion of Meadowlanes’ appraiser’s approach which values the mortgage is flawed.37 Thus, the Tax Tribunal adopted a wrong principle by using Allen’s "mortgage/equity” component approach in determining the true cash value of the subject property. This approach makes a number of invalid assumptions allowing it to value in large part the underlying mortgage paper rather than the real property. In so doing, it has the potential for creating irrational disparities in the true cash value of real property and thus violates the constitutional mandate of uniformity in the assessment of ad valorem taxes.
D. THE INTEREST-REDUCTION SUBSIDY
Under his valuation approach, Meadowlanes’ appraiser did not take into account the $8,520.74 portion of the monthly mortgage payments which represented the interest subsidy paid by hud to the mortgagee-lender.38 Initially, the Tax Tribunal also excluded the interest subsidy from its final estimate of the subject property’s true cash value. However, on remand, the tribunal recalculated its final valuation of the property, taking into account the interest subsidy under the mortgage component of the Allen method.
Meadowlanes claims the tribunal adopted a wrong principle when it adopted a valuation ap*495proach which took into account the value of a federal government mortgage interest subsidy available to it as a § 236 property owner. We have concluded that the tribunal did adopt a wrong principle when it used Meadowlanes’ appraiser’s valuation approach. However, this does not end our discussion. We find it necessary to answer the issue on which leave was granted.
On remand, the true cash value of the subject property is to be redetermined using the three traditional valuation approaches. We recognize that the tribunal when evaluating the value estimates derived under these approaches, especially the capitalization-of-income approach, will once again be faced with the issue whether it is appropriate to consider the value, if any, of the interest subsidy. We hold, similar to our decision in Antis-dale, supra at 285, that because the interest-subsidy payments made on behalf of the owner-mortgagor of the §236 property affect the usual selling price of the property, it is proper for the Tax Tribunal to consider those payments in the valuation process.
In Antisdale, this Court addressed the true cash value of property similar to the Meadowlanes housing complex and focused on the legislative definition of true cash value in MCL 211.27(1); MSA 7.27(1). We noted that that statute lists a number of value-influencing factors such as zoning and location that should be considered when determining the "usual selling price” of real property. In particular, we recognized that although these factors are intangibles, and not taxable in and of themselves, they can increase or decrease the value of property. We concluded that tax shelter benefits are also value-influencing factors and, although intangibles, should be reflected in the assessment process to the extent that they in*496crease or decrease the value of the subject real property. Antisdale, supra at 284-285.
Similarly, although the mortgage-interest subsidy is an intangible, and not taxable in and of itself, it is a value-influencing factor. In Antisdale, supra at 284, we recognized that without the subsidy these types of properties would not exist. Therefore, the value of the subsidy, if any, should be reflected in the assessment process. We agree with the Meadowlanes I Court’s conclusion:
Just as tax benefits affect the selling price of federally subsidized property, so does the existence of an interest subsidy attached to a mortgage being assumed by the purchaser. [Id. at 250.]
As clarified above, the subsidy is not taxed in and of itself. It is merely an intangible value influencer to be considered in the valuation and assessment process in the same manner as tax benefits, location, zoning, and other intangible value influences. Thus, Meadowlanes missed the point when it argued that consideration of the value of the mortgage interest subsidy in the assessment process constitutes double taxation.
We also reject Meadowlanes’ argument that the subsidy does not affect the value of the real property because the owner of a § 236 property derives no benefit from it. The interest subsidy reduces the property’s total operating costs and adds value by increasing the amount of debt the property can carry.39 Thus, it makes lower rents possible and allows the owner of § 236 property to take advantage of a highly leveraged rate of return on his equity investment in addition to reaping a number *497of tax shelter benefits.40 Despite the fact that the tenants benefit from the subsidy in the form of reduced rent, the statutory language creating the interest subsidy clarifies that the government’s payment of all interest in excess of one percent (in this case $8,520.74 per month) is a considerable benefit to the owner of § 236 property.41
Meadowlanes also supported its position by erroneously claiming that the subsidy is not income taxable to the owner.42 In Graff v Comm’r, 74 TC 743 (1980), aff’d 673 F2d 784 (CA 5, 1982), the United States Tax Court specifically concluded that the interest reduction payments made by hud on behalf of a § 236 property owner were taxable to the owner as income.43 The Graff court found that the interest reduction payments "took the place of rents that otherwise would have been charged the tenants. As such, the payments were a substitute for rent.” Graff at 757. Thus, recognizing their value to the property owner, the Tax Court held that the interest subsidy amount is both includable as income and deductible as an interest expense for federal income tax purposes.44 Since the benefits of the subsidy inure to the *498owner, their value is properly considered in the determination of the true cash value of the subject real property.
Furthermore, contrary to Meadowlanes’ assertions, the term "creative financing” as defined by this Court in Washtenaw, supra, does not include the federal interest subsidy simply by virtue of its presence in a program designed to induce private construction and operation of low-income housing projects. The Meadowlanes I Court did not err when it found that the interest subsidy was closer in nature to value-influencing factors such as property tax and typical costs of borrowing which are appropriately considered in the valuation process. Meadowlanes I, supra at 250.
In the instant case, the appraiser’s decision to exclude the subsidy was not based on market-data evidence of sales of similar properties where the sales price required adjustment to exclude consideration given for an atypical financing arrangement between the buyer and seller. To the contrary, the interest subsidy applies to all § 236 property and is transferable. This is not a negotiable term that would allow a seller to extract an artificially enhanced price upon a sale. Thus, Meadowlanes’ reliance on Washtenaw in this context is misplaced.
A survey of decisions from other jurisdictions supports our conclusion that it is appropriate to consider the federal interest subsidy in the computation of value for real property tax purposes. For example, in Rebelwood, Ltd v Hinds Co, 544 So 2d 1356 (Miss, 1989), the taxpayer-owner of a federally subsidized low-income housing complex challenged its assessed value for property tax purposes. The Rebelwood court emphasized that the valuation process must consider any circumstance that tends to affect the real property’s value. It found *499that both the § 8 rent and § 236 mortgage interest subsidies were to be considered in the valuation process since they were transferable and they made ownership of the property more desirable than it would be without them.45
Several other jurisdictions have determined that rent subsidies affect the value of federally subsidized housing complexes because (1) they affect its income-earning capacity, and (2) since they are transferable, they will be considered by a willing buyer and seller when determining fair market value. Thus, these courts have concluded that the rent subsidy must be considered in the valuation process.46 The same rationale applies to the interest-reduction subsidy since its availability makes the § 236 property economically feasible and desirable.47
An overriding theme in the decisions addressing the ad valorem taxation of federally subsidized real property is that the valuation process must consider both the positive and negative aspects of *500the regulatory agreement voluntarily entered into between the owner and the government. This comports with the well-established rule that all factors relevant to property value should be considered in the assessment process.48 Thus, we note that the Meadowlanes I Court was correct in emphasizing:
Section 236 properties are subject to unique restrictions and advantages. All of them, including the subsidized interest feature, must be at least considered in the assessment process. [Meadow-lanes I, supra at 251.]
Finally, wé reject the argument advanced by amici curiae on Meadowlanes’ behalf49 that consideration of the interest subsidy in the valuation process frustrates public policy. Other courts have considered and rejected this same argument. After reviewing the relevant statutory scheme and legislative history, these courts have concluded there is no indication Congress intended to create subsidies by local units of government in addition to the significant economic incentives it provided to induce private developers to construct and operate quality low-income housing.50 The Tax Tribunal *501has also considered and rejected this public policy argument in the context of a § 236 property.51
For the above reasons, we hold that in computing the true cash value of real property, the Michigan Tax Tribunal may take into account the value, if any, of a federal government mortgage subsidy. We affirm those portions of the decisions of the Tax Tribunal and the Court of Appeals in Meadowlanes I and Meadowlanes II that comport with this ruling.
hi
Although the tribunal and the Court of Appeals correctly considered the value of the interest subsidy, they did so using a flawed method. Thus, we affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand to the Tax Tribunal for a new hearing.
We direct that on remand, the tribunal be presented with factually supported estimates of the fair market value of the Meadowlanes property derived from the three recognized valuation approaches: (1) the replacement-cost-less-depreciation *502approach, (2) the market or comparison-sales approach, and (3) the capitalization-of-income approach. These traditional approaches are based on concepts that apply to subsidized housing complexes just as they apply to other types of real property. A survey of relevant decisions in other jurisdictions reveals reliance on these three recognized approaches.52 Evidence of an entirely new method of valuation may also be presented, but it must be demonstrated to be accurate and reasonably related to the fair market value of the subject property.
The values derived under the various approaches are to be correlated, reconciled, and weighed in order to reach a final estimate of value. It is the Tax Tribunal’s duty to determine which approaches provide the most accurate valuation under the individual circumstances of each case. An appraisal approach is to be disregarded only if there is research justifying its nonuse. In addition, the final estimate of true cash value must represent the physical real estate and all the interests, benefits, and rights inherent in ownership of the subject real property.
With these basic principles in mind, we acknowledge that there is no single correct approach for determining the true cash value of federally subsidized real property. Therefore, the appraiser should use variants of all three traditional approaches, valuing the property both as private apartments and as a federally subsidized housing complex. Also, any other approach demonstrated to be accurate and reasonably related to the fair market value of the subject property is acceptable. We believe it is best to provide the tribunal with all the relevant data so as to allow it to compare, *503correlate, and reconcile the information and make an informed decision.
Thus, on remand, the tribunal is to be presented with value estimates using (1) the cost approach, valuing the real property as subsidized; (2) the cost approach, valuing the real property as private apartments; (3) the capitalization-of-income approach, using all figures and valuing the real property as subsidized and considering the risk, leverage and yield to maturity factors that are developed from the subsidized housing market; (4) the capitalization-of-income approach, valuing the real property as a private housing complex; (5) the sales-comparison approach, using subsidized properties as comparables; (6) the sales-comparison approach, using private housing complexes or apartments as comparables; and (7) other new approaches.
When using approach (1), economic or external obsolescence should be calculated, recognizing that the real property is devoted to its highest and best use as subsidized housing property. If there is a market for subsidized housing at the location where it is built and a sufficient number of individuals who can afford to pay the rent required, then there will be little economic obsolescence under this approach. Finally, when using a sales-comparison approach, the appraiser should adjust the sales price of comparables for differences in size, age, condition, location, and other value influences that buyers and sellers of real property take into account as opposed to the value influences considered by buyers and sellers of commercial paper.
We reverse the decisions of the Tax Tribunal and the Court of Appeals and remand the case to the tribunal for a redetermination of the true cash value of the subject real property in a manner consistent with this opinion.
*504Cavanagh, C.J., and Brickley, Riley, and Griffin, JJ., concurred with Boyle, J.
The property’s design is modern and attractive, and all but the one-bedroom units are townhouses with basements. It also has a community building, a swimming pool, and a "tot lot.” The tenants are lower-income families, many with small children.
Under § 8, the Department of Housing and Urban Development pays directly to the owner of a § 236 property the fair market rental for twenty percent of all units where the rental exceeds fifteen to twenty-five percent of a tenant’s annual income. See 42 USC 1437f(C)(l)-(3). In the Meadowlanes complex, twenty percent of the apartments are reserved for § 8 tenants.
If operating expenses are higher than anticipated, the six percent owner’s equity distribution for that period is decreased or eliminated. However, the limited rate of return on equity investment is cumulative in the sense that if cash flow does not permit payment of at least three percent, the deficiency is carried over to a later year when cash flow is sufficient.
Rent restrictions include both tenant eligibility restrictions and the amount of rent that can be charged. Tenant eligibility is controlled by income limits determined by hud regulations. Rent is limited to a "basic rental charge” or twenty-five percent of the tenant’s income, whichever is higher, but cannot exceed the "fair market rental.” The "basic rental charge” is the rent necessary to recover operating costs, construction costs, and a limited profit and is determined as if the project were operated by the owner under a one percent mortgage. "Fair market rental,” on the other hand, is determined on the basis that the owner received no interest reduction subsidy. See note, Low income housing: Section 236 of the National Housing Act and the Tax Reform Act of 1969, 31 U Pitt L R 443, 448-449 (1970).
The result of the rental formula is that tenants in 236 projects pay a monthly rental of from 66 to 100% of comparable market rates, depending on their incomes. [Halperin & Tucker, Low income housing (FHA 236) programs: One of few tax shelter opportunities left, 36 J Taxation 2 (1972).]
Operating restrictions include a prohibition of prepayment of the mortgage without hud’s consent for twenty years unless the prepayment is to facilitate a sale to a qualified tenant cooperative or nonprofit group. See Halperin & Tucker, n 4 supra at 2-3. Thus, the property cannot be easily converted to other uses even if the owner decides another use would be more profitable.
This long-term mortgage for ninety percent of the project’s cost *479creates a
high loan-to-value ratio . . . enabling a smaller than conventional equity investment to leverage a higher ratio of depreciable basis to equity. Furthermore, the forty year amortization period loads the early year payments with a greater component of deductible interest than obtains under conventional 20-25 year financing. [Pennsylvania v Lynn, 163 US App DC 288, 305, n 57; 501 F2d 848 (1974).]
The project owner contracts with a lender and secures a mortgage loan bearing interest at the current market rate. Hud then contracts with the lender to make interest reduction payments each month in an amount equal to the diiference between the payment due under the mortgage note and what would be required if the note carried a one percent interest rate. 12 USC 1715z-l(c). See Graff v Comm’r, 74 TC 743, 749-750 (1980), aff’d 673 F2d 784 (CA 5,1982).
In the instant case, the stated mortgage interest rate is 6.35 percent. Meadowlanes pays all the principal owing under the mortgage plus one percent of the stated interest. Hud pays the remaining 5.35 percent interest directly to the mortgagee-lender on Meadow-lanes’ behalf.
The tax benefits include: (1) the owner’s right to take advantage of the two-hundred percent double-declining-balance method of depreciation (§ 167), (2) the owner’s right to special treatment regarding depreciation recapture, i.e., if the property was held for ten years, no excess depreciation is recaptured in former § 1250(a)(l)(C)(ii), currently 1250(d)(8), and (3) the owner’s right to defer paying taxes on capital gain from the sale of the project if certain conditions are met (§ 1039). Graff, supra at 750.
For a detailed discussion of the tax incentives associated with § 236 property, see, generally, note, Tax advantages under section 236 of the National Housing Act, 8 Hous L R 911 (1971).
See the Tax Tribunal’s Supplementary Judgment on Remand, dated January 23, 1987, where it acknowledges that its original opinion contained a typographical error regarding the true cash values of the subject property for the years in question. The error was repeated by the Court of Appeals in 156 Mich App 238; 401 NW2d 620 (1986) (Meadowlanes I). The values listed in the text are the corrected figures.
In its appeal, the city challenged (1) the tribunal’s allocation of the burden of proof, (2) the tribunal’s adoption of Meadowlanes’ valuation approach because it was not reasonably accurate and was not supported by proof, (3) the tribunal’s approval and use of a valuation method which used a formula involving cash equivalence, and (4) the tribunal’s approval and adoption of a valuation method which failed to include the value of the government’s interest-reduction subsidy payments in its final calculation of the subject property’s true cash value.
Supplemental Judgment on Remand, Michigan Tax Tribunal, entered January 23,1987.
On remand, the Tax Tribunal used the same formula to discount the mortgage component under the mortgage/equity method, i.e., the present value of an ordinary annuity. It simply recalculated the mortgage component using the full 6.35 percent interest rate rather than the one percent interest rate originally used to calculate the present value of the property’s underlying mortgage paper in the commercial paper market. The net result was an $800,000 increase in the true cash value for each tax year.
The city’s appeal focused on the Tax Tribunal’s refusal on remand to receive additional evidence bearing on true cash value. Meadowlanes’ appeal, on the other hand, focused on the inclusion of the interest-reduction subsidy in the subject property’s true cash value.
After remand, the Meadowlanes II Court observed that the tribunal did as it was directed on remand.
The tribunal found that, when the mortgage interest subsidy was taken into account, the true cash value of the apartment unit had changed from the tribunal’s original figures. This decision ... is supported by competent and substantial evidence. [176 Mich App 536, 542-543; 440 NW2d 71 (1989).]
Amici curiae, Michigan Townships Association and the Michigan Municipal League filed a brief and participated at oral argument. The focus of their argument was that the Tax Tribunal and the Court of Appeals adopted a wrong principle when they adopted Meadowlanes’ appraiser’s method for assessing the true cash value of the Meadow-lanes housing complex for the tax years 1981 through 1983.
Const 1963, art 9, § 3 provides:
The legislature shall provide for the uniform general ad valorem taxation of real and tangible personal property not exempt by law. The legislature shall provide for the determination of true cash value of such property; the proportion of true cash value at which such property shall be uniformly assessed, which shall not . . . exceed 50 percent ....
This Court has ruled that the concepts of "true cash value” and "fair market value” are synonymous in this state. CAF Investment Co v State Tax Comm, 392 Mich 442, 450; 221 NW2d 588 (1974).
Under the cost approach, true cash value is derived by adding the estimated land value to an estimate of the current cost of reproducing or replacing improvements and then deducting the loss in value from depreciation in structures, i.e., physical deterioration and functional or economic obsolescence.
The sales-comparison approach indicates true cash value by analyzing recent sales of similar properties, comparing them with the subject property, and adjusting the sales price of the comparable properties to reflect differences between the two properties.
The income-capitalization approach measures the present value of the future benefits of property ownership by estimating the property’s income stream and its resale value (reversionary interests) and then developing a capitalization rate which is used to convert the estimated future benefits into a present lump-sum value.
An additional description of the three traditional approaches is provided in Antisdale, supra at 276-277, n 1.
For discussion of a new appraisal approach, see, generally, Kirk & Smith, Using the reversion/shelter approach to appraise subsidized housing, The Appraisal Journal 326 (July, 1983).
American Institute of Real Estate Appraisers, The Appraisal of Real Estate (9th ed) (Chicago, 1987).
See State Tax Comm Assessor’s Training Manual, ch VII, p 34; and The Appraisal of Real Estate, n 22 supra at 61-75.
The Appraisal of Real Estate, n 22 supra at 63. After arriving at a value estimate under each approach, the appraiser examines the spread among the various estimates of value. A wide spread may indicate that one or more of the approaches is not truly applicable.
The Appraisal of Real Estate, n 22 supra at 554.
For a description of how these equity features were valued, see Meadowlanes I, supra at 246-247.
Applying this method to the subject property, Meadowlanes’ appraiser determined the present value of the three elements as follows:
$11,712 cash flow X 15 years = $ 53,649
15 years of tax shelter = 410,579
Tax cost due at disposition = ( — 19,908)
Total Present Value
of Equity Component $444,320
This figure is slightly above the owner’s initial equity investment in the property. Meadowlanes I, supra at 243-244.
In valuing the mortgage component, Allen considered only that portion of the payments owed by Meadowlanes each month under the *489forty-year mortgage and used an 11.8 percent discount derived from the yield rates in the secondary market for government-insured mortgages. Meadowlanes I, supra at 247.
The record reveals that Allen calculated the "likely selling price” of the subject property by adding the present value of the equity component to the mortgage balance. However, he went on to state:
The projected sale price does not represent the market value or the True Cash Value of the property. The sale involves the assumption of a low interest (1%) mortgage that has a value that is significantly less than the balance. It is necessary to arrive at the True Cash Value indicated by the sale. The mortgage is valued based upon yield rates derived from the sale of government insured mortgages on the open market ....
One commentator discussing the treatment of mortgage indebtedness in the valuation of federally subsidized housing complexes has concluded if the property can reasonably be expected to remain current on its existing indebtedness, the property must be worth at least that remaining mortgage balance. Thus, it is inappropriate to discount the remaining indebtedness simply because it carries a below-market interest rate for two reasons:
1) The Internal Revenue Code explicitly permits bona fide debt to be taken into depreciable basis or included in value determinations, provided the interest rate it carries is reasonable or is fixed by the government. The favorable financing in subsidized housing transactions originates from the government, so taking it into value at par is correct.
2) Favorable financing adds value. Unfavorable financing detracts from value. To make a second adjustment to reflect the discounted cost of unfavorable financing, or the discounted value of favorable financing, would in effect be double counting. [Kirk & Smith, n 21 supra at 334.]
See The Appraisal of Real Estate, n 22 supra at 512-513. See also Pennsylvania v Lynn, n 6 supra.
This Court in Washtenaw, supra at 366, n 2, cautioned:
This is not to say that any disparity between an interest rate facilitated by the seller and the prevailing rate will necessarily add to the purchase price. ... If there is no creative financing effect on sales price, then, of course, the method of valuation need not take it into account.
Cash-equivalency analysis is typically used to adjust the sales price of comparable properties where there is market evidence that the sales price was artificially enhanced by atypical financing terms. Appraisers are cautioned to rigorously test their calculations under this analysis and to remember that the final adjustment must always be derived from the market.
*492The Appraisal of Real Estate, n 22 supra at 319, discusses the cash equivalency analysis and provides:
Estimating cash equivalency employs direct market evidence to make the appropriate adjustments. The appraiser tries to locate sales with and without atypical financing, makes adjustments for other items, and attributes the remaining differential to the financing terms. This method can be used as a guide if substantial data on transactions with and without special financing are available.
Meadowlanes erroneously claims that the disparity is related to’ the tribunal’s use of the note’s stated 6.35 percent interest rate. This phenomenon, however, is mathematical and results strictly from valuing the mortgage paper rather than the real property. It occurs under either Allen’s original approach or the modification of that approach applied by the Tax Tribunal on remand.
The Appraisal of Real Estate, n 22 supra, p 9.
See Kirk & Smith, n 21 supra, p 327.
The consideration for the sale included $700,000 in cash, assump*494tion of the $2,423,242 million mortgage balance, and a promissory note in the amount of $650,000 for a total sales price of $3,733,242 (sic). 26 Michigan Assessor, August, 1985, No. 8, p 20.
We express no opinion regarding the validity of the equity component of Allen’s "mortgage/equity” component method.
Meadowlanes’ appraiser excluded the subsidy amount because (1) he concluded the interest-reduction subsidy was an intangible and thus not properly included in the value of real property, and (2) it was a benefit which flowed to the tenants and not the owner of the real property.
See Kirk & Smith, n 21 supra, p 329.
See Pennsylvania v Lynn, n 6 supra. See also Graff, supra at 753-754.
See 12 USC 1715z-1(a), (c), and (e).
Meadowlanes relies on a Massachusetts case, Morville House, Inc v Comm’r of Corp & Taxation, 369 Mass 928; 344 NE2d 878 (1976), which was criticized by the Tax Court in Graff, supra at 757-758.
After reviewing the legislative history, operation, incentives, and restrictions of § 236 properties, the Graff court disagreed with the argument that the owner received no benefit from the interest subsidy. The court observed, at 752-753:
When hud undertook to, and did make, part of such payments on his behalf, he benefited as the owner of the project, and he benefited since he was relieved of his legal obligation to make such payments. The receipt of such benefits causes such payments to be includable in his gross income.
Accord Rev Rul 76-75, 1976-1 CB 14.
Rebelwood, supra at 1365.
Kankakee Co Bd of Review v Property Tax Appeal Bd, 163 Ill App 3d 811; 516 NE2d 1006 (1987), aff’d 131 Ill 2d 1, 16-17; 544 NE2d 762 (1989), Executive Square Ltd Partnership v Bd of Tax Review, 11 Conn App 566; 528 A2d 409 (1987), Kargman v Jacobs, 411 A2d 1326 (RI, 1980), and Lake Co Bd of Review v Property Tax Appeal Bd, 172 Ill App 3d 851; 527 NE2d 84 (1988). In these cases, the various courts held that it was appropriate to consider actual rents rather than hypothetical market rents because the actual rent with the rent subsidy was higher than market rents. Thus, the actual rents were a better indication of the property’s true earning capacity.
In Royal Gardens Co v Concord, 114 NH 668; 328 A2d 123 (1974), and Community Development Co v Bd of Assessors, 377 Mass 351; 385 NE2d 1376 (1979), the courts held that the valuation process must consider the actual rents received. The difference in these cases, however, is that the actual rents were lower than market rents.
Two panels of the Court of Appeals have also held that it is appropriate to consider rent subsidies in the valuation process. See Dowagiac Ltd Dividend Housing Ass’n v Dowagiac, 166 Mich App 232; 420 NW2d 114 (1987), and Comstock Village Ltd Dividend Housing Ass’n v Comstock Twp, 168 Mich App 755; 425 NW2d 702 (1988).
Rebelwood, supra at 1365; Graff, supra at 753-754.
Steele v Allenstown, 124 NH 487, 492; 471 A2d 1179 (1984) (citing Royal Gardens, supra at 671-672). See also In re Appeal of Johnstown Associates, 494 Pa 433; 431 A2d 932 (1981).
Amici curiae Congresshills Apartments, Builders Association of Southeastern Michigan, and Apartment Association of Michigan in favor of petitioner Meadowlanes.
Lake Co Bd of Review v Property Tax Appeal Bd, n 46 supra, quoting Kankakee Co Bd of Review v Property Tax Appeal Bd, 163 Ill App 3d 811, 818; 516 NE2d 1006 (1987), aff’d 131 Ill 2d 1; 544 NE2d 762 (1989):
[A]doption of a method of appraisal that ignores the subsidized nature of a project such as Riverwoods Apartments . . . "would amount to a judicially-mandated project subsidy by local government, beyond that which legislative policy has established.”
*501See also Rebelwood, supra at 1365, Graff, supra at 755, In re Appeal of Johnstown Associates, n 48 supra, and Pinelake Housing Cooperative v Ann Arbor, 159 Mich App 208, 228-229; 406 NW2d 832 (1987), where a panel of the Court of Appeals rejected a similar public policy argument on the basis that the mere fact the federal government subsidizes these housing projects is not sufficient reason to require cities and townships where they are located to bestow an additional subsidy in the form of reduced property taxes.
In Kentwood Apartments v Kentwood, 1 MTTR 295, 301 (1977), the tribunal stated in relevant part:
To the extent that federal income tax receipts are utilized to subsidize the owners and tenants of Petitioner’s property, the citizens of the City . . . are already contributing to the support of subject property, albeit indirectly. As such, there is no logical or legal reason why the citizens . . . should be expected or required to further subsidize such property by means of externally imposed property tax relief.
See Rebelwood, supra and cases cited in ns 46 and 48.