=== CASE 2225240 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:41.150786+00 ===

330 Mass. 187 (1953)
112 N.E.2d 267
ALBERT I. COHEN, trustee in bankruptcy,
vs.
LUIGI SANTOIANNI & others.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Suffolk.
April 6, 1953.
May 1, 1953.
Present: QUA, C.J., LUMMUS, WILKINS, & WILLIAMS, JJ.
John P. Curran, for Reconstruction Finance Corporation, intervener.
Paul G. Counihan, for the defendant Luigi Santoianni.
*188 WILKINS, J.
This bill in equity was brought originally by John Santiano, also known as John Santoianni, against his father, Luigi Santoianni, for a binding declaration of rights under a lease of a store in East Boston. The lease, dated July 10, 1946, was purportedly given by Luigi and his wife Leonarda (now deceased) to their son John (hereinafter sometimes called the plaintiff) for a term of fifty years. After John was adjudicated bankrupt, his trustee in bankruptcy was substituted as party plaintiff.
Luigi's answer alleged that he could not read or write English or Italian, and that the lease "was obtained from him by fraud" and set up a counterclaim "that the plaintiff obtained the lease... by perpetrating fraud upon the defendant and making promises which the plaintiff has not carried into effect" and that the plaintiff owes the defendant $1,200 "under the terms of said alleged lease which the plaintiff refuses to pay." The counterclaim prayed that the "lease be declared fraudulent, null and void" and that "the plaintiff be ordered to pay to the defendant the amount found due under the terms of the said alleged lease."
Two intervening petitions were allowed. One was by one Torlone, who had been the purchaser at a foreclosure sale conducted by Pilgrim Packing Company, mortgagee under a chattel mortgage of personal property on the premises given by John and for which the lease in question was assigned as additional security. The other was by Reconstruction Finance Corporation, which was mortgagee under a prior chattel mortgage given by John and for which also John assigned the lease as additional security. The amended petition of Reconstruction Finance Corporation added as parties defendant nine children, the heirs of Leonarda; alleged that John owes it $6,500 and interest; and prayed that the indebtedness of John be determined, and that the rights of all parties be determined "to prevent unjust enrichment or forfeiture."
The judge made findings and an order for a decree which in their entirety read as follows: "The court finds the lease referred to in paragraph three of the bill of complaint was *189 obtained by the petitioner fraudulently. The court finds the petitioner [John] owes the respondent [Luigi] $750 for money loaned. The court finds that John Santiano is indebted to the intervening petitioner, Reconstruction Finance Corporation, in the amount of $6,966.91. Pursuant to these findings, an appropriate decree may be entered." The final decree declared that "the lease alleged to have been obtained by John Santiano is void as to all parties, and that John is indebted to Luigi for $750 and to Reconstruction Finance Corporation for $6,966.91; and ordered that the bill "be dismissed as to all other plaintiffs."[1] The only appeal is by the intervener Reconstruction Finance Corporation, which requested the judge to report the material facts found by him. G.L. (Ter. Ed.) c. 214, § 23, as amended. The judge adopted his findings as his report of material facts.
The first question concerns the record before us. On July 11, 1952, Reconstruction Finance Corporation filed a designation of papers, including portions of the transcript of testimony, to be printed in the record on appeal. Rule 2 (B) of the Rules for the Regulation of Practice before the Full Court (1952), 328 Mass. 693. No counter designation was filed by the defendants. At the January sitting of the full court the then counsel for Luigi stated that there had been an oversight in this respect, and his motion to continue the case was allowed. In an appendix to his brief Luigi has now caused to be printed certain portions of the testimony of various witnesses in lieu of a counter designation which would have been subject to the approval of the trial judge. Rules 2 (C), 2 (F) of the Rules for the Regulation of Practice before the Full Court (1952), 328 Mass. 694. This is not within the scope of our order. Nor is it permissible under the rules cited, which authorize the printing of testimony in an appendix to a brief only where the trial judge has ordered designated matter to be omitted or has approved the condensation of testimony. Rule 2 (F). Compare *190 Rule 5, 328 Mass. 696. The purpose of designations and counter designations is to achieve an abbreviated record which is to be treated as a report of all the evidence and thus not within the rule of such cases as Greenberg v. Flaherty, 306 Mass. 95, 98. This means a single record containing the testimony of the witnesses in chronological order, and, except for authorized abbreviations, as given at the trial. The rules do not authorize the testimony to be printed piecemeal by designations and to be scattered through the record, or through the record and the briefs. Such a practice would place an undue burden upon all concerned with the consideration of an appeal. At the arguments counsel orally stipulated that the trial judge has approved and that we might consider the testimony contained in the appendix to the brief. We, accordingly, do so, but without intending to establish a precedent. Rule 7, 328 Mass. 697.
The allegations of fraud in the answer and counterclaim were wholly lacking in factual detail, were too vague, and would have been bad on demurrer. Cosmopolitan Trust Co. v. S.L. Agoos Tanning Co. 245 Mass. 69, 73. Arena v. Erler, 300 Mass. 144, 146. Swinton v. Whitinsville Savings Bank, 311 Mass. 677, 678. Proceeding to a hearing without demurring was a waiver of the point. The judge's finding, however, was fully as vague, and places upon us the burden of ascertaining precisely what he meant when he stated that the lease was obtained fraudulently by the plaintiff. The final decree declares that the lease alleged to have been obtained by the plaintiff is void as to all parties. A report of material facts under the statute must contain every fact necessary to support the decree, from the entry of which no fact not expressly found may be implied. Carilli Construction Co. v. John Basile & Co. Inc. 317 Mass. 726, 727. If the reported facts do not support the decree, it must be reversed unless the evidence reported shows that it was nevertheless right. Matter of Loeb, 315 Mass. 191, 195. In this situation it is still our duty to examine the evidence and to decide the case according to our own judgment, giving due weight to the findings of the trial judge which will not be *191 reversed unless plainly wrong. Bernhardt v. Atlantic Finance Corp. 311 Mass. 183, 184-185. Davis v. Newburyport Five Cents Savings Bank, 311 Mass. 377, 382.
That John actually was in possession of the premises and there conducted a grocery business is an unquestioned fact. As to this, Luigi's position has been that John occupied under an oral tenancy at a monthly rental of $50.
The trial judge made no finding as to the good faith of Reconstruction Finance Corporation. See Sullivan v. Sullivan, 321 Mass. 156, 159. He must have regarded that fact as immaterial. On the evidence it has not been disputed, and we find, that Reconstruction Finance Corporation was a bona fide purchaser of the chattel mortgage and a bona fide assignee of the lease.
We now come to the question, with which the trial judge dealt, whether upon the evidence there was fraud in the obtaining of the lease which rendered it void. The defendant Luigi relies upon the principle that fraud inducing a person to believe that an act which he does is something other than it actually is renders that act void. Murphy v. Barnard, 162 Mass. 72, 77. Restatement: Contracts, § 475. Williston, Contracts (Rev. ed.) § 1488. See White v. Graves, 107 Mass. 325, 328; Boston Five Cents Savings Bank v. Brooks, 309 Mass. 52, 57. At the trial his contention, inconsistent with the allegations in his answer and counterclaim, was that the lease was forged, and had not been given by Leonarda and him. We have not had certified to us the original exhibit, and have seen the lease only in the printed record. Here it is signed "John Santiano," "Leonarda Santoiani" (with one n), and "Luigi Santoiani" (with one n). It purports to have been acknowledged by "John Santiano" and "Luigi Santoianni" (with two n's) before Edward Hurwitz, notary public. Mr. Hurwitz was John's attorney who prepared the lease. He testified that the lease in fact was acknowledged as stated, and that later he recorded it in the registry of deeds.
There was testimony by John that the lease was signed on behalf of his parents at their request by his sister Philomena. *192 This Luigi and she denied. We understand the judge's finding to signify that the lease was not a forgery but was "obtained" by the lessee, and, therefore, was given by the lessors. On the evidence this could only mean that it was signed by Philomena on their behalf, notwithstanding her further testimony that she never signed the family name in any way but Santiano. Compare Davis v. Meenan, 270 Mass. 313, 315.
The evidence undoubtedly discloses suspicious circumstances. The lessors were not able to write or to read in any language. John procured the lease to be drawn by his lawyer who gave no copy to the lessors. There was conflicting testimony by John as to whether he had read the lease to his parents before it was signed. No other witness gave such testimony, and on this record a finding that it was so read should not, in our opinion, be made. The lease is unusual and very favorable to John. Not only is the term very long, but it could be found that earlier Leonarda had twice refused to give John a fifty year lease. The lessors are responsible for all repairs, both inside and outside, but the lessee is authorized to make them and to deduct the cost from the rent, which is to continue throughout the fifty year term at $50 a month.
Merely suspicious circumstances, however, are not enough. It is elementary that fraud is never presumed, but must be affirmatively alleged and proved by the party who relies upon it for the purpose of either attack or defence. Barron v. International Trust Co. 184 Mass. 440, 443. Kerrigan v. Fortunato, 304 Mass. 617, 620. Toy v. Green, 319 Mass. 354, 360. Luigi's answer, while suggesting illiteracy, does not allege in what way the lease was "obtained" by fraud. His counterclaim slightly more explicitly alleges that the fraud consisted of "making promises which the plaintiff has not carried into effect." It is true that John has not made certain monthly rent payments, but there is nothing upon which to base a finding (which would have to go beyond the allegation) that the promise to pay rent was made with the intention not to keep it. See McComb v. C.R. *193 Brewer Lumber Co. 184 Mass. 276, 278; Fanger v. Leeder, 327 Mass. 501, 505-506. There are no specific alleged false representations upon which Luigi purports to rely. No fiduciary relationship has been alleged or argued. See Warsofsky v. Sherman, 326 Mass. 290. The finding that the lease was obtained fraudulently is plainly wrong and cannot stand.
The general rule is that, in the absence of fraud, one who signs a written agreement is bound by its terms whether he reads and understands it or not or whether he can read or not. Grace v. Adams, 100 Mass. 505, 507. Freedley v. French, 154 Mass. 339, 342. Atlas Shoe Co. v. Bloom, 209 Mass. 563, 567. Mackintosh v. Cioppa, 245 Mass. 152, 154. Wilkisius v. Sheehan, 258 Mass. 240, 243. Reliable Finance Corp. v. Baldrate, 291 Mass. 150, 152. Master Bakers Supply, Inc. v. Hopkins, Inc. 300 Mass. 553, 556-557. Shaw v. Victoria Coach Line, Inc. 314 Mass. 262, 266. This seems to us to be the pertinent rule on the evidence. We refrain, however, from making a binding determination, because we think that in view of the unsatisfactory state of the pleadings and of the record, the ends of justice will be best served by a new hearing.
We do not reach other questions argued by Reconstruction Finance Corporation, such as estoppel, laches, and the effect of G.L. (Ter. Ed.) c. 183, § 5. We need not decide whether it has acquired any rights by subrogation. See Home Owners' Loan Corp. v. Baker, 299 Mass. 158.
Decree reversed.
NOTES
[1]  This may have been intended to read "defendants." In any event the bill should not have been dismissed. Booker v. Woburn, 325 Mass. 334. Foley v. Springfield, 328 Mass. 59.

=== CASE 9740892 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:44:15.539222+00 ===

Mr. Justice Hershey delivered the opinion of the court: The plaintiff in error, hereinafter called defendant, was indicted in the criminal court of Cook County, for unlawful possession of a narcotic .drug, called cannabis or marijuana. The indictment consisted of two counts, the first of which charged the defendant with unlawful possession of the drug contrary to the statute, and the second, in addition to charging him with unlawful possession, also set forth that he had been previously convicted in the municipal court of Chicago on January 19, 1937, on an information charging him with the unlawful possession of narcotic drugs in violation of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act, and had been sentenced to confinement in the House of Correction for a period of 90 days. After the indictment was returned in the instant case, a trial was had before the court, and the defendant was convicted on the second count of said indictment. Motions for new trial and in arrest of judgment were filed and overruled, as also was a motion to release the defendant on probation. Thereupon the defendant was sentenced to the Illinois State Penitentiary for a term of not less than 15 years nor more than 20 years. The Uniform Narcotic Drug Act, (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1951, chap. 38, par. 192.23,) upon which the indictment in this case was based, provides that whoever violates the act by the unlawful possession of narcotic drugs shall be fined for the first offense not more than $5000 or be imprisoned for not less than one nor more than 5 years or both. The act further provides that for any subsequent offense the violator shall be imprisoned in the penitentiary for any term from two years to life. It contains the further provision: “Any offense under this Act shall be deemed a subsequent offense if the violator shall have been previously convicted of a felony under any law of the United States of America, or of any State or Territory or of the District of Columbia relating to narcotic drugs.” Defendant contends that his conviction in the municipal court in 1937 was not for a felony and as a consequence his conviction by the criminal court in this case cannot be deemed a conviction for a “subsequent” offense within the meaning of the act. Therefore, he argues, the trial court upon finding him guilty in the instant case was limited in the punishment that it could impose upon him to thct provided in the act for a-first offender, to wit, a fine of not more than $5000 or imprisonment for a period of not less than one nor more than five years, or both, and that the court was in error when it imposed a sentence on him of not less than 15 years and not more than 20 years in this case. Defendant contends that the statute in question is criminal or penal and in consequence thereof is to be strictly construed in favor of the accused and nothing is to be taken by intendment or implication against him beyond the literal and obvious meaning of the statute. (People v. Lund, 382 Ill. 213.) The case cited also states that the rules as to strict or liberal construction are of value only as assisting in finding the real meaning of the statute, and there is no need of construction to ascertain the meaning of a statute where the language is clear and unambiguous and the intention of the law-making power is manifestly apparent therefrom. A statute itself affords the best means of its exposition, and if the legislative intent can be ascertained from its provisions, that intent will prevail without resorting to other aids for construction. People v. Continental Ill. Nat. Bank, 360 Ill. 454. It is entirely unnecessary here to resort to extrinsic aids in order to construe this statute. Its meaning is clearly evident from the language employed. The unlawful possession of narcotic drugs is thereby made a criminal offense punishable by a fine of not more than $5000, or imprisonment for a period of not less than one year and not more than five years, or both, for the first offense. For any subsequent offense, the violator shall be imprisoned in the penitentiary for any term from two years to life. The first offense is not a felony, (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1951, chap. 38, par. 585,) nor does the statute require it to be so. The defendant directs attention to the latter part of the statute which provides that any offense under this act shall be deemed a subsequent offense if the violator shall have been previously convicted of a felony under any law of the United States of America or of any State or Territory or of the District of Columbia relating to narcotic drugs. He argues that before the provision of the statute relating to subsequent offenses may have application, the first offense must necessarily be a felony. His contention is wholly without merit. The language of the statute is clear that the part thereof to which our attention is directed by defendant relates to an offender who, previous to violating the Illinois act, had been convicted of a felony under any law of the United States of America or any State or Territory or the District of Columbia relating to narcotic drugs. The language employed and the arrangement of each word, clause, and paragraph indicates that the very purpose of the paragraph in question is to permit the application of the provision relating to punishment for subsequent offenses to those who had previously violated a narcotic drug law of the aforementioned governmental entities, and to render Illinois no longer a haven for those persons so previously convicted outside the jurisdiction of this State. This determination is substantiated by an inspection of the act as it existed before the amendment of 1951. At that time the first offense in Illinois was denominated a misdemeanor and a subsequent offense thereof rendered a violator subject to a prison term. The same thing remains true under the act as amended in 1951, but with the further provision relating to offenders who have previously been convicted of a felony under the narcotic drug laws of the United States of America, or any State or Territory or of the District of Columbia. The first offense, if committed in Illinois, could not be a felony and the subsequent offense provision could never operate if defendant’s construction were true. It is clear, however, that no conflict arises from any of the provisions of the statute as interpreted above. Therefore, the sentence imposed upon the defendant was proper and the judgment of the criminal court of Cook County is affirmed. , Judgment affirmed.

=== CASE 2225483 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:48.31995+00 ===

646 N.E.2d 52 (1994)
Gina GREGOR, Appellant-Defendant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee-Plaintiff.
No. 55A05-9404-CR-139.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, Fifth District.
December 28, 1994.
Rehearing Denied March 2, 1995.
William Van Der Pol Jr., Law Office of William Van Der Pol Jr., Martinsville, for appellant.
Pamela Carter, Atty. Gen. of Indiana and Lisa M. Paunicka, Deputy Atty. Gen., Indianapolis, for appellee.
OPINION
BARTEAU, Judge.
We consolidate and restate the issues raised by Gina Gregor on appeal as whether the trial court erred in granting the State's motion to correct error.
FACTS
On June 22, 1993, the State charged Gregor by Information with battery causing bodily injury, a Class A misdemeanor. The Information alleged that on June 18, 1993, Gregor struck another person resulting in injuries.
A bench trial was originally set for September 9, 1993. Gregor appeared on that date with counsel prepared for trial. The State requested a continuance, citing lack of preparation and the unavailability of the victim, who was the State's principal witness and who had recently undergone surgery. The trial court granted the continuance over Gregor's objection and rescheduled the trial for November 15, 1993.
The deputy prosecutor originally assigned to the case was on vacation on November 15, 1993, and another deputy prosecutor was assigned to handle the case. The victim appeared *53 at the prosecutor's office on the morning of the trial date. The deputy prosecutor talked with the victim and reviewed the file. He decided that he was not prepared to try the case and that the testimony of additional witnesses was needed, none of whom had been subpoenaed. Planning to have the trial continued, the deputy prosecutor sent the victim home.
At the time trial was scheduled to commence, Gregor again appeared in court with counsel. The deputy prosecutor also appeared and requested a continuance, citing lack of preparation and the unavailability of witnesses. The deputy prosecutor explained the circumstances to the court, that the victim had been present in his office earlier but was sent home, and that he would need to subpoena additional witnesses.
Gregor objected, arguing that the State was seeking a continuance on the same grounds on which it had based its previous motion to continue. When the deputy prosecutor explained that it was not possible to summon the victim back into court for trial that day, the court dismissed the case with prejudice.
The State filed a motion to correct error, alleging that the dismissal should have been without prejudice. After a hearing, the court granted the State's motion. The State refiled charges against Gregor, and a new trial is pending.
DISCUSSION
A trial court has wide discretion to correct errors and to grant new trials. De Vittorio v. Werker Bros., Inc. (1994), Ind. App., 634 N.E.2d 528, 530; Ind.Crim.Rule 16(B). We will reverse only for an abuse of discretion. Id. An abuse of discretion will be found when the trial court's action is against the logic and effect of the facts and circumstances before it and the inferences which may be drawn therefrom. Id. An abuse of discretion also results from a trial court's decision that is without reason or is based upon impermissible reasons or considerations. Id.
The situation presented in this appeal is similar to the case of Dennis v. State (1980), Ind. App., 412 N.E.2d 303. In Dennis, the accused was charged with a Class C felony. Trial was scheduled for January 28, 1980. On the date of trial, the accused appeared with counsel prepared for trial. The State requested a continuance, citing lack of preparation and the absence of the victim, who was the State's principal witness. The prosecutor had believed that the trial was not going to begin on the scheduled date because another criminal trial was also scheduled for that day. The prosecutor had instructed the victim, who lived in Missouri, to not make the trip to Indiana to appear for trial.
The accused moved for a dismissal, which the court granted without designating whether it was with prejudice. When the State refiled charges on the next day, the accused moved for dismissal. The trial court denied the motion to dismiss, concluding that the previous dismissal had been without prejudice.
In affirming the trial court's conclusion, this court stated:
The general rule in criminal prosecutions is that a dismissal of the charge will not bar a renewal of proceedings unless the substantial rights of the accused have been prejudiced, as where speedy trial is found to have been denied or jeopardy has attached in the first prosecution.
Dennis, 412 N.E.2d at 304.
This rule was bolstered by our opinion in State v. Joyner (1985), Ind. App., 482 N.E.2d 1377. In Joyner, the State moved to amend a defective Information on the date of trial. When the trial court denied the motion, the State moved to dismiss the action so it could refile the charges. The accused objected, stating that he would be prejudiced by a dismissal because he had prepared for trial and had subpoenaed witnesses. The trial court agreed and dismissed the case with prejudice.
Finding that the substantial rights of the accused had not been prejudiced, we stated:
The inconvenience and financial hardship in Joyner's case, while regrettable do not prejudice his substantial rights. There is no evidence in the record that a fair trial was impossible. Joyner claims he and his witnesses would be inconvenienced, but there is no evidence to suggest that the *54 witnesses would not be available for trial. Nor does the fact that Joyner had expended energy in preparation preclude the opportunity for fair trial.
482 N.E.2d at 1377.
In its motion to correct error, the State presented this general rule to the trial court. The record is clear that the trial court then believed that it did not have the authority to dismiss the case with prejudice. In granting the State's motion to correct error, the trial court remarked:
Based on the law that was cited by the State, I don't find that I have the right to dismiss it with prejudice. Therefore if the State wishes to refile, they may do so.
R. 54.
Gregor asks that we recognize an exception to the general rule which would allow for dismissal of Gregor's case with prejudice. The exception Gregor suggests focuses upon the actions of the State, rather than the prejudicial effect of the dismissal on the accused. Gregor contends that the trial court has the inherent power to dismiss with prejudice to deter the State from encroaching upon the court's authority. In support of her argument, Gregor points to State v. Lynn (1993), Ind. App., 625 N.E.2d 499, in which the court made the following statement in obiter dicta:
A very forceful argument can be made that the prior court's dismissal with prejudice was within the inherent power of the trial court as a means for the court to deter the State from usurping the court's administrative power when the State attempts to dismiss a cause rather than to comply with the statutory requirements for a continuance found at IC XX-XX-X-X (1988).
625 N.E.2d at 500 n. 2. Gregor asserts that, had the trial court not labored under the false conclusion that it lacked the authority to dismiss the case with prejudice, the original dismissal would have withstood the State's motion to correct error.
We need not resolve the issue of whether the trial court has the inherent authority to dismiss a criminal case with prejudice upon finding that the State has acted to encroach upon the court's authority. Even if we assume the authority exists and the trial court labored under the erroneous conclusion that it was without authority to dismiss the case with prejudice, this particular case could not have been dismissed with prejudice because the State did not act in such a manner as to warrant such a sanction. The deputy prosecutor did not move for a dismissal of Gregor's case,[1] so it cannot be said the State attempted to usurp the court's administrative power by trying to dismiss the case rather than complying with the statutory requirements for a continuance. Gregor also argues that the State acted improperly by intentionally causing the absence of its only witness by sending the victim home on the morning of trial. However, we faced similar prosecutorial conduct in Dennis and found that dismissal without prejudice was appropriate.
As in the cases of Dennis and Joyner, we recognize Gregor's dissatisfaction with the State's ability to refile charges that have been dismissed due to the State's lack of preparation. Joyner, 482 N.E.2d at 1379-80; Dennis, 412 N.E.2d at 305. Nevertheless, Gregor's discontent must be subordinated to the public policy favoring the prosecution of persons accused of committing criminal offenses when a fair trial is available. Id.
The trial court did not abuse its discretion in granting the State's motion to correct error and ordering the case dismissed without prejudice. Gregor has pointed to no evidence in the record indicating that her substantial rights have been prejudiced, and does not contend that she has been denied her right to a speedy trial or that jeopardy has attached. Further, Gregor can point to no conduct by the State that would warrant a dismissal with prejudice under her proposed exception. In the absence of such, we cannot say that the trial court's decision was an abuse of discretion.
AFFIRMED.
SHARPNACK, C.J., and RUCKER, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Neither the State nor Gregor moved for dismissal. The trial court ordered the action dismissed after the State moved for a continuance. None of the trial proceedings had commenced.

=== CASE 9740944 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:45:31.514698+00 ===

*689PER CURIAM.
¶ 1. We review Referee Dennis J. Flynn's recommendation that this court suspend Attorney Joan M. Boyd's license to practice law in Wisconsin for 12 months consecutive to disciplinary suspensions already imposed on her, direct her to pay restitution and the costs of the proceeding, as well as to secure 20 credits of Wisconsin — approved continuing legal education (CLE) ethics courses as set forth herein. No appeal has been filed in this attorney disciplinary matter. See SCR 22.17(2).1
¶ 2. Attorney Boyd was admitted to practice law in Wisconsin in 1989 and resides in Shawano. Attorney *690Boyd's license is currently suspended. She has been subject to discipline on several previous occasions:
• In 2000 Attorney Boyd received a public reprimand for forging her clients' endorsements on the back of a check that was issued by a bankruptcy trustee to the clients and arranging for the check to be deposited into her checking account. She also misrepresented to the bankruptcy trustee's staff that the clients had endorsed the back of the check. See Public Reprimand of Joan M. Boyd, No. 2000-04.
• In 2006 Attorney Boyd was again publicly reprimanded for failing to deposit a fee into her client trust account; commingling funds in her trust account; failing to provide the legal skill or preparation reasonably necessary to handle a federal civil rights claim; and charging a client an unreasonable fee. See In re Disciplinary Proceedings Against Boyd, 2006 WI 28, 289 Wis. 2d 351, 711 N.W.2d 268.
• Effective August 18, 2008, this court suspended Attorney Boyd's license for five months for five counts of misconduct in three client matters. See In re Disciplinary Proceedings Against Boyd, 2008 WI 103, 314 Wis. 2d 14, 752 N.W.2d 882.
• On June 26, 2009, this court ordered Attorney Boyd to pay restitution and suspended her license for six months for 13 counts of misconduct in five client matters. See In re Disciplinary Proceedings Against Boyd, 2009 WI 59, 318 Wis. 2d 281, 767 N.W.2d 226.
¶ 3. On March 25, 2009, the Office of Lawyer Regulation (OLR) filed a disciplinary complaint alleging *691that Attorney Boyd committed 11 separate acts of misconduct in four client matters. Attorney Boyd filed an answer to the complaint; however, after preliminary scheduling hearings she advised the referee she would stipulate to all the facts contained in the complaint. In July 2009 the parties entered into a stipulation, in which Attorney Boyd entered a no contest plea.
¶ 4. According to the stipulation, the referee would utilize the allegations of the complaint as an adequate factual basis for a determination of misconduct as to all 11 counts. The stipulation also made recommendations regarding discipline and restitution.
¶ 5. The referee accepted the stipulation, concluding that Attorney Boyd acted freely, knowingly, and voluntarily in entering into the stipulation and that the stipulation is not the product of any plea bargaining. Attorney Boyd's misconduct as set forth in the stipulation and the referee's report is summarized as follows.
I. Client R.R.
¶ 6. In 2001 R.R. was convicted in Kenosha County and sentenced to prison. R.R. hired Attorney Boyd in November 2005 to represent him in a federal habeas corpus action. R.R. paid Attorney Boyd $3,000 for the retainer fee. Attorney Boyd filed the petition in federal court, but did not use the form required by local rule in habeas corpus cases. R.R. also filed a pro se motion and petition. The federal court denied all the pleadings and allowed Attorney Boyd to file an amended petition for writ of habeas corpus on a specified form on or before May 5, 2006. Attorney Boyd did not advise R.R. of the court's rulings or that she filed a motion for an order to hold in abeyance the petition for a writ of habeas corpus. An amended petition was never *692filed on behalf of R.R. Attorney Boyd and R.R. agreed Attorney Boyd should withdraw from the representation.
¶ 7. R.R. requested Attorney Boyd return the $3,000 advance payment, but Attorney Boyd did not return the fee. The federal court received a communication from R.R. and directed Attorney Boyd to apprise the court why Attorney Boyd failed to communicate the court's ruling to her client. Attorney Boyd did not respond to that court's directive. R.R. wrote Attorney Boyd and asked questions about his case. Attorney Boyd did not respond. In June 2006 the federal court ordered Attorney Boyd to show cause regarding her representation of R.R. Ultimately, Attorney Boyd withdrew the petition for habeas corpus. A new petition was filed in federal court, but it was not timely. Attorney Boyd did not ask the court to reopen the earlier case that had been timely filed. On May 8,2007, the federal court denied the petition for a writ of habeas corpus and dismissed the case.
¶ 8. With respect to Attorney Boyd's representation of R.R., the referee found as follows:
Count 1. Attorney Boyd violated SCR 20:1.12 by not providing competent representation to R.R.
Count 2. Attorney Boyd violated SCR 20:1.33 by failing to file an amended habeas corpus petition, by failing to submit a timely response to the court, by delaying the filing of a new habeas corpus petition until *693after the statutory deadline had expired, and by failing to act with reasonable diligence and promptness in representing her client.
Count 3. Attorney Boyd violated former SCR 20:1.4(a)4 by failing to inform R.R. she had filed a particular motion, by failing to inform R.R. of the federal court's order denying all petitions, by failing to keep her client reasonably informed as to the status of his case, and by failing to promptly comply with reasonable requests for information.
Count 4. Attorney Boyd violated former SCR 20:1.5(a)5 by accepting a $3,000 fee and then failing to provide services that were necessary to preserve the client's rights. The referee agreed the legal fee was not reasonable.
*694II. Client M.D.
¶ 9. Attorney Boyd represented M.D. in March and April 2007. M.D. retained Attorney Boyd to file a post-conviction motion on his behalf within three weeks. Attorney Boyd agreed and M.D. paid her $4,800 as a retainer fee. The motion was not prepared or filed and no court appearance was arranged.
¶ 10. M.D. attempted to contact Attorney Boyd concerning the status of the representation and to express his concerns why nothing had been done in his case. Ultimately, M.D. terminated the lawyer-client relationship with Attorney Boyd and asked for a refund of the retainer. Attorney Boyd returned $2,000 of the fee representing an "initial refund".
¶ 11. Regarding Attorney Boyd's representation of M.D., the referee concluded as follows:
Count 5. By failing to file a post-conviction motion and have her client appear in court as agreed, Attorney Boyd failed to act with reasonable diligence and promptness in representing M.D. in violation of SCR 20:1.3.
Count 6. Attorney Boyd failed to keep M.D. reasonably informed about the status of his matter and failed to comply with reasonable client requests for case information in violation of former SCR 20:1.4(a) (effective through June 30, 2007).
III. Client G.W.
¶ 12. G.W. was sentenced to 25 years in prison by the Milwaukee County circuit court. In late 2006 he hired Attorney Boyd to handle a post-conviction mo*695tion. G.W paid Attorney Boyd a retainer fee of $1,800. Attorney Boyd prepared the requested motion and legal memorandum and sent them to G.W. for review before filing. G.W. reviewed the documents and wrote to Attorney Boyd informing her that the motion appeared to be legally defective because it did not include all the grounds for possible relief they had discussed, and it failed to allege that post-conviction counsel was ineffective in the original appeal. Attorney Boyd did not respond to G.W. and subsequently filed the pleadings as originally prepared.
¶ 13. In May 2007 the court denied the motion based on the same rationale cited by G.W Attorney Boyd advised G.W of the ruling, that the ruling could be appealed, and that her fee for the appeal would be $2,000. G.W agreed to the appeal, and Attorney Boyd filed a timely notice of appeal with the court of appeals. However, Attorney Boyd did not pay the required filing fee. Thereafter, G.W advised Attorney Boyd he was terminating her representation and he would pursue the matter pro se.
¶ 14. Regarding Attorney Boyd's representation of G.W, the referee concluded:
Count 7. By failing to consider the input and wishes of G.W and, instead, filing an unrevised motion that turned out to be legally inadequate and ineffective, Attorney Boyd did not provide competent representation to G.W., thereby violating SCR 20:1.1.
Count 8. Attorney Boyd violated former SCR 20:1.2(a)6 by not considering G.W's decisions concern*696ing the objectives of the representation and by failing to consult with G.W as to how the representation would be pursued.
¶ 15. On August 5, 2009, G.W filed a motion in this court objecting to the stipulation between Attorney Boyd and the OLR. In particular, he was concerned the stipulation did not contemplate restitution to him. He also asked the court to reinstate certain post-conviction rights.
¶ 16. On August 12, 2009, the OLR filed a response to GW's motion explaining that G.W has no standing to bring this motion. The OLR also explained why it did not seek restitution in the GW. matter. GW filed a reply on August 21, 2009, reiterating his requests for relief.
IV Client B.J.
¶ 17. B.J. was sentenced to 25 years in prison in 1998 and all direct appeal options had been exhausted. In November 2002 B.J. retained Attorney Boyd to prepare and file a post-conviction motion on his behalf and paid Attorney Boyd a retainer fee. Attorney Boyd filed the motion and the circuit court issued a written decision in October 2004 denying the motion. Attorney Boyd immediately sent the court's decision to B.J. and advised him the next step would be to file an appeal. However, the record reflects that Attorney Boyd did not *697inform B.J. about the timelines for any appeal and the procedures for filing the appeal so as to protect his appellate rights.
¶ 18. B.J. asked Attorney Boyd to work with him concerning Attorney Boyd's request for additional fees for the appeal. A notice of appeal was not filed. Attorney Boyd never told B.J. she was terminating her representation. On or about January 31, 2005, after the appeal deadline had passed, B.J. paid Attorney Boyd a $2,000 retainer. At a meeting on April 26, 2005, Attorney Boyd informed B.J. the time for filing an appeal had passed.
¶ 19. B.J. and Attorney Boyd subsequently agreed the additional $2,000 attorney fee would be used to pay Attorney Boyd to investigate whether the sentencing court had unconstitutionally applied a sentence enhancer and to seek modification of the sentence. Thereafter, B.J. sent Attorney Boyd several letters regarding the matter. Attorney Boyd failed to respond to many of B.J.'s letters. Attorney Boyd did not file any motion and did not provide B.J. with any time records regarding her work on his matters. B.J. eventually filed his own motion, pro se, with the court addressing both the enhancer statute and sentence credit issues.
¶ 20. With regard to Attorney Boyd's representation of B.J., the referee found:
Count 9. By failing to investigate the sentence enhancer issue after accepting a retainer to do so, Attorney Boyd failed to act with reasonable diligence and promptness in her representation of B.J., in violation of SCR 20:1.3.
Count 10. By failing to respond to B.J.'s letters requesting case information, Attorney Boyd failed to keep her client reasonably informed as to the status of his matter and to promptly comply with the client's *698reasonable requests for case information in violation of former SCR 20:1.4(a) (effective through June 30, 2007).
Count 11. By failing to give B.J. written notice of his statutory appellate deadline and by failing to advise B.J. she was terminating her representation after the court's denial of B. J.'s post-conviction motion, Attorney Boyd violated former SCR 20:1.4(b).7
¶ 21. The referee discussed the terms of the stipulation. He also discussed Attorney Boyd's previous disciplinary history as well as the fact that another, separate disciplinary proceeding was also pending against Attorney Boyd. The referee observed that the "conduct of Attorney Boyd is serious and repetitive."
¶ 22. Ultimately, the referee recommended this court impose a 12-month suspension of Attorney Boyd's law license8 to run consecutive to any other disciplinary suspension, order Attorney Boyd to pay restitution and the costs of this proceeding, as well as require Attorney Boyd to complete 20 credits of Wisconsin — approved CLE ethics courses.
¶ 23. Specifically, the referee recommended the court direct Attorney Boyd to pay restitution, as follows:
• Client R.R.: $3,000 with legal interest at the rate of 5 percent from November 5, 2005, until paid.
*699• Client M.D.: $4,800 with legal interest at the rate of 5 percent from March 28, 2007, until paid.
• Client B.J.: $1,500 with legal interest at the rate of 5 percent from January 31, 2004, until paid.
¶ 24. We agree with the referee's recommendations regarding a 12-month suspension, to run consecutive to existing disciplinary suspensions, restitution, additional ethics coursework, and payment of the costs of this proceeding.9
¶ 25. However, the question whether G.W should have received restitution warrants further discussion. As noted, the referee did not recommend restitution be paid to G.W. and G.W. has strongly objected to this omission. The OLR has stated it is "not unsympathetic" to G.W's request for restitution and the question gave this court pause, as well. On November 10, 2009, this court issued an order directing the parties to show cause why the stipulation did not provide for restitution to G.W. Attorney Boyd filed no response. The OLR filed a response on November 23, 2009.
¶ 26. The OLR formulated a policy on restitution in 2007. See In re Disciplinary Proceedings Against Nussberger, 2009 WI 103, ¶ 20, 321 Wis. 2d 576, 775 N.W.2d 525. Its policy is to seek restitution only under the following circumstances:
• The grievant's or respondent's rights in a collateral proceeding will not likely be prejudiced;
• The funds to be restored do not constitute incidental or consequential damages;
*700• The funds to he restored were in the respondent lawyer's direct control; and
• There is a reasonably ascertainable amount.
¶ 27. The OLR states that although G.W. did pay a flat fee of $1,800 to Attorney Boyd, Attorney Boyd was able to produce timesheets reflecting 25.2 hours of work which, at a customary hourly rate, "would have surpassed the flat fee that was actually paid." As such, OLR concluded that prosecution for an unreasonable fee was not authorized. The OLR also "took note of the fact that prior to filing the disciplinary complaint [G.W] had not filed an application for reimbursement with the State Bar of Wisconsin Lawyers' Fund for Client Protection."
¶ 28. The fact that G.W. did not file an application for reimbursement with the Lawyers' Fund for Client Protection does not determine whether G.W. was entitled to restitution. However, SCR Chapter 12, which governs the Lawyers' Fund for Client Protection, does provide some guidance as to what constitutes a "reimbursable loss." It requires, inter alia, that the loss was caused by "the dishonest conduct of an attorney ..." (emphasis added). See SCR 12.045(7)(a)(1). Similarly, SCR 21.16(2m) involving discipline for professional misconduct, provides that restitution may be ordered when a client's money or property was "misappropriated or misapplied..." (emphasis added). See SCR 21.16(2m)(a)1. Here, GW paid $1,800 for very substandard — indeed incompetent — legal work. While G.W may have grounds for a civil action against Attorney Boyd, it appears that the $1,800 fee does not meet the criteria the OLR uses to assess whether restitution is reasonable.
¶ 29. IT IS ORDERED that the license of Joan M. Boyd to practice law in Wisconsin is suspended for a *701period of 12 months, to run consecutive to existing disciplinary suspensions already imposed by this court.
¶ 30. IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that to the extent she has not yet done so, Joan M. Boyd shall comply with SCR 22.26 regarding the duties of a person whose license to practice law in Wisconsin has been suspended.
¶ 31. IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that Joan M. Boyd pay restitution plus interest at the legal rate. See Wis. Stat. § 138.04. Restitution shall be paid as follows:
A. Client R.R.: $3,000 with legal interest at the rate of 5 percent from November 5, 2005, until paid.
B. Client M.D.: $4,800 with legal interest at the rate of 5 percent from March 28, 2007, until paid.
C. Client B.J.: $1,500 with legal interest at the rate of 5 percent from January 31, 2004, until paid.
If restitution is not paid within 60 days of the date of this order, Joan M. Boyd's license shall remain suspended until further order of the court.
¶ 32. IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that Joan M. Boyd is directed to obtain advance approval of and complete 20 credits of Wisconsin — approved continuing legal education ethics courses prior to seeking reinstatement.
¶ 33. IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that within 90 days of the date of this order Joan M. Boyd pay to the Office of Lawyer Regulation the costs of this proceeding. If the costs are not paid within the time specified and absent a showing to this court of her inability to pay the costs within that time, Joan M. Boyd's license to practice law in Wisconsin shall remain suspended until further order of the court.
*702¶ 34. IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that the restitution is to be completed prior to paying costs to the Office of Lawyer Regulation.
SCR 22.17(2) provides:
*690If no appeal is filed timely, the supreme court shall review the referee's report; adopt, reject or modify the referee's findings and conclusions or remand the matter to the referee for additional findings; and determine and impose appropriate discipline. The court, on its own motion, may order the parties to file briefs in the matter.
SCR 20:1.1 provides, "A lawyer shall provide competent representation to a client. Competent representation requires the legal knowledge, skill, thoroughness and preparation reasonably necessary for the representation."
SCR 20:1.3 states, "A lawyer shall act with reasonable diligence and promptness in representing a client."
Former SCR 20:1.4(a) (effective through June 30, 2007) provided, "A lawyer shall keep a client reasonably informed about the status of a matter and promptly comply with reasonable requests for information."
Former SCR 20:1.5(a) (effective through June 30, 2007), provided: Fees.
A lawyer's fees shall be reasonable. The factors to be considered in determining the reasonableness of a fee include the following:
(1) the time and labor required, the novelty and difficulty of the questions involved, and the skill requisite to perform the legal service properly;
(2) the likelihood, if apparent to the client, that the acceptance of the particular employment will preclude other employment by the lawyer;
(3) the fee customarily charged in the locality for similar legal services;
(4) the amount involved and the results obtained;
(5) the time limitations imposed by the client or by the circumstances;
(6) the nature and length of the professional relationship with the client;
*694(7) the experience, reputation, and ability of the lawyer or lawyers performing the services; and
(8) whether the fee is fixed or contingent.
SCR 20:1.2(a) (effective through June 30, 2007) provides:
A lawyer shall abide by a client's decisions concerning the objectives of representation, subject to paragraphs (c), (d) and (e), *696and shall consult with the client as to the means by which they are to he pursued. A lawyer shall inform a client of all offers of settlement and abide by a client's decision whether to accept an offer of settlement of a matter. In a criminal case or any proceeding that could result in deprivation of liberty, the lawyer shall abide by the client's decision, after consultation with the lawyer, as to a plea to be entered, whether to waive jury trial and whether the client will testify.
Former SCR 20:1.4(b) (effective through June 30, 2007) provided, "A lawyer shall explain a matter to the extent reasonably necessary to permit the client to make informed decisions regarding the representation."
While the stipulation recommended a nine-month consecutive suspension, the referee recommended 12 months and Attorney Boyd did not appeal this recommendation. We agree that a 12-month suspension is more appropriate for the misconduct involved in this matter.
As of August 24, 2009, the OLR's costs total $4,347.14.

=== CASE 9740660 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:39:42.353621+00 ===

SACKETT, Judge
(dissenting).
I dissent. I would reverse the judgment in plaintiff-appellee West Des Moines State Bank’s favor.
West Des Moines State Bank took a security interest in any rebates Des Moines Boating Center had coming from the defendant-appellant Brunswick Corporation. West Bank contends it is entitled to rebates allegedly owed Des Moines Boating Center for the year 1988. West Bank’s claim is valid only if it can show defendant owed the rebates to Des Moines Boating Center.
The rebate program was available to dealers only if they were (1) contracted dealers, and (2) in good standing at the end of the calendar year. These requirements were conditions precedent to any obligation to pay the rebate. Conditions precedent are facts and events, occurring subsequently to the making of a valid contract, that just exist or occur before there is a right of immediate performance, before there is a breach of contract duty, before the usual judicial remedies are available. Nat’l Farmers Org’n. Inc. v. Lias, 271 N.W.2d 751, 754 (Iowa 1978). There is no way under the facts here Des Moines Boating Center could be found to be a contracted dealer in good standing at the end of 1988.
West Bank and Des Moines Boating Center had written notice that Des Moines Boating Center’s accounts with defendant and its subsidiaries had to be current as a precondition to the issuance of a rebate. West Bank had written notice of this prior to the time it attempted to take an assignment of Des Moines Boating Center’s interest in the rebates. Neither Des Moines Boating Center nor West Bank objected. When the 1987 rebate was paid, $12,521.04 of the total rebate went to defendant to satisfy existing accounts. No objections were made by West Bank.
Des Moines Boating Center admitted it sold defendant’s products out of trust and had no means or intention of paying for the products by the year’s end. Des Moines Boating Center’s financial condition prohibited it from purchasing products from defendant and paying its existing debt. By the end of 1988, the Des Moines Boating Center was in bankruptcy.
Considering these uncontroverted facts, there is no basis to find Des Moines Boating Center was a dealer in good standing at the end of 1988. I would reverse the judgment.

=== CASE 2224424 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:21.751839+00 ===

483 N.W.2d 146 (1992)
240 Neb. 609
Judy F. PAPPAS, Appellant,
v.
George A. SOMMER, Appellee.
No. S-89-1157.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
May 1, 1992.
*147 J. Murry Shaeffer, P.C., Lincoln, for appellant.
Francis L. Winner, P.C., Omaha, for appellee.
HASTINGS, C.J., and BOSLAUGH, WHITE, CAPORALE, SHANAHAN, GRANT, and FAHRNBRUCH, JJ.
CAPORALE, Justice.
The plaintiff-appellant, Judy F. Pappas, asserts the district court improvidently dismissed her cause for the damages purportedly arising from the alleged professional negligence of the defendant-appellee, attorney George A. Sommer. More specifically, Pappas claims, in effect, that the district court erroneously concluded (1) that she lacked standing to sue and (2) that it lacked subject matter jurisdiction. We affirm in part, and in part reverse and remand for further proceedings.
Pappas alleges in her petition that she, in accordance with the negligent advice Sommer gave her, executed documents which rendered her liable on the debt of another and which subjected her interest in certain real estate to the judgment lien arising out of that debt. According to the petition, it became necessary, as a consequence of the foregoing, for Pappas to "file a personal bankrupcty [sic] action."
Sommer responded by filing a "Motion to Dismiss," asserting that the district court lacked subject matter jurisdiction because "[t]he claim described is part of a bankrupt estate pending in the U.S. Bankruptcy Court," jurisdiction over which had not been removed to the district court.
The district court suggested the motion should be treated as a demurrer, but nonetheless received in evidence a copy of Pappas' bankruptcy filing, which recites that relief was being sought under chapter 11 of the federal Bankruptcy Code.
The district court explained in its ruling that because Pappas' negligence cause had *148 accrued prior to the bankruptcy filing, the cause had become an asset of the bankruptcy estate and thus could not be pursued by Pappas in her own right.
The district court correctly recognized that a pretrial motion to dismiss is not permitted. Neb.Rev.Stat. § 25-803 (Reissue 1989); United States Fire Ins. Co. v. Affiliated FM Ins. Co., 225 Neb. 218, 403 N.W.2d 383 (1987); Nelson v. Sioux City Boat Club, 216 Neb. 484, 344 N.W.2d 634 (1984); Blitzkie v. State, 216 Neb. 105, 342 N.W.2d 5 (1983). It also correctly recognized that under appropriate circumstances, such an irregular motion may be treated as a demurrer. United States Fire Ins. Co., supra; Voyles v. DeBrown Leasing, Inc., 222 Neb. 250, 383 N.W.2d 36 (1986).
However, the district court ignored the rule that a demurrer goes only to those defects which appear on the face of the petition. Houska v. City of Wahoo, 227 Neb. 322, 417 N.W.2d 337 (1988); Smick v. Langvardt, 216 Neb. 778, 345 N.W.2d 830 (1984). When ruling on a demurrer, a court must assume that the pleaded facts, as distinguished from legal conclusions, are true as alleged and must give the pleading the benefit of any reasonable inference from the facts alleged, but cannot assume the existence of a fact not alleged, make factual findings to aid the pleading, or consider evidence which might be adduced at trial. Matheson v. Stork, 239 Neb. 547, 477 N.W.2d 156 (1991), quoting Hecker v. Ravenna Bank, 237 Neb. 810, 468 N.W.2d 88 (1991).
Thus, having elected to treat Sommer's irregular motion as a demurrer, the district court erred in admitting the copy of Pappas' filing in the bankruptcy court. The district court could properly consider only the factual allegations in Pappas' petition and the reasonable implications of those allegations. We so confine our analysis.
We know from the petition that Pappas' negligence action accrued prior to the bankruptcy filing. All assets of the debtor become the property of the bankrupt estate upon commencement of the bankruptcy proceeding. 11 U.S.C. § 541 (1988). See, e.g., In re Dow, 132 B.R. 853 (S.D.Ohio 1991) (cause of action for attorney's alleged malpractice in filing bankruptcy petition constituted estate property). As Pappas' negligence cause constituted property she owned when she filed for bankruptcy relief, the cause became the property of the trustee of the bankruptcy estate, and it was the trustee's obligation to "collect and reduce" its value to money and not Pappas' obligation to do so. 11 U.S.C. § 704(1) (1988).
In arguing against this proposition, Pappas calls to our attention that as a debtor in possession of the bankrupt estate under chapter 11 of the code, bankruptcy rule 6009, 11 U.S.C. app. rule 6009 (1988), grants her, as well as the trustee, the authority to prosecute the malpractice claim. Rule 6009 does indeed provide that, with or without court approval, either a trustee or a debtor in possession may commence and prosecute on behalf of the estate any action or proceeding before any tribunal.
However, as the petition does not allege the type of bankruptcy relief Pappas sought, we cannot know that the filing was under chapter 11. Moreover, as the petition does not so allege, we cannot know that Pappas is in possession of the bankruptcy estate. Without that knowledge, we must apply the general rule that the property of the bankrupt belongs to the trustee of the estate.
Neb.Rev.Stat. § 25-301 (Reissue 1989) provides that, with an exception not involved here, every "action must be prosecuted in the name of the real party in interest...." Not only does the caption of the petition not recite that the negligence action is brought on behalf of the bankruptcy estate, the petition fails to allege that Pappas prosecuted the lawsuit for and on behalf of the estate. Accordingly, the district court correctly concluded that Pappas lacked standing to bring this lawsuit in her own name and on her own behalf. See, e.g., Collins v. Federal Land Bank of Omaha, 421 N.W.2d 136 (Iowa 1988) (legal malpractice claims based on attorney's alleged *149 negligent advice and conduct on behalf of clients accruing before bankruptcy filing became property of bankruptcy estate and could not be pursued by clients on their own behalf).
However, our analysis does not end with that determination, for the rule is that after a demurrer is sustained, leave to amend the petition is to be given, unless it is clear that no reasonable possibility exists that the plaintiff will be able to correct the deficiency. See, St. Paul Fire & Marine Ins. Co. v. Touche Ross & Co., 234 Neb. 789, 452 N.W.2d 746 (1990); Kane v. Vodicka, 238 Neb. 436, 471 N.W.2d 136 (1991); Schmuecker Bros. Implement v. Sobotka, 217 Neb. 114, 348 N.W.2d 130 (1984); Fowler v. Nat. Bank of Commerce, 209 Neb. 861, 312 N.W.2d 269 (1981); Newman Grove Creamery Co. v. Deaver, 208 Neb. 178, 302 N.W.2d 697 (1981).
Thus, while the district court correctly sustained Sommer's demurrer, it erred in failing to grant Pappas an opportunity to amend her petition. Accordingly, we affirm the district court's sustainment of the demurrer, but reverse its order of dismissal and remand the cause for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
AFFIRMED IN PART, AND IN PART REVERSED AND REMANDED FOR FURTHER PROCEEDINGS.

=== CASE 2224426 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:21.789483+00 ===

483 N.W.2d 752 (1992)
240 Neb. 716
Daniel FOREMAN, Appellant,
v.
STATE of Nebraska, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, and the Nebraska Second Injury Fund, Appellees.
No. S-91-608.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
May 15, 1992.
*753 Rod Rehm, P.C., Lincoln, for appellant.
*754 Don Stenberg, Atty. Gen., and Lisa D. Martin-Price, Lincoln, for appellee State.
Jill Gradwohl Schroeder, of Baylor, Evnen, Curtiss, Grimit & Witt, Lincoln, for appellee Second Injury Fund.
BOSLAUGH, WHITE, CAPORALE, SHANAHAN, GRANT, and FAHRNBRUCH, JJ., and COLWELL, District Judge, Retired.
BOSLAUGH, Justice.
The plaintiff, Daniel Foreman, sustained a low back injury on December 16, 1985, while he was employed as a sheet metal worker for the defendant University of Nebraska-Lincoln. The injury occurred when the plaintiff was lifting some large fittings for an exhaust system.
The record shows that on January 29, 1986, Dr. Louis Gogela performed a laminectomy at the L4 level of the plaintiff's spine. On August 1, 1986, Dr. Gogela released the plaintiff to return to full-time employment without restriction.
On August 16, 1986, during the course of his employment by the university, the plaintiff bent over to replace a screen in a window, and as he twisted, he felt something pop in his back. The plaintiff returned to Dr. Gogela for treatment of this injury.
On March 23, 1987, Dr. Gogela performed additional surgery to remove disk material at the L4 level of the plaintiff's spine. Dr. Gogela released the plaintiff to work in the summer of 1987, restricting him to light duties initially and eventually allowing the plaintiff to return to full-time duties without restrictions.
In a report dated July 21, 1987, Dr. Gogela stated that the plaintiff had sustained a 10-percent permanent partial impairment of the body as a whole. Thereafter, the university made a voluntary award of permanent partial disability at a rate of 10 percent and paid the plaintiff $30.58 per week.
On October 24, 1988, the plaintiff again injured his lower back while working for the university. Following this injury, the plaintiff sought medical treatment from Dr. Ronald Schwab.
On March 1, 1989, Dr. Schwab performed a "lumbar spinal decompression with posterolateral spinal fusion L4 to sacrum, and Steffe plate internal fixation L4-5 level."
After the accident of October 24, 1988, the plaintiff did not return to employment at the university. He received temporary total disability payments from November 1, 1988, to November 15, 1990, and he continued to receive permanent partial disability payments of $30.58 a week through January 26, 1989.
On October 30, 1989, Dr. Schwab completed a functional capacity form on which he indicated that the plaintiff could participate in certain restricted work activities. On November 14, 1989, Dr. Schwab wrote to Jim Weiss, a vocational rehabilitation counselor employed by the university, which stated that he believed the plaintiff could return to his former work activities if he did not lift in excess of 50 pounds. Additionally, Dr. Schwab completed an estimated functional capacity form which set forth the plaintiff's work restrictions. On December 29, 1989, Dr. Schwab estimated that the plaintiff could return to work on approximately March 1, 1990.
In a report dated March 15, 1990, Dr. Frederick Hathaway stated that the plaintiff's spinal fusion was solid and that the plaintiff could work with certain restrictions. In a supplemental report dated October 18, 1990, Dr. Hathaway expressed the opinion that the plaintiff had reached maximum medical improvement and he could have returned to work as of April 1, 1990. According to Dr. Hathaway, the plaintiff had sustained a 40-percent permanent partial impairment of the body as a whole.
This action was commenced on February 20, 1990. The petition alleged injuries occurring on December 16, 1985, August 18, 1986, and October 24, 1988. At the first hearing in this matter, the plaintiff testified that although he had not returned to work at the university, he was working approximately 30 hours a week in various farming activities on his farm.
*755 On October 15, 1990, Dr. Schwab reported that he estimated that the plaintiff had sustained a 30-percent disability to the body as a whole and stated that the plaintiff could return to work subject to certain restrictions.
Various vocational rehabilitation professionals interviewed the plaintiff, reviewed his medical and occupational history, and presented opinions concerning the plaintiff's loss of earning capacity.
On rehearing, the compensation court found that the statute of limitations barred the plaintiff from recovering additional compensation for the accident of December 16, 1985, and that the plaintiff was not entitled to further benefits from the accident and injury of August 16, 1986, due to the plaintiff's failure to establish by expert medical evidence that the accident caused the need for surgery in March 1987 or resulted in any permanent impairment. The compensation court concluded that the accident and injury of October 24, 1988, were compensable and that as a result thereof, the plaintiff was temporarily totally disabled from October 25, 1988, through March 31, 1990, and that he thereafter sustained a 30-percent permanent loss of earning capacity. The plaintiff was awarded compensation for 745/7 weeks for temporary total disability at the rate of $245 per week, compensation for 2252/7 weeks of permanent partial disability for a 30-percent loss of earning power at $95.41 per week, mileage reimbursement for medical care, reimbursement for direct payment of medications, and vocational rehabilitation benefits if applied for in a timely fashion. The Second Injury Fund was found to have no liability and was dismissed as a party.
The plaintiff has appealed from the award on rehearing.
The plaintiff assigns as error the compensation court's findings (1) that he was no longer entitled to temporary total disability benefits from the accident and injury of October 24, 1988, (2) that the plaintiff was no longer entitled to 10 percent permanent partial disability benefits for the accident and injury of August 16, 1986, (3) that the plaintiff failed to establish causation entitling him to benefits for the accident and injury of August 16, 1986, (4) that the plaintiff sustained a 30-percent loss of earning capacity as a result of the accident and injury of October 24, 1988, and (5) that the Second Injury Fund was not liable for any portion of benefits due the defendant.
"`Findings of fact made by the Nebraska Workers' Compensation Court after rehearing have the same force and effect as a jury verdict in a civil case. [Citations omitted.] In testing the sufficiency of evidence to support findings of fact made by the Nebraska Workers' Compensation Court after rehearing, the evidence must be considered in the light most favorable to the successful party. [Citations omitted.] Factual determinations by the Workers' Compensation Court will not be set aside on appeal unless such determinations are clearly erroneous. Regarding facts determined and findings made after rehearing in the Workers' Compensation Court, § 48-185 precludes the Supreme Court's substitution of its view of facts for that of the Workers' Compensation Court if the record contains evidence to substantiate the factual conclusions reached by the Workers' Compensation Court. [Citations omitted.] As the trier of fact, the Nebraska Workers' Compensation Court is the sole judge of the credibility of witnesses and the weight to be given testimony.'"
Roan Eagle v. State, 237 Neb. 961, 962, 468 N.W.2d 382, 384 (1991), quoting Heiliger v. Walters & Heiliger Electric, Inc., 236 Neb. 459, 461 N.W.2d 565 (1990).
Relying on Briggs v. Consolidated Freightways, 234 Neb. 410, 451 N.W.2d 278 (1990), and the testimony from his treating physician, the plaintiff argues that he is still entitled to compensation for temporary total disability because he has not reached maximum medical improvement.
A claimant who has achieved maximum medical healing is no longer entitled to compensation for temporary total disability. Briggs, supra. In determining *756 whether a claimant has reached maximum medical recovery,
"[t]he fact that some treatment is still necessary, such as physical therapy or drugs, does not necessarily rule out a finding that the condition has become stabilized, if the underlying condition causing the disability has become stable and if nothing further in the way of treatment will improve that condition...."
Briggs, 234 Neb. at 415, 451 N.W.2d at 283, quoting 2 Arthur Larson, The Law of Workmen's Compensation § 57.12(c) (1989).
In a deposition taken on January 10, 1991, after the rehearing, the plaintiff's physician, Dr. Schwab, testified that he did not believe that the plaintiff's condition had stabilized. He also stated he could not "comfortably say that he has reached maximum medical improvement at this time." However, on redirect examination, Dr. Schwab testified that he could not state with any medical certainty that the plaintiff was suffering from any additional problem that was treatable, and he had no diagnostic procedures scheduled as of the date of the deposition.
Generally, whether a worker has reached maximum medical improvement is a question of fact. Roan Eagle v. State, supra. Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the defendant, as we are required to do, we cannot say that the compensation court was clearly wrong in finding that the plaintiff had achieved maximum medical improvement by April 1, 1990, and was no longer temporarily totally disabled.
The plaintiff also contends that the compensation court erred in finding that he was no longer entitled to permanent partial disability payments of $30.58 per week. Referring to Hansen v. Paxton & Vierling Iron Works, 138 Neb. 589, 293 N.W. 415 (1940), the plaintiff argues that permanent partial disability benefits may be received by an injured worker in addition to temporary total disability benefits for a subsequent injury even if the total of those benefits exceeds the maximum amount of compensation benefits payable. The plaintiff's argument is without merit.
In the Hansen case, this court stated:
There is nothing in the workmen's compensation law to prevent an employee from receiving compensation for temporary total disability to perform the duties in which he is engaged at the time of an accident, merely because he is then receiving an unrelated allowance for a permanent partial disability from a previous accident.
Hansen, 138 Neb. at 595, 293 N.W. at 418. In that case, the injury for which the worker received compensation for permanent partial disability and the injury for which the worker received compensation for temporary total disability were to different parts of the body and were unrelated. Furthermore, there is no indication that the combined payments for permanent partial disability and temporary total disability exceeded the maximum allowable under the statute.
Neb.Rev.Stat. § 48-121 (Reissue 1988) states in part:
(1) For total disability, the compensation during such disability shall be sixty-six and two-thirds percent of the wages received at the time of injury, but such compensation shall not be more than the maximum weekly income benefit specified in section 48-121.01....
(2) For disability partial in character, except the particular cases mentioned in subdivision (3) of this section, the compensation shall be sixty-six and two-thirds percent of the difference between the wages received at the time of the injury and the earning power of the employee thereafter, but such compensation shall not be more than the maximum weekly income benefit specified in section 48-121.01....
The maximum weekly benefit allowable under Neb.Rev.Stat. § 48-121.01 (Reissue 1988) is $245. After the plaintiff's injury of October 24, 1988, the defendant employer paid the plaintiff compensation for temporary total disability at the rate of $245 a week and continued to make payments of *757 $30.58 per week for permanent partial disability until January 26, 1989.
Termination of the payments for permanent partial disability was proper because the plaintiff was not entitled to compensation in excess of the prescribed statutory maximum amount of weekly compensation. The compensation court recognized this by allowing the defendant employer a credit for $318.91 for permanent partial disability inadvertently paid to the plaintiff at the time that he was receiving temporary total disability benefits as a result of his October 24, 1988, injury.
As to the assignment of error regarding the finding that the plaintiff had not established causation entitling him to compensation for the accident and injury of August 16, 1986, the plaintiff concedes that the issue is moot if this court finds he is not entitled to receive compensation for any permanent partial disability arising from that injury because he was already receiving the maximum compensation allowed under the statute for the injury of October 24, 1988.
The plaintiff has assigned as error the finding that he sustained a 30-percent loss of earning capacity as a result of the accident and injury of October 24, 1988; however, this error was not argued in his brief. This court will not consider errors assigned but not discussed. In re Interest of B.M., 239 Neb. 292, 475 N.W.2d 909 (1991).
The final assignment of error concerns the finding that the Second Injury Fund was not liable for any part of the compensation due the plaintiff.
"To recover from the Second Injury Fund, § 48-128, a claimant must prove by a preponderance of evidence (1) a prior permanent partial disability, (2) a second or subsequent injury which is compensable, causing permanent disability, and (3) the combination of permanent disabilities existing after such second or subsequent injury is substantially greater in degree or percentage than permanent disability from the second or subsequent injury, considered by itself and not in conjunction with the prior permanent disability."
Sherard v. Bethphage Mission, Inc., 236 Neb. 900, 908, 464 N.W.2d 343, 348 (1991), quoting Norris v. Iowa Beef Processors, 224 Neb. 867, 402 N.W.2d 658 (1987).
For a condition to constitute a preexisting permanent partial disability for which compensation can be recovered from the Second Injury Fund, the worker must have sustained at least a 25-percent loss of earning capacity. Neb.Rev.Stat. § 48-128 (Reissue 1988).
In this case, the compensation court found that the plaintiff's loss of earning capacity prior to the October 24, 1988, injury was not at least 25 percent. The record supports this finding.
The judgment is affirmed.
AFFIRMED.

=== CASE 2224428 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:21.832256+00 ===

193 Mich. App. 124 (1992)
483 N.W.2d 441
PEOPLE
v.
WATROBA
Docket No. 137168.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided February 18, 1992, at 9:25 A.M.
Frank J. Kelley, Attorney General, Gay Secor Hardy, Solicitor General, John D. O'Hair, Prosecuting Attorney, Timothy A. Baughman, Chief of Research, Training, and Appeals, and Olga Agnello, Assistant Prosecuting Attorney, for the people.
Edick & Esper, P.C. (by Robert E. Edick), for the defendant on appeal.
Before: WEAVER, P.J., and MICHAEL J. KELLY and MARILYN KELLY, JJ.
MICHAEL J. KELLY, J.
The people appeal by leave granted an order of the circuit court granting defendant's motion for postappeal relief. We reverse.
On June 29, 1979, defendant pleaded nolo contendere to charges of assault with intent to commit great bodily harm less than murder, MCL 750.84; MSA 28.279, and possession of a firearm during the commission of a felony, MCL 750.227b; MSA 28.424(2). In exchange for defendant's plea, the prosecutor withdrew a charge of assault with intent to commit murder, MCL 750.83; MSA 28.278, and the court agreed to sentence defendant to probation for the assault conviction and to grant an appeal bond while defendant challenged on appeal the constitutionality of the felony-firearm *126 statute. However, unbeknownst to defendant, the Michigan Supreme Court had four days earlier upheld the constitutionality of the statute. After sentencing and while defendant was released on bond and his appeal was pending before this Court, defendant fled the state and did not return until May 1990. His appeal before this Court was dismissed on October 9, 1980, for lack of progress.
Upon defendant's return to Michigan, he retained counsel and filed the claim for postappeal relief. Defendant sought to withdraw his plea on the ground that it was illusory. Defendant's position is that he would not have entered into the plea agreement or would have sought to withdraw his plea before sentencing if he had known that the Supreme Court had decided that the felony-firearm statute was constitutional. The circuit court agreed that defendant's plea was not given voluntarily and intelligently, and it granted defendant's motion for relief from judgment. The circuit court also remanded the case for a new preliminary examination. On appeal, the prosecution asks this Court to determine whether the trial court properly allowed defendant to withdraw his ten-year-old nolo contendere plea.
Subchapter 6.500 of the Michigan Court Rules establishes the procedures for pursuing postappeal relief from a criminal conviction. The subchapter is the exclusive means to challenge a conviction in Michigan once a defendant has exhausted the normal appellate process. Relief, however, may not be granted unless the defendant demonstrates (a) good cause for failure to have raised the grounds for relief on appeal or in a prior motion under the subchapter and (b) actual prejudice from the alleged irregularities that support the claim for relief. MCR 6.508(D)(3)(a) and (b). In this case, *127 defendant has failed to demonstrate good cause for his failure to raise the illusory plea argument in his appeal as of right or in a previous motion under this subchapter. The court may waive the good-cause requirement if it concludes that there is a significant possibility that the defendant is innocent of the crime. MCR 6.508(D)(3). No such possibility has been proffered or demonstrated in this case. Accordingly, we find that the circuit court erred in granting defendant's motion for postappeal relief. We therefore reverse the decision of the circuit court and order reinstatement of defendant's convictions.
Reversed.

=== CASE 2224432 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:21.91239+00 ===

483 N.W.2d 160 (1992)
Christopher MULLINS, Appellee,
v.
NORTH DAKOTA DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES, Appellant.
Civ. No. 910077.
Supreme Court of North Dakota.
March 19, 1992.
*161 Sidney J. Hertz Fiergola (argued), Asst. Atty. Gen., Bismarck, for appellant.
Gerry Gunderson (argued), of Wheeler Wolf, Bismarck, for appellee.
MESCHKE, Justice.
The North Dakota Department of Human Services appeals an order of the district court directing the Department to find Christopher Mullins "eligible for all developmental disability services if it is determined that he meets the definitional criteria contained in the North Dakota Century Code, without distinguishing between the mentally retarded or mentally ill." Because the Department now concedes that Christopher is developmentally disabled, and because Christopher acknowledges that the Department presently furnishes him with all appropriate services, we affirm.
Christopher Mullins is an adolescent of normal intelligence who is chronically mentally ill. His diagnoses include Tourette's syndrome,[1] attention deficit hyperactive disorder, schizophreniform disorder in remission, and aggressive conduct disorder  undersocialized type. Christopher needs daily medication to treat his illnesses and needs special education to deal with his uncontrolled behavior. He was first hospitalized at the North Dakota State Hospital; then from 1987-1990, he was at the Archbishop Gilfillan Residential Treatment Center in Bemidji, MN; and, since 1990, he has been living in a licensed foster home at Grafton, closer to his family's home in Minto.
Years ago, those helping Christopher began to seek developmental disability services for him from the Department. In 1986, Christopher, represented by Legal Assistance of North Dakota, asked the Federal District Court for North Dakota to include Christopher in the protected class of developmentally disabled persons entitled to receive services under the implementation order in Association for Retarded Citizens of North Dakota v. Olson, 561 F.Supp. 473 (D.N.D.1982), [A.R.C.], affirmed and remanded in part, 713 F.2d. 1384 (8th Cir. 1983). Inclusion in that protected class would have entitled Christopher to services, treatment, and habilitation, including food, clothing, shelter, medical care, and education, regardless of age or condition. 561 F.Supp. at 494.
The Federal District Court ruled that Christopher was developmentally disabled under both federal and state statutes  42 U.S.C. § 6001 and NDCC 25-01.2-01. Association For Retarded Citizens of North Dakota v. Sinner, 115 F.R.D. 28, 31-32 (D.N.D.1987). However, because Christopher is mentally ill, not mentally retarded, the Court ruled that he is not a member of the class protected in that implementation order. Id. at 32. The Court concluded that Christopher "qualifies for the services and techniques which are embodied in the `developmental model' of assistance," but was unwilling to redefine the protected class of mentally retarded persons to include those who are mentally ill. Id. Another reason that the Court refused Christopher class status was that "there was no showing that the residential educational program and the case management service presently provided to Christopher do not meet the necessary elements of a developmental model for his proper assistance." Id.
In 1987, assisted by representatives of the Protection and Advocacy Committee,[2] Christopher renewed his application to the Department for case-management services for the developmentally disabled. The Department denied that application, relying on the criteria in the Service Chapters of its Manual for identifying mentally retarded persons protected by the A.R.C. class action *162 decree. The Department ruled that Christopher is not mentally retarded, that he is not a member of the class protected by the A.R.C. decree, and that it is not necessary to determine whether Christopher is developmentally disabled. The Department reasoned that Christopher is of average intelligence, and that his disability, consisting of psychiatric disorders, is dissimilar to mental retardation.
On appeal, the district court reversed that decision by the Department, and remanded "with instructions to make a determination whether Christopher is `developmentally disabled' as defined under the statute, and to provide the appropriate services thereunder." The Department appealed to this court.
Christopher's appeal was consolidated with the appeals of two other applicants seeking case-management services from the Developmental Disabilities Division of the Department. The other applicants, too, had been denied services by the Department's application of the Service Chapters of its Manual for identifying mentally retarded persons protected by the A.R.C. decree. In that appeal, this court reasoned that the Department's reliance upon the criteria in the Service Chapters of its Manual "results in the inclusion or exclusion of applicants for case management services...." We ruled that the relevant parts of the Manual had not been adopted as rules, and hence were invalid and ineffective. Mullins v. North Dakota Department of Human Services, 454 N.W.2d 732 (N.D.1990). Accordingly, we affirmed the district court's judgment that reversed the Department's refusal to decide whether Christopher was developmentally disabled. We remanded with directions that the Department determine Christopher's eligibility for services under the relevant statute, NDCC 25-01.2-01(1), that defines "developmental disability".[3]
After remand, two multi-disciplinary meetings were conducted by the Department to evaluate Christopher's current treatment and continuing needs. Christopher's eligibility for developmental disability services was not addressed, and six months after remand, the Department had not yet acted on his eligibility. Impatient with this procrastination, counsel for Christopher moved the district court for an order directing the Department to show cause why it had not complied with the directions on remand. See Luithle v. Burleigh County Social Service, 474 N.W.2d 497 (N.D.1991) (The district court retains jurisdiction when an appeal of a decision by an administrative agency is remanded to the agency for reconsideration). The Department then notified Christopher's father that Christopher was not eligible for "Developmental Disabilities services" because he was not mentally retarded, and because "his needs were being met through existing behavioral interventions." Notwithstanding that determination, the court heard both sides on the show-cause question.
From testimony of Robert Sanderson, the Department's Regional Director of the Northeast Human Services Center at Grand Forks, and of Sandi Noble, Director of the Developmental Disability Division of the Department, the district court understood the Department's position to be that, because Christopher "is not mentally retarded, he is not eligible for certain services," particularly case-management services *163 from its Developmental Disability Division. The court ruled that the statute did not distinguish between those who are mentally retarded and thus developmentally disabled, on the one hand, and those who are mentally ill and thus developmentally disabled, on the other hand. The court drew this conclusion from the relevant statute that says:
All persons with developmental disabilities have a right to appropriate treatment, services, and habilitation for those disabilities. Treatment, services, and habilitation for developmentally disabled persons must be provided in the least restrictive appropriate setting.
NDCC 25-01.2-02 (1991). (Emphasis supplied). The court went on to say that the Department "must realize that it has to provide services to all developmentally disabled persons, not just those who are mentally retarded" and that "if [Christopher] is developmentally disabled, then he must be provided D[evelopmental] D[isability] services, which include case management services."
The district court reasoned that the Department "may not pick and choose who gets what services; it must provide the applicants for services with objective eligibility criteria before making such a decision." Because the Department determined Christopher's eligibility for developmental disability services "without some type of objective criteria," the court concluded that it acted arbitrarily, capriciously, and unreasonably. Therefore, the court directed that the Department "find [Christopher] eligible for all developmental disability services if it is determined that he meets the definitional criteria contained in the North Dakota Century Code, without distinguishing between the mentally retarded or mentally ill."
The Department appeals, declaring:
Although the Department asserted that it did not need to determine whether Mullins was developmentally disabled because appropriate services were provided and available to him, the Department ... now concede[s] that [Christopher] is developmentally disabled in order to put all the issues before this court.
The Department then argues that the district court "abused its discretion in requiring all D[evelopmental] D[isability] services to be provided to all developmentally disabled," and that, therefore, its decision should be reversed.
Because the Department says that it is furnishing appropriate services to Christopher primarily through educational placements, the Department asserts that it is discharging its duties to him as a person with developmental disabilities. The Department argues that additional services are neither necessary nor appropriate for Christopher. According to the Department, because it "stands ready, willing, and able to provide treatment, services, or habilitation that are appropriate to meet his needs," there is nothing more that the Department can be compelled to do for Christopher. The Department declares that it "does not have a duty to provide services without regard to cost," and that it "has the authority to determine which of its divisions should serve [Christopher], and which services are most appropriate for him".
The brief for Christopher on this appeal does little to respond to the Department's arguments here. Rather, Christopher simply argues that the Department failed to comply with the prior remand of this court, postponed action unduly, and arbitrarily distinguished between a mentally retarded person and a mentally ill person in furnishing services to Christopher. Christopher asks this court to "affirm the district court's decision, and to order that Christopher is eligible for developmental disability services (including case management) based upon the admission by the Department that Christopher is developmentally disabled."
The Department outlines for us those services, (within the "developmental model", it says), that it is furnishing to Christopher. Christopher receives special education services through the Education of the Handicapped Act. See 20 U.S.C. § 1400 et seq. Christopher has an individualized *164 education plan and receives special-education case-management. Christopher also receives foster care through the Department, having been transferred in 1990 from the Gilfillan Home at Bemidji, MN, to a licensed foster home in Grafton. According to the Department, this foster care furnishes Christopher access to his family on a regular basis, a form of case-management services, and appropriate services "in the least restrictive appropriate setting consistent with the developmental disability statute."[4] Additionally, the Department says that it has identified the mental health services appropriate for Christopher and his family, and has offered individual and family therapy, as well as clinical case-management, to them. Christopher does not dispute this description of services offered to him and received by him, although he persists in seeking case-management services through the Department's Developmental Disability Division.
Christopher simply argues that the Department was unjustifiably slow in designating his disability classification on remand. We agree that the Department unduly delayed and ignored Christopher's statutory eligibility for developmental disability services. Now, though, that question has been answered by the Department's concession that Christopher is developmentally disabled. Nothing more remains to be decided about Christopher's eligibility for services.
Instead, the Department would like to have us decide a different question about whether it is required to furnish equivalent services to all developmentally disabled persons directly through its Developmental Disabilities Division. We decline to do so. That question is beyond the scope of this appeal. Only Christopher's case, not a class action nor a declaratory judgment, is here.
The Department urges that developmental disabilities stem from a variety of conditions, not a singular diagnosis, which consequently must be addressed by a variety of treatments, not a singular program. Indeed, if we understand correctly, implicit in the concept of "case-management" is a method to identify and schedule the varied services appropriate for the individualized conditions of each developmentally disabled person. This argument, then, does little to advance the Department's position.
The Department argues that it is statutorily authorized to offer services to the developmentally disabled who are mentally ill through other divisions and other means than those used to serve the developmentally disabled who are mentally retarded.[5] Accordingly, the Department *165 says that it has chosen to serve the mentally retarded through its Developmental Disabilities Division, and to serve the mentally ill through its Mental Health Division.[6] Because Christopher is not mentally retarded, the Department explains that his services are not furnished through the Department's Developmental Disabilities Division, but instead are furnished in other ways. So long as there is no unreasonable discrimination in services to different categories of the developmentally disabled, this is an understandable explanation.
No unreasonable discrimination is presently evident here. During oral argument, counsel for Christopher acknowledged that there were no identifiable deficiencies in the services presently furnished to Christopher. This record indicates that Christopher is functioning satisfactorily both in school and in foster care. But, in the present framework of combined federal and state resources for the mentally ill, Christopher's special-education services will end, apparently, when Christopher reaches the age of twenty-one.[7] Thus, *166 Christopher's main concern seems to be about tomorrow, not today. In effect, Christopher seeks assurances that he will receive comparable treatment and services after he becomes an adult. The Department replies that it would expect to undertake other appropriate services for Christopher, if needed, when his special-education services end.
Because Christopher does not identify any specific deficiency in his current services and treatment, he virtually concedes that he is now served appropriately. Beyond that, it is not presently possible to judicially address Christopher's anxieties. For the future, under the Act for the Developmentally Disabled, "[e]very developmentally disabled person is entitled to enforce any of the rights guaranteed by this chapter by civil action or any other remedy available by common law or statute." NDCC 25-01.2-17. In these circumstances, we conclude that Christopher's concerns are not present questions. See In the Interest of C.W., 453 N.W.2d 806 (N.D.1990). Because there is no dispute ripe for legal review, we decline to address Christopher's future concerns.
The Department concedes that Christopher is developmentally disabled. For present purposes, Christopher acknowledges that he is being furnished appropriate services and treatment for his developmental disabilities. We decline to give advisory opinions on the other questions urged by the parties.
When an administrative agency decision is appealed to the district court and thereafter to this court, we review the decision of the agency. Speedway Inc. v. Job Service North Dakota, 454 N.W.2d 526 (N.D.1990). When we review an administrative decision, one of the requirements is that we determine whether the agency decision is in accordance with the law. NDCC 28-32-19(1). In making that determination, we look to the law and its application to the facts. Bickler v. North Dakota State Highway Commissioner, 423 N.W.2d 146 (N.D.1988). In this case, we conclude that the Department's decision refusing to classify Christopher as developmentally disabled was not in accordance with the law. However, because the Department now concedes that Christopher meets the statutory definition of a person developmentally disabled, and because Christopher acknowledges that the Department is presently furnishing him with all services appropriate to his disabilities, we conclude that the Department is now complying with the law as directed by the district court.
Accordingly, we affirm the district court.
ERICKSTAD, C.J., and LEVINE and VANDE WALLE, JJ., concur.
Justice H.F. GIERKE III, a member of the Court when this case was heard, resigned effective November 20, 1991, and did not participate in this decision. Justice JOHNSON not being a member of this Court at the time this case was heard did not participate in this decision.
NOTES
[1]  Tourette's syndrome is defined by Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary (Twenty-fifth edition; 1974), p. 1520:
A syndrome of facial and vocal tics with onset in childhood, progressing to generalized jerking movements in any part of the body, with echolalia and coprolalia; once thought to have an unfavorable prognosis but recently shown to be responsive to treatment with butyrophenones.
[2]  See NDCC Ch. 25-01.3 for the statutes authorizing activities of the committee on protection and advocacy for developmentally disabled persons.
[3]  The relevant statute, NDCC 25-01.2-01(1), says:
1. "Developmental disability" means a severe, chronic disability of a person which:
a. Is attributable to a mental or physical impairment or combination of mental and physical impairments;
b. Is manifested before the person attains age twenty-two;
c. Is likely to continue indefinitely;
d. Results in substantial functional limitations in three or more of the following areas of major life activity:
(1) Self-care;
(2) Receptive and expressive language;
(3) Learning;
(4) Mobility;
(5) Self-direction;
(6) Capacity for independent living; and
(7) Economic sufficiency; and
e. Reflects the person's needs for a combination and sequence of special, interdisciplinary, or generic care, treatment, or other services which are of lifelong or extended duration and are individually planned and coordinated.
[4]  NDCC 25-01.2-02 says:
Appropriate treatment, services, and habilitation Treatment in least restrictive appropriate setting. All persons with developmental disabilities have a right to appropriate treatment, services, and habilitation for those disabilities. Treatment, services, and habilitation for developmentally disabled persons must be provided in the least restrictive appropriate setting.
[5]  The Department cites statutes that state the scope of its powers and duties. NDCC 25-16-10 says:
Purchase of services. The department of human services may purchase from funds appropriated to it for that purpose, residential care, custody, treatment, training, and education for developmentally disabled persons from any treatment or care center for such persons licensed in this state.
NDCC 25-16-11 says:
Funds of state department of human services for purchasing residential care, custody, treatment, and education for developmentally disabled persons. All moneys received from appropriation by the legislative assembly to purchase residential care, custody, treatment, training, and education for developmental disabled persons from any treatment or care centers licensed in North Dakota must be kept by the state treasurer in a fund known as the "fund of the state department of human services for purchasing residential care, custody, treatment, training, and education for developmentally disabled persons", and all expenditures made under the provisions of this chapter must be upon warrants prepared by the office of management and budget and signed by the state auditor, such expenditures to be supported by vouchers to be signed by the executive director of the state department of human services or his agents, or by such other officer or assistants as the executive director may designate and certify to the office of management and budget. Any funds received from federal agencies must be deposited and disbursed in the manner provided by act of Congress or by the regulations of the federal agencies from which the funds were received.
NDCC 50-06-05.1 says, in part:
Powers and duties of the department. The department has the following powers and duties to be administered, with the advice of the board, by the department through its state office or through regional human service centers or otherwise as directed by it:
* * * * * *
14. To provide insofar as staff resources permit appropriate human services, including social histories, social or social-psychological evaluations, individual, group, family, and marital counseling, and related consultation, when referred by self, parent, guardian, county social service board, court, physician, or other individual or agency, and when application is made by self (if an adult or emancipated youth), parent, guardian, or agency having custody; also, on the same basis, to provide human services to children and adults in relation to their placement in or return from the developmental center at Grafton, state hospital, or North Dakota industrial school.
NDCC 50-06.2-03(3) says, in part:
Powers and duties of the state agency. The state agency has the following powers or duties under this chapter:
* * * * * *
3. To make available, through county agencies or human service centers, any or all of the services set out in the comprehensive human services plan on behalf of those individuals and families determined to be eligible for those services under criteria established by the state agency.
[6]  NDCC 50-06-06.5 says:
Continuum of services for chronically mentally ill individuals. The department of human services shall develop a plan for integrated, multidisciplinary continuum of services for chronically mentally ill individuals. The continuum may consist of an array of services provided by private mental health professionals, private agencies, county social service agencies, human service centers, community-based residential care and treatment facilities, and private and public inpatient psychiatric hospitals. To the extent feasible, access to the continuum must be through human service centers. Within the limits of legislative appropriations, the plan for a continuum may include:
1. Programs, and appropriate related facilities, to provide socialization skills.
2. Programs, and appropriate related facilities, to provide basic living skills.
3. Appropriate residential facilities.
4. Appropriate training, placement, and support to enhance potential for employment.
5. Appropriate delivery and control of necessary medication.
6. Appropriate economic assistance.
7. An inpatient facility with appropriate programs to respond to persons who require hospitalization.
The continuum of care must provide that a person requiring treatment be submitted to the least restrictive available conditions necessary to achieve the purposes of treatment. The department shall ensure appropriate cooperation with county social service agencies and private providers in achieving the continuum of care.
[7]  20 U.S.C. § 1412 says:
Eligibility requirements
In order to qualify for assistance under this part in any fiscal year, a State shall demonstrate to the Secretary that the following conditions are met:
* * * * * *
2. The State has developed a plan pursuant to section 613(b) [20 USCS § 1413(b) ] in effect prior to the date of the enactment of the Education for All Handicapped Children Act of 1975 [enacted Nov. 29, 1975] and submitted not later than August 21, 1975, which will be amended so as to comply with the provisions of this paragraph. Each such amended plan shall set forth in detail the policies and procedures which the State will undertake or has undertaken in order to assure that 
* * * * * *
(B) a free appropriate public education will be available for all handicapped children between the ages of three and eighteen within the State not later than September 1, 1978, and for all handicapped children between the ages of three and twenty-one within the State not later than September 1, 1980, except that, with respect to handicapped children aged three to five and aged eighteen to twenty-one, inclusive, the requirements of this clause shall not be applied in any State if the application of such requirement would be inconsistent with State law or practice, or the order of any court, respecting public education within such age groups in the State;
* * * * * *

=== CASE 9740661 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:39:47.582915+00 ===

CHIEF JUSTICE HARRISON delivered the opinion of the court: Defendant, Harold Richardson, was convicted of first degree murder (720 ILCS 5/9 — 1(a)(1) (West 1994)) and aggravated criminal sexual assault (720 ILCS 5/12— 14(a)(2) (West 1994)) following a bench trial in the circuit court of Cook County, and sentenced to consecutive prison terms of 34 and 6 years respectively. On direct appeal, defendant sought a new sentencing hearing, arguing that the trial court improperly considered multiple victim impact statements in violation of the Rights of Crime Victims and Witnesses Act (Act) (725 ILCS 120/1 et seq. (West 1998)), and that the provision of the Act prqhibiting its use as a ground for appellate relief was unconstitutional. The appellate court affirmed the judgment of the circuit court. No. 1 — 98—1348 (unpublished order under Supreme Court Rule 23). We allowed defendant’s petition for leave to appeal. 177 Ill. 2d R. 315. The evidence adduced at trial established that defendant and several others participated in the sexual assault, beating and strangulation of Nina Glover. At sentencing, the State presented the written victim impact statements of Glover’s two daughters and of her mother. Defendant argues before this court that the trial court’s consideration of three victim impact statements violates the plain language of the Act. We agree. “In the exercise of statutory construction, our primary task is to ascertain and effectuate the intent of the legislature.” People v. Pullen, 192 Ill. 2d 36, 42 (2000). The most reliable indicator of legislative intent is the language of the statute itself. People v. Robinson, 172 Ill. 2d 452, 457 (1996). The language of the statute must be given its plain and ordinary meaning, and where the language is clear and unambiguous, we have no occasion to resort to aids of statutory construction. Pullen, 192 Ill. 2d at 42. Further, a statute should be construed so that no word or phrase is rendered superfluous or meaningless. Kraft, Inc. v. Edgar, 138 Ill. 2d 178, 189 (1990). Because the construction of a statute is a question of law, our review is de novo. Robinson, 172 Ill. 2d at 457. Section 6(a) of the Act sets forth the right of the victim to present a victim impact statement for the court’s consideration at the sentencing of a defendant convicted of a violent crime. 725 ILCS 120/6(a) (West 1998). The statutory definition of “crime victim,” for purposes of section 6(a), includes “a single representative who may be the spouse, parent, child or sibling of a person killed as a result of a violent crime perpetrated against the person killed.” 725 ILCS 120/3(a)(3) (West 1998). It is therefore clear from the plain and unambiguous language of the statute that, while Nina Glover’s parent or either of her two children could have qualified as the “crime victim” under section 3(a)(3), the trial court did not comply with the Act where it accepted and considered the victim impact statements of all three persons rather than of “a single representative” of the deceased. 720 ILCS 120/3 (a) (3) (West 1998); see People v. Benford, 295 Ill. App. 3d 695, 700 (1998). Having found a violation of the statute, the issue before this court becomes whether the trial court’s improper consideration of multiple victim impact statements entitles defendant to a new sentencing hearing. Defendant acknowledges section 9 of the Act, which states: “Nothing in this Act shall create a basis for vacating a conviction or a ground for appellate relief in any criminal case.” 725 ILCS 120/9 (West 1998). Defendant contends that section 9 is unconstitutional because it violates two provisions of the Illinois Constitution of 1970, the separation of powers clause set forth in article II, section 1 (Ill. Const. 1970, art. II, § 1), and the right to appellate review guaranteed by article VI, section 6 (Ill. Const. 1970, art. VI, § 6). However, it is unnecessary to address these arguments because we find another provision of our state constitution dispositive of this issue. Article I, section 8.1, of the Illinois Constitution (the Amendment), an amendment adopted November 3, 1992, is entitled “Crime Victim’s Rights” and states, in part, that “[c]rime victims, as defined by law, shall have the following rights as provided by law: *** [t]he right to make a statement to the court at sentencing.” (Emphasis added;) Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, § 8.1(a)(4). Thus, here, because section 3(a)(3) of the Act defines “crime victim” to mean “a single representative *** of a person killed,” the Amendment would allow for only one victim impact statement to be made to the court at sentencing. 725 ILCS 120/3 (a) (3) (West 1998). However, like the Act, the Amendment further provides: “Nothing in this Section or in any law enacted under this Section shall be construed as creating a basis for vacating a conviction or a ground for appellate relief in any criminal case.” Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, § 8.1(d). Thus, defendant is prohibited by our constitution from seeking appellate relief on the ground that more than one victim impact statement was presented and considered at his sentencing. The United States Constitution does not require the states to grant appeals as of right to criminal defendants seeking to review alleged trial court errors. Evitls v. Lucey, 469 U.S. 387, 393, 83 L. Ed. 2d 821, 827, 105 S. Ct. 830, 834 (1985). Illinois, however, has granted criminal defendants the right to appeal “final judgments of a Circuit Court,” in article VI, section 6, of our state constitution. Ill. Const. 1970, art. VI, § 6. Thus, it is incumbent upon this court to harmonize, if practicable, article I, section 8.1(d), and article VI, section 6, which initially appear to be in conflict. See Oak Park Federal Savings & Loan Ass’n v. Village of Oak Park, 54 Ill. 2d 200, 203 (1973). All parts of the constitution must be construed together and, although one article or section is entitled to the same weight as any other article or section, the whole must be construed so that the general intent will prevail. People ex rel. Wellman v. Washburn, 410 Ill. 322, 328 (1951); see also Herget National Bank v. Kenney, 105 Ill. 2d 405, 410 (1985). Additionally, while one clause will not be allowed to defeat another if by any reasonable construction the two can be made to stand together (Oak Park, 54 Ill. 2d at 203), a specific constitutional provision will prevail over a general section if the two are incompatible (Walker v. State Board of Elections, 65 Ill. 2d 543, 556 (1976)). Further, as this court stated in Wellman: “The bill of rights incorporated in our constitution is a restatement and adoption of the very principles upon which our freedom is based and is generally admitted to be our greatest heritage. Where any act of the legislature or other provision of the constitution, in a particular case, tends to infringe upon the rights thus preserved, we must assume that it was the intent of the framers thereof that there should be no curtailment of such rights.” Wellman, 410 Ill. at 328-29. Considering the above stated principles, we find that article I, section 8.1(d), as part of the bill of rights and as the more specific provision, must be read as a limitation on the appellate jurisdiction granted by article VI, section 6. See In re Estate of Gebis, 186 Ill. 2d 188, 192 (1999). As the titles of the Amendment and the Act suggest, their drafters intended them to serve “as a shield to protect the rights of victims,” and expressly delineated that their provisions “not be used as a sword by criminal defendants seeking appellate relief.” See Benford, 295 Ill. App. 3d at 700. We therefore hold, based on its plain and explicit language, that article I, section 8.1(d), specifically removes victims’ rights from the spectrum of issues which a criminal defendant may appeal. Defendant agrees that section 8.1(d) operates to restrict appellate jurisdiction in criminal cases if the basis for relief is “any law enacted under” the Amendment. Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, § 8.1(d). However, defendant contends that section 3(a)(3) of the Act is not a law enacted “under” the Amendment because the statutory restriction on who constitutes a crime victim set forth in section 3(a)(3) precludes it from being a law that “ enforce [s] ” the Amendment, as required by section 8.1(b). Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, §§ 8.1(b), (d). We disagree. While section 8.1(b) states that “[t]he General Assembly may provide by law for the enforcement of this [Amendment],” this language does not establish a test for determining which pieces of legislation trigger the protections of section 8.1(d). Although section 3(a)(3) of the Act was amended effective January 1, 1994, to limit the definition of crime victim to “a single representative” of the deceased, section 3(a)(3) is still a law which enforces the Amendment. See 725 ILCS 120/3(a)(3) (West 1994). As we have noted, section 8.1(a) states that crime victims, “as defined by law,” are entitled to the rights set forth in the Amendment “as provided by law.” Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, § 8.1(a). Thus, defendant cannot avoid the constitutional preclusion of appellate relief by claiming that section 3(a)(3), a law defining “crime victim” as contemplated by section 8.1(a), was not enacted to enforce the Amendment. Finally, we believe it important to note that the prohibition on appellate relief for violations of the Act or the Amendment does not alleviate the trial court’s responsibility to exercise appropriate discretion at sentencing. This court has found that the Act does not require the consideration at sentencing of any and all victim impact evidence without regard for its relevance or materiality. See People v. Hope, 184 Ill. 2d 39, 49, 53 (1998) (the Act “does not contemplate, and we will not condone, an expansion of victim impact statements to include evidence from victims other than the victims of the offense on trial”; such evidence is irrelevant and therefore inadmissable). Indeed, the portion of the Act which provides that “[t]he court shall consider any statements made by the victim” is not mandatory in nature and does nothing to indicate what weight should be given to victim impact evidence, nor does it indicate what sentence should be imposed. 725 ILCS 120/6(a) (West 1998); People v. Felella, 131 Ill. 2d 525, 539 (1989). This court has further warned that Payne v. Tennessee, 501 U.S. 808, 115 L. Ed. 2d 720, Ill. S. Ct. 2597 (1991), which established the admissibility of victim impact evidence at sentencing, “ ‘ “does not give the prosecution a free rein to introduce and argue anything it wants.” ’ ” Hope, 184 Ill. 2d at 48, quoting People v. Mitchell, 152 Ill. 2d 274, 338 (1992). “ ‘In the event that evidence is introduced that is so unduly prejudicial that it renders the trial fundamentally unfair, the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment provides a mechanism for relief.’ ” Mitchell, 152 Ill. 2d at 338, quoting Payne, 501 U.S. at 825, 115 L. Ed. 2d at 735, 111 S. Ct. at 2608. In the instant case, however, defendant has not made a substantial showing that his right to due process was violated by the introduction of multiple victim impact statements at his sentencing. It is well established that where a sentencing hearing is conducted before the trial court rather than a jury, the court is presumed to consider only competent and relevant evidence in determining sentence. People v. Ashford, 168 Ill. 2d 494, 508 (1995). As the appellate court observed, the State herein did not argue the content of the three victim impact statements as a factor in aggravation and, although the trial court stated that it had read the same statements at a codefendant’s sentencing hearing, the court did not mention the statements when imposing defendant’s sentence. Therefore, we hold that while the trial court erred in admitting and considering multiple victim impact statements, defendant has offered nothing to support a finding that the statements unduly prejudiced the trial court such that defendant’s sentencing hearing was rendered fundamentally unfair. See Ashford, 168 Ill. 2d at 508. Accordingly and for the foregoing reasons, we affirm the judgment of the appellate court. Affirmed.

=== CASE 9740662 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:39:47.587448+00 ===

JUSTICE THOMAS, specially concurring: Although I agree with the majority that the judgment of the appellate court should be affirmed, I disagree with the majority’s conclusion that the trial court improperly considered three victim impact statements in violation of the plain language of the Rights of Crime Victims and Witnesses Act (Act) (725 ILCS 120/1 et seq. (West 1998)). As the majority recognizes, this court must look to the language of the statute itself to determine legislative intent, and must give the language of the statute its plain and ordinary meaning. 196 Ill. 2d at 228. In finding that the trial court improperly considered three victim impact statements, the majority focuses on section 3(a)(3) of the Act, which defines a crime victim as a “single representative” of the deceased. 725 ILCS 120/ 3(a)(3) (West 1998). Based upon that definition, the majority then concludes that the trial court “did not comply with the Act where it accepted and considered the victim impact statements of all three persons rather than of ‘a single representative’ of the deceased.” 196 Ill. 2d at 229, quoting 725 ILCS 120/3(a)(3) (West 1998). I believe that a plain reading of the statute compels a different conclusion in this case. Section 6(a) of the Act provides that where “a victim of [a] violent crime is present in the courtroom at the time of the sentencing ***, the victim upon his or her request shall have the right to address the court regarding the impact which the defendant’s criminal conduct *** has had upon the victim.” (Emphasis added.) 725 ILCS 120/6(a) (West 1998). Reading section 3(a)(3) of the Act together with section 6 of the Act, then, only a single representative of Nina Glover could have requested an opportunity to address the court at sentencing regarding the impact of defendant’s crime. Such a situation, however, was not presented in this case. Here, it was the State that presented the written victim impact statements of Nina Glover’s two daughters and her mother. 196 Ill. 2d at 228. I agree with Justice Miller, writing separately in a prior decision of this court, that section 6 of the Act “applies when the victim, on his or her own initiative, wishes to address the sentencing court; section 6 does not purport to limit the evidence that the prosecution may otherwise introduce in aggravation.” People v. Hope, 184 Ill. 2d 39, 55 (1998) (Miller, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). During the aggravation and mitigation phase of a sentencing hearing, a sentencing judge has wide discretion concerning the sources and types of evidence used to assist him in determining the kind and extent of punishment to be imposed. People v. Williams, 181 Ill. 2d 297, 322 (1998). The only limitation on the admission of evidence is that the evidence must be reliable and relevant. Williams, 181 Ill. 2d at 322. Because the three victim impact statements at issue in this case were introduced by the State in aggravation, section 6 of the Act did not limit the trial court’s consideration of those statements. To hold otherwise “threatens to severely limit the prosecution’s ability to present relevant, reliable evidence in aggravation” and “transforms what was designed to provide a benefit to victims and witnesses into a shield for their offenders.” Hope, 184 Ill. 2d at 56 (Miller, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). The trial court’s decision to admit multiple victim impact statements in this case was a matter of discretion. Of course, the trial court must exercise appropriate discretion at sentencing and must consider the relevance and materiality of victim impact evidence. 196 Ill. 2d at 232. There is no evidence in this case, however, that the trial court abused its discretion in considering the victim impact statements. Consequently, I believe that the trial court did not violate the Act when it considered multiple victim impact statements, and I disagree with the majority opinion to the extent that it holds to the contrary.

=== CASE 2224442 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:22.121524+00 ===

193 Mich. App. 137 (1991)
483 N.W.2d 622
ARNOLD
v.
STATE EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT BOARD
Docket No. 119537.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided December 6, 1991.
Approved for publication February 25, 1992, at 9:00 A.M.
Charfoos, Reiter, Peterson & Holmquist, P.C. (by James A. Reiter), for the petitioner.
Frank J. Kelley, Attorney General, Gay Secor Hardy, Solicitor General, Thomas L. Casey, Assistant Solicitor General, and Walter V. Kron and Michael J. Moquin, Assistant Attorneys General, for the respondent.
Before: MacKENZIE, P.J., and SAWYER and JANSEN, JJ.
PER CURIAM.
Petitioner appeals as of right from a Wayne Circuit Court order affirming the State Employees' Retirement Board's denial of her request for duty-disability benefits. We affirm.
*138 Section 21 of the State Employees' Retirement Act, MCL 38.21; MSA 3.981(21), provides in part:
Subject to the provisions of sections 33 and 34, upon the application of a member, or his department head, or the state personnel director, a member who becomes totally incapacitated for duty in the service of the state of Michigan without willful negligence on his part, by reason of a personal injury or disease, which the retirement board finds to have occurred as the natural and proximate result of the said member's actual performance of duty in the service of the state, shall be retired.
Disability retirement benefits under the statute are payable for injury or disease that occurs as the natural and proximate result of the claimant's actual performance of duty in the service of the state. Stoneburg v State Employees' Retirement System, 139 Mich App 794; 362 NW2d 878 (1984). The State Employees' Retirement Board determines whether a claimant's injuries were duty-related, and its decision must be affirmed on appeal if it is supported by competent, material, and substantial evidence on the entire record, provided the decision is not arbitrary, capricious, or clearly an abuse of discretion or otherwise affected by a substantial and material error of law. Buttleman v State Employees' Retirement System, 178 Mich App 688, 689-690; 444 NW2d 538 (1989).
In this case, it is essentially undisputed that petitioner suffers from chronic depression, that she was under stress from several sources, including her job, and that her depression was aggravated but not caused by her state employment. Petitioner contends that aggravation of her psychiatric condition is sufficient to entitle her to duty-disability benefits under § 21. We disagree.
Whether aggravation of a preexisting condition *139 is sufficient to support a claim for duty-disability retirement benefits was discussed in Buttleman, supra, where this Court upheld the retirement board's conclusion that aggravation of a preexisting condition was not sufficient to state a claim for duty-disability benefits under § 21. This Court stated:
[Section 21] is ambiguous in that it can support two interpretations: (1) that a claimant's incapacity must proximately result from actual performance of duty, or (2) that only the specific-event injury triggering onset of the disability must be the natural and proximate result of work-related duties. Accordingly, we defer to the statutory construction given by the retirement board as the enforcing agency. Howard Pore, Inc [v State Comm'r of Revenue, 322 Mich 49; 33 NW2d 657 (1948)]. The interpretation given by the retirement board makes duty-related proximate cause an element of a claimant's prima facie case for duty disability retirement benefits. MCL 38.21; MSA 3.981(21). See Stoneburg v State Employees' Retirement System, 139 Mich App 794, 800-801; 362 NW2d 878 (1984). Upholding this interpretation does not appear to conflict with legislative intent. Knauss [v State Employees' Retirement System, 143 Mich App 644; 372 NW2d 643 (1985)].
* * *
After reviewing the three depositions and numerous medical reports indicating that petitioner suffered from both kidney disease and degenerative lumbar-disc disease, the hearing examiner denied petitioner's claim to disability retirement benefits on the ground that petitioner's disability was caused by aggravation of a preexisting condition rather than directly by work-related causes. We must uphold the retirement board's decision because it is supported by competent, material and substantial evidence and was not arbitrary, capricious or clearly an abuse of discretion or legal error. [Buttleman, supra, p 690, 691.]
*140 The Buttleman Court upheld the denial of duty-disability benefits based on aggravation of a preexisting condition. In this case, petitioner requested duty-disability benefits based on aggravation of a preexisting condition, her depression. The evidence presented at the administrative hearing supports the retirement board's decision that petitioner's disability was caused by aggravation of a preexisting condition rather than directly by work-related causes. Consistent with Buttleman, we therefore uphold the retirement board's decision because aggravation of a preexisting condition is not sufficient to state a claim for duty-disability benefits under § 21 and because the board's decision was supported by competent, material, and substantial evidence and was not arbitrary, capricious, or clearly an abuse of discretion or a clear legal error.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 9740663 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:39:52.406756+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE HOMER delivered the opinion of the court: Pursuant to a partially negotiated plea agreement, defendant Tierrion D. Caruth pied guilty to home invasion (720 ILCS 5/12 — 11(a)(2) (West 1996)) in case 97 — CF—5224. He was subsequently tried by a jury and found guilty of residential burglary and aggravated criminal sexual assault (720 ILCS 5/19 — 3, 12 — 14(a)(1) (West 1996)) in case 97 — CF—5743. Following a joint sentencing hearing, defendant was sentenced to consecutive prison terms of 14, 20 and 25 years, respectively. The issues on appeal are (1) whether defendant was deprived of due process by the court’s use of closed circuit television at arraignment, (2) whether the trial court mistakenly believed that consecutive sentences were statutorily mandated for all three offenses, and (3) whether the consecutive sentence imposed for home invasion violated the rule of Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U.S. 466, 147 L. Ed. 2d 435, 120 S. Ct. 2348 (2000). For reasons that follow, we affirm defendant’s convictions and sentences. FACTS AND PROCEDURAL CONTEXT The record shows that the defendant appeared without objection by closed circuit television for his arraignment in case 97 — CF—5224 on October 22, 1997. He was likewise arraigned in case 97 — CF—5743 on October 31, 1997. In both cases, appointed counsel entered pleas of not guilty and waived a formal reading of the indictment. Defendant subsequently pied guilty in open court to one count of home invasion in case 97 — CF—5224 in exchange for the State’s agreement to dismiss three related counts in that case. The factual basis established that on September 20,1997, defendant broke into an apartment occupied by Shelly Wruk. He tied Wruk’s wrists and ankles together with a telephone extension cord and stole electronic equipment, credit cards and the contents of her wallet. Wruk suffered bruises to her wrists and ankles from being bound. The court admonished defendant and accepted his plea. On June 8, 1999, case 97 — CF—5743 proceeded to a jury trial. The evidence established that defendant broke into the home of Jacqueline Rizzo on August 27, 1997. He stabbed her in the hand with a knife and forced her to perform acts of fellatio and intercourse. He then tied Rizzo’s wrists and ankles together and proceeded to take jewelry, money, electronic equipment, video tapes and other items from her home. Rizzo reported the incident to the police after defendant left, and a rape kit was prepared at the hospital. DNA from semen on a vaginal swab matched defendant’s DNA. Based on the evidence, the jury found defendant guilty of aggravated criminal sexual assault and residential burglary, as charged. The two cases then proceeded to a joint sentencing hearing. The State urged the court to impose consecutive sentences for each of the three offenses, and defense counsel argued for concurrent sentences. The court imposed consecutive sentences totaling 59 years. Defendant’s posttrial and postsentencing motions were denied, and he appeals. ARRAIGNMENT VIA CLOSED CIRCUIT TELEVISION Defendant first argues that his constitutional right to be present in person at every critical stage of his trial was violated by the court’s use of closed circuit television during the proceedings to arraign him. In the alternative, he contends that the court erred by not complying with the statute requiring it to promulgate local rules for the use of closed circuit television. See 725 ILCS 5/106D — 1 (West 1998).  It is well settled that a defendant in a felony case has a right to be present at his arraignment. People v. Lindsey, 309 Ill. App. 3d 1031, 723 N.E.2d 841 (2000), appeal allowed, 189 Ill. 2d 670 (2000). However, the right to be present may be waived. Lindsey, 309 Ill. App. 3d 1031, 723 N.E.2d 841. Where a defendant appears by closed circuit television without objection, he is deemed to have consented to the procedure and thereby waives the issue on review unless plain error is shown. Lindsey, 309 Ill. App. 3d 1031, 723 N.E.2d 841.  A procedural defect is plain error if the evidence of guilt was closely balanced or if the defendant was deprived of a substantial right. People v. Keene, 169 Ill. 2d 1, 660 N.E.2d 901 (1995). A substantial right has been denied if the error affected the proceedings to such a degree that we cannot confidently state that the defendant’s trial was fundamentally fair. Keene, 169 Ill. 2d 1, 660 N.E.2d 901. In other words, this court will act on error that is of such gravity that it threatens the very integrity of the judicial process. People v. Blue, 189 Ill. 2d 99, 724 N.E.2d 920 (2000).  A defendant’s constitutional right to appear in person is not a substantial right in itself. People v. Bean, 137 Ill. 2d 65, 560 N.E.2d 258 (1990). Rather, it is a means of securing substantial due process rights that may be affected by the proceeding. Bean, 137 Ill. 2d 65, 560 N.E.2d 258 (1990). A defendant is constitutionally guaranteed the right to be present whenever his presence has a reasonably substantial relation to the fulness of his opportunity to defend against the charge. People v. Lofton, 194 Ill. 2d 40, 740 N.E.2d 782 (2000). Thus, at proceedings implicating the ultimate decision of guilt or innocence, a defendant’s appearance solely by closed circuit television may be considered plain error, regardless of the strength of the State’s evidence. See People v. Guttendorf, 309 Ill. App. 3d 1044, 723 N.E.2d 838 (2000).  In this case, defendant did not object to the use of the closed circuit television procedure. Further, the record does not support defendant’s claim that the use of the closed circuit procedure was plain error. Defendant does not argue that the evidence of guilt was closely balanced, and there is no indication that defendant did not understand the charges and penalties he faced. The arraignment proceedings were extremely brief, consisting only of counsel’s entry of not-guilty pleas and waivers of a formal reading of the indictments. Under the circumstances, we cannot say that the closed circuit procedure prejudiced defendant or impaired any substantial rights. We also reject defendant’s argument that the trial court committed reversible error by failing to comply with section 106D — 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963 (725 ILCS 5/106D — 1 (West 1998)). As aforesaid, defendant did not preserve the issue by objecting in the trial court. The evidence was not closely balanced; and, without any basis upon which to find that the fairness of proceedings to arraign defendant was impaired, the trial court’s rulemaking oversight was not plain error. See Lindsey, 309 Ill. App. 3d 1031, 723 N.E.2d 841. CONSECUTIVE SENTENCING  In his second argument, defendant contends that the trial judge erroneously believed that consecutive sentences for his home invasion and residential burglary convictions were mandatory. The State argues that this argument was waived or, in the alternative, the sentences were imposed pursuant to the court’s discretionary authority. Section 5 — 8—4 of the Unified Code of Corrections (730 ILCS 5/5 — 8—4 (West 1998)) controls the imposition of concurrent and consecutive sentences when a defendant is sentenced for multiple offenses. Generally, concurrent sentences must be imposed for offenses “committed as part of a single course of conduct during which there was no substantial change in the nature of the criminal objective.” 730 ILCS 5/5 — 8—4(a) (West 1998). However, consecutive sentencing is mandatory for certain triggering offenses, including aggravated criminal sexual assault. 730 ILCS 5/5 — 8—4(a), (b); 720 ILCS 5/12 — 14 (West 1998). In addition, subsection 5 — 8—4(b) grants discretionary authority to impose consecutive sentences for other offenses not committed as part of a single course of conduct where the court “is of the opinion that such a term is required to protect the public from further criminal conduct by the defendant.” 730 ILCS 5/5 — 8—4(b) (West 1998). In this case, defendant does not dispute that the statute mandated that he serve his sentence for aggravated criminal sexual assault consecutively to his sentences for residential burglary and home invasion. However, he argues, the trial judge’s comments indicate that he believed that the sentences for residential burglary and home invasion were mandatorily consecutive to each other as well. We disagree. Prior to imposing sentence, the court commented as follows: “In this society, in which it’s kind of a dangerous place, and when we’re out on the streets, whether we’re driving on the highways or whether we’re out in public, there’s all kinds of dangerous things that can happen; but, the one place that most of us feel that we are safe in is our own homes. *** [Ultimately we want to feel that there’s someplace where we can be that we are going to be safe. And clearly Ms. Wruk and Ms. Rizzo had that right, as all of us do, *** to be safe, and it is very important that there be a sentence that will deter others from doing this kind of crime.” The court then imposed a 14-year sentence for home invasion in case 97 — CF—5224. Turning next to case 97 — CF—5743, the court imposed a 25-year sentence for aggravated criminal sexual assault, noting that this sentence was required to be served consecutively to both residential burglary and home invasion. Finally, the court imposed a 20-year sentence for residential burglary and stated that this sentence would be served consecutively for home invasion “in the other case.” Based on our careful review of the trial court’s comments and the context in which they were made, we believe that the court imposed consecutive sentences for residential burglary and home invasion pursuant to its discretionary authority under section 5 — 8—4(b). Prior to pronouncing sentence for home invasion, the court expressed great concern about the need to protect the public from the kind of offenses defendant committed against the victims in these cases. Protecting the public from a defendant’s criminal conduct is a consideration that comes into play when the court is proceeding under section 5 — 8— 4(b). It. is not a factor under the mandatory provisions of section 5 — 8—4(a). The court’s comments supported its decision to impose a consecutive sentence pursuant to section 5 — 8—4(b). Accordingly, we reject defendant’s statutory challenge to his consecutive sentences. CONSTITUTIONALITY OF SENTENCING STATUTE During the pendency of the appeal, the defendant was granted leave to add an issue attacking the constitutionality of the consecutive sentencing statute. Both parties have presented persuasive arguments for their respective positions. Defendant argues that section 5 — 8— 4(b) unconstitutionally allows the trial judge to increase the penalty for multiple offenses upon finding that consecutive sentences are required to protect the public. In support of his position, defendant cites Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U.S. 466, 147 L. Ed. 2d 435, 120 S. Ct. 2348 (2000), and People v. Clifton, 321 Ill. App. 3d 707 (2000). See also People v. Wilder, 321 Ill. App. 3d 608 (2001). Defendant acknowledges that the Illinois Appellate Court has upheld consecutive sentencing under section 5 — 8—4(a) in other cases. See, e.g., People v. Sutherland, 317 Ill. App. 3d 1117, 743 N.E.2d 1017 (2000), appeal denied, 195 Ill. 2d 594 (2001); People v. Primm, 319 Ill. App. 3d 411 (2000); People v. Maiden, 318 Ill. App. 3d 545, 743 N.E.2d 1052 (2001); see also People v. Lucas, 321 Ill. App. 3d 49 (2001). However, he urges this court to follow the reasoning of Clifton and its progeny. The State, relying on the latter cases, argues that Apprendi does not apply to consecutive sentencing, and the factors that the court must find to impose a discretionary sentence under section 5 — 8—4(b) are not elements of the underlying offenses. In Apprendi, the Supreme Court held that a New Jersey hate crime statute violated the defendant’s right to due process, because the defendant’s sentence was enhanced upon the trial judge’s determination that the underlying offense was racially motivated. The Court ruled that, “[ojther than the fact of a prior conviction, any fact that increases the penalty for a crime beyond the prescribed statutory maximum must be submitted to a jury, and proved beyond a reasonable doubt.” Apprendi, 530 U.S. at 490, 147 L. Ed. 2d at 455, 120 S. Ct. at 2362-63. Subsequently, in Clifton, Apprendi was applied to Illinois’ consecutive sentencing statute. At issue in Clifton was the constitutionality of section 5 — 8—4(a), which mandates consecutive sentences where offenses are committed as part of a single course of conduct, one of the offenses is a Class 1 or Class X felony, “and the defendant inflicted severe bodily injury.” 730 ILCS 5/5 — 8—4(a) (West 1998). The Clifton court observed that, regardless of the propriety of each discrete sentence imposed, the effect of the consecutive sentencing statute was to increase the collective penalty based on the judge’s finding that the defendant inflicted serious bodily injury. Clifton, 321 Ill. App. 3d at 727-28. Pursuant to Apprendi, the Clifton court ruled that consecutive sentences under section 5 — 8—4(a) could not be imposed unless the issue of severe bodily injury was submitted to a jury and proved beyond a reasonable doubt. Clifton, 321 Ill. App. 3d at 725-28. More recently, another panel of the Illinois Appellate Court extended Clifton to section 5 — 8—4(b). Wilder, 321 Ill. App. 3d 608. The Wilder court observed that to impose consecutive sentences under section 5 — 8—4(b), the court must determine: (1) that the offenses were not carried out in a single course of conduct, and (2) considering the nature and circumstances of the offense and the history and character of the defendant, that consecutive sentences are required to protect the public from further criminal conduct by the defendant. The court found that both determinations were factual findings which violated the rule of Apprendi. Wilder, 321 Ill. App. 3d 608. In the meantime, other panels of the Illinois Appellate Court have upheld the consecutive sentencing statute. In Sutherland, the court first ruled that consecutive sentencing did not increase the defendant’s punishment for each offense beyond the prescribed statutory maximum. Sutherland, 317 Ill. App. 3d at 1131, 743 N.E.2d at 1017. The court also observed that, unlike the mental element at issue in Apprendi, “severe bodily injury” was not an essential element of the offense. Moreover, the court noted, Sutherland did not claim that he was unaware that he faced potential consecutive sentences. Sutherland, 317 Ill. App. 3d at 1131, 743 N.E.2d at 1018. Accordingly, the court rejected Clifton and upheld Sutherland’s sentences. Sutherland, 317 Ill. App. 3d at 1131, 743 N.E.2d at 1018. A Second District panel of the Illinois Appellate Court subsequently applied a rationale similar to Sutherland and rejected the defendant’s contention that Apprendi applied to the finding of a “single course of conduct” under section 5_8 — 4(a). Maiden, 318 Ill. App. 3d at 550, 743 N.E.2d at 1055. Finally, another First District panel embraced Sutherland and Maiden in another challenge to the trial court’s finding of a “single course of conduct” under section 5 — 8—4(a). Lucas, 321 Ill. App. 3d 49. In Lucas, the court noted that the Court in Apprendi had expressly declined to consider the constitutionality of consecutive sentencing. Unwilling to extend Apprendi beyond sentencing enhancement legislation, the Lucas court rejected the reasoning of Clifton and its progeny and concluded that the defendant’s consecutive sentences should stand. Lucas, 321 Ill. App. 3d 49.  Based on our review of the statute at issue and relevant cases, we now reject defendant’s constitutional challenge to his consecutive sentences. In so deciding, we respectfully reject the court’s rationale in Wilder, the only reported decision directly ruling on the constitutionality of section 5 — 8—4(b). In our opinion, Sutherland and its progeny represent a proper application of the Apprendi rule. While, as a practical matter, a defendant certainly is exposed to a longer period of imprisonment when consecutive sentences are imposed based on the court’s assessment of the relevant sentencing considerations (see Clifton, 321 Ill. App. 3d 707; Wilder, 321 Ill. App. 3d 608), we do not believe that due process guarantees are offended by this state’s consecutive sentencing statute (see Sutherland, 317 Ill. App. 3d 1117, 743 N.E.2d 1007; Maiden, 318 Ill. App. 3d 545, 743 N.E.2d 1052; Lucas, 321 Ill. App. 3d 49). Enhanced sentencing factors, such as the factor considered in Apprendi, increase the sentencing range for a particular offense, effectively elevating the offense to a new, enhanced version of the offense for which the defendant was convicted. According to Apprendi, due process is denied if the defendant was not given notice and full trial rights with respect to every element of the enhanced version of the offense (other than recidivism), including the enhancement factor. See Apprendi, 530 U.S. 466, 147 L. Ed. 2d 435, 120 S. Ct. 2348 (2000); People v. Thurow, 318 Ill. App. 3d 128, 742 N.E.2d 880 (2001). Conversely, where a defendant faces sentencing for multiple offenses and each discrete sentence falls within the range for the offenses of which the defendant was convicted, we see no unfairness in allowing the court to determine that the sentences should be served consecutively pursuant to section 5 — 8—4. The consecutive sentencing statute does not change the sentencing range for an offense after trial. Particularly where, as here, the record does not indicate that the defendant was unaware that he faced potential consecutive sentences, he would be hard-pressed to show that the statute deprived him of fair notice. See Sutherland, 317 Ill. App. 3d 1117, 743 N.E.2d 1007. We also believe it significant that the Court could have considered, but chose not to consider, consecutive sentencing under the New Jersey statute in Apprendi. See Lucas, 321 Ill. App. 3d 49. In sum, we decline to extend Apprendi to section 5 — 8—4(b). We agree with Sutherland and its progeny that extending Apprendi so as to invalidate this state’s consecutive sentencing statute is neither required nor advisable. Accordingly, we affirm defendant’s consecutive sentences. CONCLUSION For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the judgment of the circuit court of Will County. Affirmed. LYTTON, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9740664 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:39:52.411221+00 ===

JUSTICE SLATER, dissenting: I must dissent from that aspect of the majority’s decision upholding the constitutionality of section 5 — 8—4(b) of the Unified Code of Corrections (Code) (730 ILCS 5/5 — 8—4(b) (West 1998)). Contrary to the majority’s opinion, I do not believe that the issue before us is whether the rationale for the United States Supreme Court’s decision in Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U.S. 466, 147 L. Ed. 2d 435, 120 S. Ct. 2348 (2000), should be extended to invalidate the particular Code provision in controversy. Rather, I believe the question before us is whether section 5 — 8—4(b) can survive a faithful application of the holding in that case. In Apprendi, the Supreme Court expressed its holding in the following manner: “Other than the fact of a prior conviction, any fact that increases the penalty for a crime beyond the prescribed statutory maximum must be submitted to a jury, and proved beyond a reasonable doubt. With that exception, we endorse the statement of the rule set forth in the concurring opinions in [Jones v. United States, 526 U.S. 227, 143 L. Ed. 2d 311, 119 S. Ct. 1215 (1999)]: ‘[I]t is unconstitutional for a legislature to remove from the jury the assessment of facts that increase the prescribed range of penalties to which a criminal defendant is exposed. It is equally clear that such facts must be established by proof beyond a reasonable doubt.’ ” Apprendi, 530 U.S. at 490, 147 L. Ed. 2d at 455, 120 S. Ct. at 2362-63, quoting Jones, 526 U.S. at 252-53, 143 L. Ed. 2d at 332, 119 S. Ct. at 1228-29 (Stevens, J., concurring). Section 5 — 8—4(b) allows the trial court to find facts permitting the imposition of consecutive sentences. Absent this postverdict fact finding, the defendant would receive concurrent sentences. I believe reality and logic demand that we recognize that consecutive sentencing exposes a defendant to an increased penalty. Accordingly, section . 5 — 8—4(b) permits the trial court, after the jury has rendered its verdict, to find facts that expose the defendant to an increased range of punishment. Thus, section 5 — 8—4(b) authorizes the very thing that the Apprendi Court holds is contrary to a criminal defendant’s rights under the fifth and sixth amendments. Section 5 — 8—4(b) is, therefore, unconstitutional. As I understand it, the majority arrives at the contrary conclusion based on the following three propositions: (1) where a defendant is sentenced for multiple offenses, the rule in Apprendi is not violated so long as each term of imprisonment falls within the statutory .sentencing range prescribed for each corresponding offense; (2) the Supreme Court “could have, but chose not to consider consecutive sentencing” in Apprendi-, and (3) the rule oí Apprendi is somehow inoperable if the defendant cannot demonstrate that he was ignorant that the trial court might impose consecutive sentences based on its postverdict fact finding. With respect to the first proposition, the majority discovers a limitation to the Apprendi holding that is absent from the text of the Apprendi majority opinion. In addition to the paucity of textual support, the limitation fashioned by the majority lacks a cogent rationale. Indeed, it is a strange rule that a trial court may not impose a sentence for a single offense greater than the statutory maximum authorized by the jury’s verdict, but the trial court may impose, through its own postverdict fact finding, multiple consecutive sentences for multiple offenses where the jury’s verdict only authorizes concurrent sentences. As for the second proposition, contrary to the majority’s claim, the United States Supreme Court in Apprendi did not “expressly decline[ ] to consider the constitutionality of consecutive sentencing.” 322 111. App. 3d at 233. Rather, the Supreme Court was not presented with the question. The defendant in Apprendi did not receive consecutive sentences. The only mention of consecutive sentencing in the Apprendi majority opinion comes in the following context: “It is appropriate to begin by explaining why certain aspects of the case are not relevant to the narrow issue that we must resolve. First, the State has argued that even without the trial judge’s finding of racial bias, the judge could have imposed consecutive sentences on counts 3 and 18 that would have produced the 12-year term of imprisonment that Apprendi received; Apprendi’s actual sentence was thus within the range authorized by statute for the three offenses to which he pleaded guilty. [Citation.] The constitutional question, however, is whether the 12-year sentence imposed on count 18 was permissible, given that it was above the 10-year maximum for the offense charged in that count. The finding is legally significant because it increased — indeed, it doubled — the maximum range within which the judge could exercise his discretion, converting what otherwise was a maximum 10-year sentence on that count into a minimum sentence. The sentences on counts 3 and 22 have no more relevance to our disposition than the dismissal of the remaining 18 counts.” Apprendi, 530 U.S. at 474, 147 L. Ed. 2d at 445, 120 S. Ct. at 2354. A fair reading of the foregoing passage simply does not permit an inference that the Supreme Court was expressly reserving the question of how the general principles enunciated in the rest of its opinion might apply to consecutive sentencing. Finally, I must take issue with the third and last pillar supporting the unstable edifice of the majority’s decision. The majority notes that “where, as here, the record does not indicate that the defendant was unaware that he faced potential consecutive sentences, he would be hard-pressed to show that the statute deprived him of fair notice.” 322 111. App. 3d at 233. While this observation may satisfy the majority’s concerns regarding notice of the potential penalties, it does nothing to address the fact that defendant was deprived of his Sixth Amendment right to a jury determination of facts that exposed him to a substantially greater range of punishment. Accordingly, because I would hold that section 5 — 8—4(b) of the Code is unconstitutional under the U.S. Supreme Court’s decision in Apprendi, I dissent.

=== CASE 9740665 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:39:52.658385+00 ===

Per Curiam.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
William C. Green appeals his jury conviction of two counts of third degree assault on an officer, a Class IV felony in violation of Neb. Rev. Stat. § 28-931(1) (Reissue 1989), and the resulting enhanced sentence of 10 years’ imprisonment on each count (to be served concurrently), with credit given for 138 days served. Third degree assault is punishable by no more than 5 years’ imprisonment, a $10,000 fine, or both; however, the court found that appellant was a habitual criminal under Neb. Rev. Stat. § 29-2221 (Reissue 1989).
FACTS
On August 25, 1989, Officer Stahlhut and Investigator Doetker arrived at the county jail to interview appellant Green and to obtain physical evidence on Green, who was being held at the jail on other charges. As Doetker was beginning to read appellant the Miranda warnings, appellant rose from his seat and started to leave the interviewing room. Stahlhut grabbed *640the appellant by the arm. Green jerked away and hit the officer with his right forearm. The officer attempted to grab Green again, at which time Green poked the officer under his right eye with his fingers. As the investigator approached the pair to assist, Green attempted to punch the investigator in the abdomen.
Two jailers responded to the scuffle and shocked the appellant four times with a stun gun.
ASSIGNMENTS OF ERROR
Green alleges, in summary, that the district court erred in (1) overruling his motion to suppress evidence; (2) finding, based upon insufficient evidence, that he was a habitual criminal; and (3) sustaining the verdicts on insufficient evidence.
DISCUSSION
We address first appellant’s contention that his motion to suppress certain evidence at trial should have been sustained. The Supreme Court will uphold the trial court’s ruling on a motion to suppress unless such ruling is clearly erroneous. State v. Victor, 235 Neb. 770, 457 N.W.2d 431 (1990); State v. Juhl, 234 Neb. 33, 449 N.W.2d 202 (1989).
Appellant essentially contends that since he had been arrested and his custody had been transferred to correctional personnel and not the officers, the officers had no right to try to stop him from exiting the jail’s interviewing room, which violated his Fourth Amendment rights and constituted an illegal seizure of his person. Appellant then hypothesized, in accordance with the “fruit of the poisonous tree” doctrine (see Wong Sun v. United States, 371 U.S. 471, 83 S. Ct. 407, 9 L. Ed. 2d 441 (1963)), that all of the officers’ observations after that point ought to be suppressed.
We have iterated several times that while it is true that prisoners do not forfeit all of their Fourth Amendment rights during incarceration, they do not retain the same measure of protection afforded to nonincarcerated individuals. See, State v. Starks, 229 Neb. 482, 427 N.W.2d 297 (1988); State v. Kerns, 201 Neb. 617, 271 N.W.2d 48 (1978). No new arrest occurred upon the officers’ commencement of the interview. Appellant Green thus had no constitutional basis to contest the identity of *641the party assigned to hold him by the arresting authority. See, also, State v. McCarthy, 197 Conn. 247, 496 A.2d 513 (1985), as quoted by this court in Starks. The assignment is without merit.
We next address the sufficiency of the evidence in finding that appellant is a habitual criminal. In support of his assertion, appellant cites, generally, Boykin v. Alabama, 395 U.S. 238, 89 S. Ct. 1709, 23 L. Ed. 2d 274 (1969), and Gonzales v. Grammer, 848 F.2d 894 (8th Cir. 1988).
However, in evaluating previous habitual criminal convictions, we have held that to prove a prior conviction for enhancement purposes, the State need only show that at the time of the prior conviction the defendant had, or waived, counsel. State v. Oliver, 230 Neb. 864, 434 N.W.2d 293 (1989). The record reflects that Green was indeed represented by appointed counsel at the time of his prior convictions. The assignment is without merit, and the habitual criminal conviction is affirmed.
A jury’s verdict must be sustained if the evidence, viewed in the light most favorable to the State, is sufficient to support the verdict. State v. Ryan, 233 Neb. 74, 444 N.W.2d 610 (1989). Appellant asserts that neither the officer nor the detective had bruises or visible injuries and that the record reflects that appellant only “attempted” to punch the investigator in the abdomen. Thus, he argues, the evidence is insufficient to sustain the convictions.
Appellant’s assertion, while somewhat creative, has no basis in reality. We have never required that an assault culminate in visible markings in order to be labeled as such. In fact, for third degree assault on a police officer, § 28-931(1) requires knowing, intentional, or reckless causation of bodily injury to a peace officer while the officer is engaged in the performance of official duties. The record supports the appellant’s convictions. We accordingly affirm.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 2224453 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:22.352622+00 ===

193 Mich. App. 348 (1992)
483 N.W.2d 416
JONES & LAUGHLIN STEEL CORPORATION
v.
CITY OF WARREN
Docket No. 119309.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided January 10, 1992.
Approved for publication March 25, 1992, at 9:15 A.M.
Bodman, Longley & Dahling (by John C. Cashen), for Jones & Laughlin Steel Corporation.
W. Thomas Marrocco, Jr., for City of Warren.
Clark, Hardy, Lewis, Pollard & Page, P.C. (by Neil H. Goodman), for Fitzgerald Public Schools.
Before: MARILYN KELLY, P.J., and WAHLS and FITZGERALD, JJ.
PER CURIAM.
Petitioner Jones & Laughlin Steel Corporation appeals as of right from a judgment of the Michigan Tax Tribunal that dismissed petitioner's *350 appeal concerning the true cash value and lawful assessed value for tax year 1983 of personal property located at its facility in the City of Warren. We reverse and remand this case to the Tax Tribunal for further findings of fact and an independent assessment of true cash value.
The relevant tax date was December 31, 1982. Petitioner's personal property was originally assigned an assessed value on the roll for tax year 1983 of $4,933,100. Petitioner unsuccessfully protested the assessment to the local board of review and then sought review by the Tax Tribunal. After the tribunal ordered a continuance following bankruptcy proceedings involving petitioner, a hearing was held in April 1988. The parties stipulated to the value of the real property at the Warren facility and submitted proofs with respect to the value of the personal property. The main point of disagreement concerned the facility's blooming mill and billet mill, which together represented a substantial portion, if not most, of the total value of the personal property.[1]
Petitioner's proofs showed that the use of blooming and billet mills in steel production was no longer the most cost-advantageous method and that there is increasing use of the more efficient continuous-casting method of fabricating steel. Furthermore, 1982 was a difficult year for the steel industry, and in the last quarter of 1982 petitioner was operating at forty-six percent of capacity and sustaining a monthly loss of approximately $1 million. In November 1982, petitioner purchased an idle continuous-casting facility in Pennsylvania and made plans to sell or close the *351 Warren facility. Efforts to sell the Warren facility began and operations there ceased in May 1983. The facility was purchased in September 1983 by Youngstown Industrial, a machinery dealer and real estate developer, which hoped to find a buyer who would use the facility for steel production, or, failing that, planned to demolish the facility and redevelop the land. Youngstown Industrial paid petitioner $1,001,000 for the facility's equipment, including the mills. According to a Youngstown employee, prospective buyers did not desire the entire facility because it was obsolete. Although Youngstown was able to sell a portion of the blooming mill for $30,000, the remainder of the blooming mill and the billet mill were eventually sold as scrap. Gross proceeds from all equipment and scrap sales totaled $420,000. Petitioner's proofs also included an appraisal, prepared in anticipation of the sale of the facility, that valued the blooming and billet mills together at $500,000. According to the appraiser, his research found only two comparable sales of blooming mills. These mills had sold for approximately twice their scrap value. Petitioner argued that true cash value was shown by the sale price of its equipment to Youngstown, plus original cost-less-depreciation estimates of other property not included in the Youngstown sale but owned or leased by petitioner on the tax date. Petitioner's estimate of true cash value was $2,331,866.
The respondent city's proofs were based on an application of the original cost multipliers found in the Tax Assessor's Manual to petitioner's equipment. According to the city's application of the assessor's manual, the true cash value of petitioner's personal property, including the mills, on December 31, 1982, was $9,466,000. This figure was based on the use of the long-life, in-use table *352 of multipliers. Petitioner argued that the correct long-life multiplier to use for the mills was that applicable to surplus equipment, which, according to petitioner's calculations, would have resulted in a total true cash value of $3,118,800. Another estimate of true cash value submitted by the respondent school district, which was greater than the city's estimate, was rejected by the Tax Tribunal on the ground that it did not adequately account for the depreciation and obsolescence of the blooming mill.
The Tax Tribunal held that petitioner did not present sufficient evidence to allow it to make an independent determination of true cash value and that petitioner therefore had failed to meet its burden of proof. The tribunal also held that, because there was no evidence that the blooming mill was not in use on the tax date, the city's use of the in-use multiplier, rather than the surplus multiplier, in its assessment was proper. The tribunal then accepted the city's true cash value estimate of $9,466,000 and assessment of $4,773,000, apparently for the reason that petitioner had not met its burden of proof. This appeal followed.
This Court's review of a decision of the Tax Tribunal is limited. When fraud is not alleged, we ask whether the Tax Tribunal committed an error of law or adopted a wrong principle. Const 1963, art 6, § 28; William Mueller & Sons, Inc v Dep't of Treasury, 189 Mich App 570, 572; 473 NW2d 783 (1991). We will accept the tribunal's factual findings as final, provided they are supported by competent, material, and substantial evidence. Antisdale v City of Galesburg, 420 Mich 265, 277; 362 NW2d 632 (1984); Dow Chemical Co v Dep't of Treasury, 185 Mich App 458, 462-463; 462 NW2d 765 (1990). Substantial evidence must be more *353 than a scintilla of evidence, although it may be substantially less than a preponderance of the evidence. Id. at 463; Russo v Dep't of Licensing & Regulation, 119 Mich App 624, 631; 326 NW2d 583 (1982).
The Tax Tribunal is under a duty to apply its expertise to the facts of a case to determine the appropriate method of arriving at the true cash value of property, utilizing an approach that provides the most accurate valuation under the circumstances. Antisdale, supra at 277; Teledyne Continental Motors v Muskegon Twp, 163 Mich App 188, 193; 413 NW2d 700 (1987). True cash value is synonymous with fair market value. MCL 211.27; MSA 7.27. Regardless of the approach selected, the value determined must represent the usual price for which the subject property would sell. Meadowlanes Ltd Dividend Housing Ass'n v City of Holland, 437 Mich 473, 485; 473 NW2d 636 (1991). The three most common approaches to valuation are the capitalization-of-income approach, the sales-comparison or market approach, and the cost-less-depreciation approach. Id. at 484-485. Only the latter two methods were applied in the present case. The burden of proof was on petitioner to establish the true cash value of the property. MCL 205.737(3); MSA 7.650(37)(3).
The market approach is the only valuation method that directly reflects the balance of supply and demand for property in marketplace trading. Antisdale, supra at 277-278, n 1; Teledyne Continental Motors, supra at 193. Petitioner's proofs regarding the $1,001,000 sale of its equipment to Youngstown Industrial was intended to show the relatively small value the marketplace put on aging steelmaking equipment, including the mills. The Tax Tribunal, however, erred as a matter of law in its treatment of petitioner's evidence regarding *354 the sale. The tribunal held: "A sale that occurs after the tax date has little or no bearing on the assessment made prior to the sale." (Emphasis in original.)
We disagree. Unlike some situations involving assessments of industrial property for which no ready market exists and a hypothetical buyer must be posited,[2] in this case the equipment was actually sold in a commercial transaction, albeit after the tax date. We believe that evidence of the price at which an item of property actually sold is most certainly relevant evidence of its value at an earlier time within the meaning of the term "relevant evidence." MRE 401. Although the sale to Youngstown Industrial occurred approximately nine months after the tax date, the lapse in time is important only with respect to the weight that should be given the evidence, not to the relevance of the evidence. While the tribunal correctly noted that the sale price of a particular piece of property does not control its determination of the value of that property, Antisdale, supra at 278, the tribunal's opinion that the evidence "has little or no bearing" on the property's earlier value suggests that the evidence was rejected out of hand. Such cursory rejection would be erroneous.
The tribunal further erred in failing to make an independent determination of the true cash value of the property. The tribunal apparently believed that no such determination was necessary after it concluded that petitioner had failed to meet its burden of proof and dismissed petitioner's appeal. The tribunal correctly noted that the burden of proof was on petitioner, MCL 205.737(3); MSA 7.650(37)(3). This burden encompasses two separate *355 concepts: (1) the burden of persuasion, which does not shift during the course of the hearing; and (2) the burden of going forward with the evidence, which may shift to the opposing party. Kar v Hogan, 399 Mich 529, 539-540; 251 NW2d 77 (1976); Holy Spirit Ass'n For the Unification of World Christianity v Dep't of Treasury, 131 Mich App 743, 752; 347 NW2d 707 (1984). The tribunal's decision, however, seems analogous to the entry of a directed verdict upon the failure of a plaintiff's proofs. To the extent this analogy may be accurate in this case, the entry of judgment against petitioner for its failure to provide sufficient evidence was erroneous because, while petitioner may not have met its burden of persuasion, it did meet its burden of going forward with evidence.
Even if the tribunal had correctly concluded that petitioner's proofs had failed, the tribunal still would be required to make an independent determination of the true cash value of the property. The tribunal may not automatically accept a respondent's assessment, but must make its own findings of fact and arrive at a legally supportable true cash value. Pinelake Housing Cooperative v Ann Arbor, 159 Mich App 208, 220; 406 NW2d 832 (1987); Consolidated Aluminum Corp v Richmond Twp, 88 Mich App 229, 232-233; 276 NW2d 566 (1979). In this case, the tribunal did consider whether the in-use multiplier or the surplus multiplier should have been used in respondent's costless-depreciation assessment,[3] but then simply accepted respondent's assessment without discussing why the assessment reflected the true cash value *356 of the property. On remand, the tribunal shall make an independent determination of true cash value. We note that the tribunal is not bound to accept either of the parties' theories of valuation. It may accept one theory and reject the other, it may reject both theories, or it may utilize a combination of both in arriving at its determination. Meadowlanes Ltd Dividend Housing Ass'n, supra at 485-486; Wolverine Tower Associates v Ann Arbor, 96 Mich App 780; 293 NW2d 669 (1980).
We also hold that the Tax Tribunal's factual finding that the mills were only partially obsolete was supported by the evidence. Although petitioner continually implied on appeal that the tribunal found that the mills were totally obsolete, a review of the tribunal's decision shows that it found the mills to be only partially obsolete. However, the tribunal made no findings with regard to the extent of the obsolescence of the mills, a major point of contention below. On remand, the tribunal is instructed to find the extent to which the mills have suffered both functional and economic obsolescence. See Fisher-New Center Co v Tax Comm, 380 Mich 340, 362; 157 NW2d 271 (1968); Teledyne Continental Motors v Muskegon Twp, 145 Mich App 749, 754-755; 378 NW2d 590 (1985). The tribunal is also instructed to find the extent to which the assessor's manual adequately accounts for any obsolescence that may be found. We note that the record shows that the multiplier table for long-lived, in-use equipment, upon which the city's assessment was based, does not account for depreciation or obsolescence beyond a life of fifteen years. Put another way, the assessor's manual apparently would allow equal amounts of depreciation and obsolescence for an assessment of a thirty-two-year-old blooming mill and a nineteenth-century *357 traction engine that remained in use. Finally, the tribunal is instructed to consider separately the true cash values of the blooming mill and the billet mill. If the tribunal believes it to be necessary, it may reopen proofs in order to resolve these issues.
Reversed and remanded to the Tax Tribunal. We do not retain jurisdiction.
NOTES
[1]  Although petitioner makes occasional references on appeal to the valuation of other equipment, that equipment is not identified and petitioner's argument seems solely concerned with the blooming mill and the billet mill. Our discussion will therefore be likewise limited.
[2]  See, e.g., Teledyne Continental Motors v Muskegon Twp, 163 Mich App 188, 192-193; 413 NW2d 700 (1987), and Clark Equipment Co v Leoni Twp, 113 Mich App 778, 785; 318 NW2d 586 (1982).
[3]  We agree with the Tax Tribunal that the city's use of the in-use multiplier was correct. Although petitioner may have been in the process of abandoning the Warren facility on the tax date, we do not believe that petitioner has shown the concurrent requirement that the property had been declared as surplus as the word "surplus" is commonly understood.

=== CASE 2224467 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:22.709589+00 ===

751 N.E.2d 582 (2001)
323 Ill. App. 3d 153
256 Ill. Dec. 192
Philip ARMANDO, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
STATE FARM MUTUAL AUTOMOBILE INSURANCE COMPANY, Defendant-Appellee.
No. 1-00-1242.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, Fifth Division.
June 8, 2001.
*583 Edward G. Shenoo, Chicago, for Appellant.
James W. Fessler and Michael Resis of O'Hagan, Smith & Amundsen, L.L.C., Chicago, for Appellee.
Justice THEIS delivered the opinion of the court:
Plaintiff, Philip Armando, brought a two-count declaratory judgment action against defendant, State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Company (State Farm), seeking a determination of his right to uninsured motorist coverage under his State Farm policy. State Farm filed a counterclaim for declaratory relief and motion for summary judgment arguing that under the "other insurance" provisions of its policy it owed no coverage to plaintiff. Thereafter, plaintiff filed a cross-motion for summary judgment, arguing that the "other insurance" clause violated the public policy of this state as expressed in section 143a of the Illinois Insurance Code (Code). 215 ILCS 5/143a (West 1998). The trial court granted summary judgment on the counterclaim and denied summary judgment on plaintiff's complaint, finding that plaintiff was not entitled to coverage, that the "other insurance" provision was consistent with public policy, and that State Farm did not act vexatiously or unreasonably in handling plaintiff's claim. For the following reasons, we affirm.
The following facts are undisputed. On May 22, 1997, while plaintiff was operating a vehicle owned by Steven and Marie Woodman, he was struck by an uninsured motorist and suffered personal injuries. The Woodmans' vehicle was insured under a policy issued by American Family Insurance Company (American Family). The policy provided for uninsured motorist coverage with limits of $100,000 per person and $300,000 per occurrence. Plaintiff settled his accident claim against American Family for the full $100,000 limits of uninsured motorist coverage. However, he was also the named insured under a policy issued by State Farm and sought additional coverage for his injuries under that policy. The limits of liability for uninsured motorist coverage under the State Farm policy were $100,000 per person and $300,000 per accident.
State Farm denied plaintiff's claim, citing an "other insurance" clause in the policy which defeated coverage. That clause provided that, when plaintiff had other primary uninsured motorist coverage under another insurance policy, its State Farm coverage applied as excess insurance, but only in the amount by which the excess coverage exceeded the primary coverage. Thus, under the terms of the policy, since plaintiff received $100,000 from American Family, State Farm claimed it owed no additional coverage to plaintiff.
On appeal, plaintiff contends that this restrictive excess clause is contrary to the public policy of the State of Illinois as expressed in section 143a of the Code. 215 ILCS 5/143a (West 1998). Section 143a provides in relevant part that every motor vehicle liability insurance policy issued to an insured must provide coverage for bodily injury caused by an uninsured motorist. 215 ILCS 5/143a (West 1998). Specifically, plaintiff argues that, where the insured is occupying a nonowned vehicle to which *584 another insurance policy applies, the "other insurance" clause amounts to an exclusion of uninsured motorist coverage which is void and unenforceable under Illinois law, citing Illinois Farmers Insurance Co. v. Cisco, 178 Ill. 2d 386, 227 Ill. Dec. 325, 687 N.E.2d 807 (1997), in support. Additionally, plaintiff argues that the operation of the "other insurance" clause deprives him of the benefit of his bargain, uninsured motorist coverage under his own policy for which he paid a premium.
The policy provision at issue provides as follows:
"If There is Other Uninsured Motor Vehicle Coverage * * *
* * *
3. If the insured sustains bodily injury while occupying a vehicle not owned or leased by you, your spouse or any relative, and:
a. such vehicle is described on the declarations page of another policy providing uninsured motor vehicle coverage, * * *
* * *
this coverage applies:
a. as excess to any uninsured motor vehicle coverage which applies to the vehicle or driver as primary coverage, but
b. only in the amount by which it exceeds the primary coverage." (Emphasis omitted.)
The terms of an insurance policy are to be applied as written unless those terms are in conflict with public policy. Menke v. Country Mutual Insurance Co., 78 Ill. 2d 420, 423, 36 Ill. Dec. 698, 401 N.E.2d 539, 541 (1980). While our supreme court has long ago found "other insurance" clauses to be valid limitations on liability (Putnam v. New Amsterdam Casualty Co., 48 Ill. 2d 71, 83, 269 N.E.2d 97, 103 (1970)), it has more recently addressed the public policy concerns of section 143a with respect to various "other insurance" clauses in Luechtefeld v. Allstate Insurance Co., 167 Ill. 2d 148, 212 Ill. Dec. 224, 656 N.E.2d 1058 (1995), and Cisco, 178 Ill. 2d 386, 227 Ill. Dec. 325, 687 N.E.2d 807. We find these cases instructive.
In Luechtefeld, the plaintiff was injured when an uninsured motorist struck his motorcycle. He made a claim under the policy which insured the motorcycle and additionally sought coverage under a policy issued to him by another insurer which covered his other vehicles. Although the latter policy provided for greater uninsured motorist coverage than the policy covering his motorcycle, it excluded coverage for owned vehicles covered by another policy. The plaintiff argued that the exclusion was unenforceable and that he was entitled to coverage under both policies for which he paid a premium. 167 Ill. 2d at 149-50, 212 Ill. Dec. 224, 656 N.E.2d at 1059-60.
The court held that the exclusion did not violate public policy because the purpose of the statute was to place the policyholder in substantially the same position he would occupy if the uninsured motorist had the minimum liability insurance required under the Code. 167 Ill. 2d at 152, 212 Ill. Dec. 224, 656 N.E.2d at 1061. Where the insured selected the policy limits that applied to the vehicle in which the injury occurred, as long as the coverage under that policy equaled or exceeded the statutory minimum required under the Code, the court found no conflict between the exclusionary clause in the policy and section 143a. 167 Ill. 2d at 152, 212 Ill. Dec. 224, 656 N.E.2d at 1061.
In Cisco, the plaintiffs were injured in accidents with uninsured motorists while *585 driving vehicles owned by their employers. The uninsured motorist coverage provided by the employers' insurance policies was $20,000 per person and $40,000 per occurrence, the minimum required under the Code at that time. The plaintiffs also sought coverage under policies issued to them by their own insurers. Those policies provided coverage in the amounts of $100,000 per person and $300,000 per occurrence. However, the "other insurance" clause in the plaintiffs' policies completely excluded uninsured motorist coverage for a vehicle not owned by plaintiffs unless the owner of that vehicle had no other applicable insurance. Cisco, 178 Ill.2d at 387-389, 227 Ill. Dec. 325, 687 N.E.2d at 808-09.
The court held that this exclusion violated public policy because it attempted to condition coverage on the availability of similar coverage on a nonowned vehicle rather than on the uninsured status of the person causing the injury. Additionally, unlike the plaintiff in Luechtefeld, the plaintiffs in Cisco did not select the limits of liability on the nonowned vehicle which provided them with less coverage than they had bargained for when purchasing their own policies. The court expressed that the insured should not be limited to the uninsured motorist coverage choices made by a third party over which the insured has no control. 178 Ill. 2d at 393, 227 Ill. Dec. 325, 687 N.E.2d at 811.
Thus, based on the holdings in Luechtefeld and Cisco, public policy dictates (1) that the insured must be placed in substantially the same position he would have occupied if the tortfeasor had been minimally insured; and (2) that an insured who chooses to purchase higher levels of uninsured motorist coverage is entitled to the difference between his own coverage and the coverage afforded to him by a nonowned vehicle.
Applying these principles to the present case, we find that State Farm's "other insurance" clause does not violate public policy. Unlike the exclusion in Cisco, the State Farm provision ensures that the insured is never deprived of uninsured motorist protection and ensures that he will receive uninsured motorist coverage up to the limits for which he paid. Thus, his coverage selection is never undermined. If the uninsured motorist coverage on the nonowned vehicle were less than the amount of coverage plaintiff purchased under his State Farm policy, State Farm would pay the difference up to but not exceeding the applicable limits of the State Farm coverage.
Moreover, plaintiff's proposal that the policies be "stacked" to allow double compensation would violate public policy. Plaintiff has already recovered from the American Family policy the amount he would have received had the tortfeasor been insured to the extent required by statute and has recovered the amount for which he bargained. If the policies were "stacked," plaintiff would receive greater compensation by virtue of the fact that the tortfeasor violated the financial responsibility laws of Illinois. See Putnam, 48 Ill.2d at 86, 269 N.E.2d at 104 (addressing same public policy concerns in relation to validity of similar "other insurance" clause prior to enactment of financial responsibility law).
While under State Farm's policy plaintiff does not receive the $100,000 from State Farm, to whom he paid a premium, payment of a premium does not always create a reasonable expectation that the insured will receive the full amount of coverage from his insurer. Luechtefeld, 167 Ill.2d at 158, 212 Ill. Dec. 224, 656 N.E.2d at 1063. The Code specifically provides that where the insured has uninsured motorist coverage under more than *586 one policy the insurer may insert terms that limit recovery to the highest limits in any applicable policy. Section 143a-2(5) provides:
"Scope. Nothing herein shall prohibit an insurer from setting forth policy terms and conditions which provide that if the insured has coverage available under this Section under more than one policy or provision of coverage, any recovery or benefits may be equal to, but may not exceed, the higher of the applicable limits of the respective coverage * * *." 215 ILCS 5/143a-2(5) (West 1998).
Nothing in the statute limits this application to policies issued by the same insurer. Darwish v. Nationwide Mutual Insurance Co., 246 Ill.App.3d 903, 907, 186 Ill. Dec. 833, 617 N.E.2d 72, 75 (1993). Accordingly, under the terms of the applicable insurance policies and Code provisions, plaintiff received the full amount of uninsured motorist coverage to which he was entitled. We therefore find no violation of public policy. Furthermore, because there is no coverage under the State Farm policy, we find that State Farm did not act vexatiously or unreasonably in handling plaintiff's claim. Martin v. Illinois Farmers Insurance, 318 Ill.App.3d 751, 764, 252 Ill. Dec. 310, 742 N.E.2d 848, 858 (2000).
Accordingly, the judgment of the circuit court is affirmed.
Affirmed.
QUINN, P.J., and GREIMAN, J., concur.

=== CASE 9740667 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:39:59.921605+00 ===

Riley, J.
We granted leave to appeal to determine whether the public building exception to governmental immunity, MCL 691.1406; MSA 3.996(106),1 applies to a slip and fall injury occa*161sioned by an accumulation of grease or oil on a hallway floor.2 The Court of Appeals held that the exception was applicable to these facts and reversed the trial court’s grant of summary disposition in the defendant’s favor.3 We disagree with the findings of the Court of Appeals majority, and hold that the transitory condition was not caused by a dangerous or defective condition of the building itself, thus the public building exception does not apply.
I. FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
A
Plaintiff Gerald Wade was a prison inmate at the Lakeland Correctional Facility in Coldwater, Michigan. On January 25, 1987, plaintiff slipped on some foreign substance4 and fractured his kneecap. Plaintiff sued the State of Michigan, Department of Corrections, under the public building exception to governmental immunity5 on the basis of the theory that it failed to repair and maintain the Lakeland facility, a public building.
In the Court of Claims, defendant moved for summary disposition pursuant to the governmental immunity statute, MCL 691.1407; MSA 3.996(107).6 The court granted defendant’s motion on the basis of its finding that an accumulation of *162grease or oil on the floor did not amount to a defect of the building itself.
The Court of Appeals reversed, finding little distinction between dangerous conditions caused by a structural defect in the floor and a floor covered with an accumulation of oil or grease. Wade v Dep’t of Corrections, 182 Mich App 519, 525; 453 NW2d 683 (1990). The majority rejected the statutory interpretation, which differentiates between risks of injury on the basis of what occasioned the risk. Id. Judge Mackenzie dissented, on the basis of her belief that the public building exception is confined to the duty of preserving the structural integrity of a public building.
B
Although not specified in the record, the trial court granted defendant’s motion for summary disposition pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(7) and (C)(8). MCR 2.116(C)(7) tests whether a claim is barred because of immunity granted by law, and requires consideration of all documentary evidence filed or submitted by the parties. MCR 2.116(G)(5); Green v Berrien General Hosp Auxiliary, Inc, 437 Mich 1, 4, n 4; 464 NW2d 703 (1990). MCR 2.116(C)(8), failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted, tests the legal sufficiency of the complaint and allows consideration of only the pleadings. MCR 2.116(G)(5); Scameheorn v Bucks, 167 Mich App 302, 306; 421 NW2d 918 (1988). Under both subrules, all well-pleaded allegations are accepted *163as true, and construed most favorably to the non-moving party. Scameheorn, supra at 306; Haywood v Fowler, 190 Mich App 253, 256; 475 NW2d 458 (1991). A court may only grant a motion pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(8) where the claims are so clearly unenforceable as a matter of law that no factual development could possibly justify recovery. Scameheorn, supra at 306.
Immunity granted by law, such as governmental immunity, pursuant to MCL 691.1401 et seq.; MSA 3.996(101) et seq., is an affirmative defense and requires that the defense be stated in the party’s responsive pleading. MCR 2.111(F)(3)(a). Leite v Dow Chemical Co, 439 Mich 920 (1992). In order to survive a motion for summary disposition, the plaintiff must, however, allege facts justifying application of an exception to governmental immunity. Ross v Consumers Power Co (On Rehearing), 420 Mich 567, 621, n 34; 363 NW2d 641 (1984); Gibson v Grand Rapids, 162 Mich App 100, 103; 412 NW2d 658 (1987).
II. REVIEW OF MICHIGAN CASE LAW
In Reardon v Dep’t of Mental Health, 430 Mich 398; 424 NW2d 248 (1988), this Court examined the scope of the public building exception to governmental immunity. MCL 691.1406; MSA 3.996(106). We held that the intent of the Legislature in enacting the public building exception was to "impose a duty to maintain safe public buildings, but not necessarily safety in public buildings.” (Emphasis added.) Reardon, supra at 417. The duty to repair and maintain relates to the structural condition of the premises, and a government engaged in a governmental function is open to liability only where the injury results from a dangerous or defective condition of a building. Id. *164Although factually distinguishable from the instant case, the holding in Reardon delineating the public building exception is controlling.
In Reardon, a nursing student was assaulted in her dormitory. She alleged that the room, and therefore the building, was unsafe and defective because of the number of master keys in circulation among the employees. In Schafer v Ethridge, 430 Mich 398; 424 NW2d 248 (1988), the companion case of Reardon, a severely mentally retarded resident of a center for developmental disabilities was impregnated while staying in the acute care wing. The complaint alleged that the layout of the wing created a dangerous condition allowing an assault to occur.
This Court rejected the application of the public building exception to these facts on the grounds that no evidence was presented that a condition of the building contributed to the assaults or posed a danger to the plaintiffs. Reardon, supra at 417.
In Reardon, we discussed the statutory genesis of the public building exception. In response to the judicial abrogation of governmental immunity for municipalities in Williams v Detroit, 364 Mich 231; 111 NW2d 1 (1961), in 1964 the Legislature passed Public Act 170.7 The purpose of this act was to restore governmental immunity to nonsovereign agencies, and to provide for uniform treatment of governmental entities when engaged in governmental functions.8 See Reardon, supra at 408.
*165Earlier constructions of the governmental immunity act by this Court indicated that with the expansion of governmental activity in recent years, services provided by governmental agencies are not essentially governmental in nature. Pichette v Manistique Public Schools, 403 Mich 268, 279; 269 NW2d 143 (1978). We then found that public policy required a narrow construction of the term "governmental function,” and imposed a broad duty on the government to protect the public from injury by maintaining safe public places. Id. at 285. A "narrow” interpretation of the public building exception which limited application of the exception to the specific physical structure of the building itself was explicitly rejected. Tilford v Wayne Co General Hosp, 403 Mich 293, 299; 269 NW2d 153 (1978). The decisions in Lockaby v Wayne Co, 406 Mich 65, 77; 276 NW2d 1 (1979), and Bush v Oscoda Area Schools, 405 Mich 716, 731; 275 NW2d 268 (1979), also reflect narrow interpretations of governmental function and governmental immunity. In Bush, this Court rejected the defendant’s contention that the injury must result from dangerous or defective conditions caused by inadequate or negligent repairs or maintenance, and found that "a building may be dangerous or defective because of improper design, *166faulty construction or the absence of safety devices.” Id. at 730.
In Ross, supra, the Court reconsidered the scope of the governmental immunity statute. Our purpose in interpreting the immunity act was to create a cohesive, uniform, and workable set of rules to define an injured party’s rights, and the governmental entity’s liability. Id. at 596. We concluded that the intent of the act was to bring into uniformity the liability for state and non-sovereign governmental agencies. Id. at 608.
The decision in Ross settled prior inconsistencies in governmental immunity jurisprudence by finding that the heart of the act, § 7, provides for broad immunity from tort liability for governmental agencies engaged in governmental functions. Ross, supra at 595. The language of § 7 is "in the broadest possible language,” and the term "governmental function” was likewise to be construed broadly. Id. at 618. From this broad grant of immunity, the Court recognized four narrow statutory exceptions, including the public building exception.9 The more recent decision in Hyde v Univ of Michigan Bd of Regents, 426 Mich 223, 245; 393 NW2d 847 (1986), also recognized that exceptions to governmental immunity are to be narrowly construed:10
Subsequent Court of Appeals decisions, however, continued to interpret the public building exception broadly. In Davis v Detroit, 149 Mich App 249, 262; 386 NW2d 169 (1986), the Court found that the Legislature intended to impose a "broad *167duty” on governmental agencies to maintain safe buildings. And, in Ray v Dep’t of Social Services, 156 Mich App 55, 63; 401 NW2d 307 (1986), the Court discussed the broad application of the public building exception, stating that "it was the intent of the Legislature to apply the same standard of care and duty as would be applied to a department store or supermarket or a privately owned place of business open to the public.” The only differences between private tort liability and that of governmental agencies noted by the Court in Ray were the notice and knowledge requirements in the public building exception statute. Id.
Various Court of Appeals decisions since our 1988 decision in Reardon, supra, have recognized that the public building exception is now to be interpreted more narrowly, and is limited to dangers actually presented by the building itself. "[T]he scope of this [public building] exception has been narrowed considerably in the time since Pichette and Tilford Puroll v Madison Heights, 187 Mich App 672, 673; 468 NW2d 52 (1990). See Merritt v Dep’t of Social Services, 184 Mich App 522, 523; 459 NW2d 10 (1989) (an accumulation of ice on a parking lot maintained by the defendant was not within the public building exception; the scope of the exception was narrowed since Tilford); Dew v Livonia, 180 Mich App 676, 679; 447 NW2d 764 (1989) (the intent of the Legislature was to apply the public building exception to " dangers actually presented by the building itself,’ and not to all injuries incurred inside or adjacent to a public building”); Wing v Detroit, 178 Mich App 628, 631; 444 NW2d 539 (1989) (the plaintiff’s claim regarding her slip and fall at the Detroit Zoo requires an expansion of pre-Ross decisions which is precluded by Reardon). See also Abrams v Schoolcraft Community College, 178 Mich App *168668; 444 NW2d 533 (1989), Eberhard v St Johns Public Schools, 189 Mich App 466; 473 NW2d 745 (1991), Hall v Detroit Bd of Ed, 186 Mich App 469; 465 NW2d 12 (1990), and Hemphill v Michigan, 173 Mich App 335; 433 NW2d 826 (1988).
The exception has been held applicable where the claim alleges an injury occasioned by a defective or dangerous condition of the building itself. Williamson v Dep’t of Mental Health, 176 Mich App 752, 758; 440 NW2d 97 (1989) (a mentally retarded resident drowned in the bath due to an improper design of the shower and bath).
III. ANALYSIS
Having reconsidered the scope of the governmental immunity statute, this Court remains persuaded that the legislative intent regarding application of the public building exception statute is limited to injuries occasioned by a "dangerous or defective physical condition of the building itself.” The statutory scheme does not contemplate transitory conditions because they are not related to the permanent structure or physical integrity of the building. Reardon, supra at 409. In Reardon, we recognized the holding in Bush with approval, reasoning that as long as the injury is presented by a structural condition of the building, it does not matter whether the condition arose because of improper design, faulty construction, or the absence of safety devices. Id. at 410. Our decisions in Pichette, Tilford, Lockaby, and Bush, are in harmony with Reardon, because these decisions preceded our resolution in Ross, which more broadly defined the scope of governmental functions and immunity. Reardon, supra at 415.
Plaintiff maintains that Reardon does not apply in this case because the injuries to the plaintiffs in Reardon were caused by the acts of third parties. *169We disagree. We find no substantive difference between acts of third parties which directly or negligently cause injury to the plaintiff from the facts involved in the present case. The significant, and we believe determining, aspect of both situations is that the dangerous condition was not caused by a dangerous or defective condition of the building itself. We agree with the reasoning of dissenting Judge Mackenzie who found in this case: "plaintiff has alleged nothing more than negligent janitorial care. That is not enough to bring this case within the public building exception to governmental immunity.” Wade, supra at 527.
In contesting defendant’s motion for summary disposition, plaintiff asserted that pursuant to the public building exception, he was obligated to establish the source of the substance on the floor in order to prove that the accumulation was the result of some building defect. Plaintiff argues that since no source was alleged in the complaint or the prisoner’s accident report, he should be allowed to develop facts to show that a building defect caused the accumulation.11 The trial court, after reviewing only pleadings, found that the mere accumulation of grease or oil did not amount to a defect in the building itself, and therefore, plaintiff did not properly establish facts in his complaint that would have avoided governmental immunity.
The Court of Appeals reversed and remanded on the grounds that the physical condition of the floor was a physical condition of the building itself. The Court stressed that the result, a slippery floor, is the same regardless of whether the dangerous condition is caused by an accumulation of oil or *170grease rather than a defect in the building itself.12 The Court relied on the pre-Reardon case of Ray, supra. In light of our holding in Reardon, we find the interpretation of the public building exception in Ray overly broad.
In the instant case, the Court of Appeals opined that Ray, was still good law after Reardon. It rejected an interpretation of Reardon that would find the public building exception inapplicable to these facts because the condition was not part of the building itself.
We do not agree. The assertion in Ray that a governmental entity is held to the same standards as private landowners, Ray, supra at 63, is not consistent with the finding in Ross of a clear legislative judgment to treat public and private tortfeasors differently. Ross, supra at 618. Mere negligence by á governmental agency does not trigger liability.
IV. CONCLUSION
In sum, we conclude that the public building exception is to be narrowly construed, and does not encompass claims of negligent janitorial care. A spill on the floor does not become part of the building itself by virtue of the risk of injury it may create for the plaintiff. Moreover, we do not believe the Legislature intended "dangerous or defective condition of a public building” to refer to such transitory conditions. The use of the ninety-day period for conclusively presuming knowledge, as well as the reference to time to "repair” the *171defect, reinforces our belief that the public building exception does not encompass transitory conditions or ordinary daily maintenance.
In the present case, plaintiff’s claim alleges no more than mere negligence: that grease, oil, food, and water were allowed to accumulate on the floor. This accumulation was the transitory condition which caused the plaintiff’s injury. Furthermore, no defect of the public building itself was pleaded. We find, therefore, that plaintiff failed to state a claim upon which relief could be granted, and the trial court properly granted defendant’s motion for summary disposition.
We therefore reverse the decision of the Court of Appeals.
Cavanagh, C.J., and Brickley, Boyle, Griffin,. and Mallett, JJ., concurred with Riley, J.
The public building exception to governmental immunity, MCL 691.1406; MSA 3.996(106), provides in pertinent part:
Governmental agencies have the obligation to repair and maintain public buildings under their control when open for use by members of the public. Governmental agencies are liable for bodily injury and property damage resulting from a dangerous or defective condition of a public building if the governmental agency had actual or constructive knowledge of the defect and, for a reasonable time after acquiring knowledge, failed to remedy the condition or to take action reasonably necessary to protect the public against the condition. Knowledge of the dangerous and defective condition of the public building and time to repair the same shall be conclusively presumed when such defect existed so as to be readily apparent to an ordinary observant person for a period of 90 days or longer before the injury took place.
437 Mich 972 (1991).
182 Mich App 519; 453 NW2d 683 (1990).
Paragraph 8 of plaintiff’s complaint alleges that the slip and fall was caused by an accumulation of "oil, grease, water and food” on the hallway floor of the correctional facility, and paragraph 10 alleges defendant allowed a defective or dangerous condition to exist, which consisted of “an accumulation of grease, oil, water, food or other slippery matter . . . .”
MCL 691.1406; MSA 3.996(106), n 1 supra.
The statute providing for governmental immunity from tort liability, MCL 691.1407; MSA 3.996(107), provides in pertinent part:
*162(1) Except as otherwise provided in this act, all governmental agencies shall be immune from tort liability in all cases wherein the government agency is engaged in the exercise or discharge of a governmental function. Except as otherwise provided in this act, this act shall not be construed as modifying or restricting the immunity of the state from tort liability as it existed before July 1, 1965, which immunity is affirmed.
In Maki v East Tawas, 385 Mich 151; 188 NW2d 593 (1971), the Court held 1964 PA 170 to be unconstitutional as violative of the Title-Object Clause of Const 1963, art 4, § 24. In response, the Legislature amended the title of the act, but essentially maintained the body of the act.
The title of the act, as amended by 1970 PA 155 and 1978 PA 141, states that it is
An act to make uniform the liability of municipal corporations, *165political subdivisions, and the state, its agencies and departments, when engaged in the exercise or discharge of a governmental function, for injuries to property and persons; to define and limit this liability; to define and limit the liability of the state when engaged in a proprietary function; to authorize the purchase of liability insurance to protect against loss arising out of this liability; to provide for defending certain claims made against public officers and paying damages sought or awarded against them; to provide for the legal defense of public officers and employees; to provide for reimbursement of public officers and employees for certain legal expenses; and to repeal certain acts and parts of acts.
The other exceptions are not applicable to the present case. They concern maintenance of public highways, MCL 691.1402; MSA 3.996(102); operation of a government-owned motor vehicle by an officer or agent, MCL 691.1405; MSA 3.996(105); and performance of proprietary functions by government entities, MCL 691.1413; MSA 3.996(113).
See also Jolly v St Clair, 428 Mich 860; 400 NW2d 597 (1987).
Plaintiff did not allege that the dangerous condition arose out of a dangerous or defective condition of the building itself, hence we do not address that issue in this opinion.
See Henkey v Grand Rapids, 185 Mich App 56, 57; 460 NW2d 271 (1990) ("The pertinent inquiry should not concern the genesis of the danger,” but rather the knowledge of the danger by the governmental entity).

=== CASE 9740668 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:39:59.928993+00 ===

Levin, J.
(dissenting). The question presented, I agree with the majority, is whether the public building exception to governmental immunity1 ap*172plies to a slip and fall injury occasioned by an accumulation of grease or oil2 on a hallway floor.3
The circuit judge granted summary disposition, finding that Wade did not allege a "defect in the building itself.”4 The Court of Appeals reversed, stating that a governmental agency "has a statutory duty to maintain its public buildings so that the members of the public who are on public premises are protected from dangerous and defective conditions of the building.”5 (Emphasis in original.)
The majority reverses the decision of the Court of Appeals stating that "the transitory condition was not caused by a dangerous or defective condition of the building itself, thus the public building exception does not apply.”6 The majority elaborates that "[t]he statutory scheme does not contemplate transitory conditions because they are not related to the permanent structure or physical integrity of the building.”7 The majority would further limit the building exception, stating "[m]ere negligence by a governmental agency does not trigger liability.”8
*173I
I would affirm the Court of Appeals, and would remand for trial.
A
The majority’s construction ignores that there are two prongs of the building exception. The building exception provides that a governmental agency is obliged to "repair and maintain" a public building under its supervision. (Emphasis added.) That obligation, the first stated prong of the building exception, is specifically and separately stated in the sentence immediately preceding the sentence stating the second prong, that a governmental agency is subject to liability for damage resulting from a "dangerous or defective condition” of a public building.9
A governmental agency is thus subject to liability under the building exception where it has failed to repair and maintain a public building, without regard to whether the failure to repair and maintain also constitutes a "dangerous or defective condition.” This Court, in Reardon v Dep’t of Mental Health, 430 Mich 398; 424 NW2d 248 (1988), otherwise regarded by the majority as "controlling,”10 recognized that the building exception states two separate obligations: "The ñrst sentence [of the building exception] imposes upon governmental agencies the duty to 'repair and maintain public buildings under their control . . . .’11 "In addition, the second sentence of the exception imposes liability on governmental agencies for injuries 'resulting from a dangerous or *174defective condition of a public building . . . .’ ” (Emphasis supplied in Reardon.)12
B
Nor is there justification for the majority’s conclusion that the "dangerous or defective condition” prong of the building exception should be limited by judicial construction
—to exclude a dangerous or defective condition that is "transitory,”13 —to include only a dangerous or defective condition that relates to the "permanent structure or physical integrity of the building,”14 or
—to a dangerous or defective condition caused by a fault of a governmental agency more egregious than "[m]ere negligence.”15
The words "transitory” and "permanent structure or physical integrity of the building” and words establishing a standard of fault more egregious than "mere negligence” do not appear in the building exception. Nor are such words, or the concepts they convey, so today added by the majority by judicial construction,16 consistent with either a literal reading of, or a purpose of, the building exception, both identified by the majority and supported in the history of the governmental tort liability act or in the development, in Michigan and elsewhere, of statutory delineation of the *175scope of governmental immunity and of exceptions providing for governmental liability.
In Reardon, this Court said:
In light of the historical context in which the statute was enacted, as well as the language chosen by the Legislature, and the generally broad scope of immunity, we hold that the Legislature intended the public building exception to apply in cases where the injury is occasioned by the physical condition of the building itself.[17]
"Physical condition” was not limited in Reardon, to a condition that relates to the "permanent structure or physical integrity of the building.”18
C
The majority argues that "use of the ninety-day *176period for conclusively presuming knowledge, as well as the reference to time to 'repair’ the defect,” supports a belief that the building exception "does not encompass transitory conditions or ordinary daily maintenance.”19 The argument ignores that the statutory requirement that a governmental agency have knowledge of, and reasonable time to remedy, the condition applies in terms only under the second stated prong, "dangerous or defective condition of a public building,” and not under the first stated prong, "repair and maintain public buildings,” of the building exception. See n 1 for text of the building exception.
The majority’s argument also ignores that an injured person might show that the requisite knowledge was in fact acquired, and that there was also a reasonable opportunity to remedy, within minutes or hours, long before the lapse of ninety days when the governmental agency is conclusively deemed to have knowledge and time to repair. An accumulation of grease or oil might be remedied within minutes or hours of the governmental agency acquiring knowledge, and, remedied or unremedied, concerns the "physical condition” of the floor and hence of the building itself.20
The majority’s statement of this argument additionally ignores that the statute imposes, under the first prong, an obligation to "repair and maintain” not merely an obligation, as stated in the majority opinion, to " 'repair’ the defect.” The obligation is actually stated in the statute as an obligation to "repair and maintain public buildings under their control.” The majority in Reardon, quite correctly, read this as meaning an obligation to " 'repair or maintain.’ ”21
*177D
In the instant case, Wade does not assert that the grease or oil accumulated because of a structural defect.22 In another case, however, the "transitory” grease or oil might have accumulated in a crevice in the floor or because the floor, as a result of poor design or poor construction, is slanted.
ii
The majority relies heavily on Reardon, supra. There the plaintiffs sought to recover, under the building exception, for injuries suffered as a result of a sexual, assault by an employee of the Department of Mental Health on a nursing student, and for a sexual assault on a mentally retarded resident of a facility operated by the department. The plaintiffs alleged that the absence of a method of securely locking the door of a dormitory room, in one case, and the floor plan of a ward, in the other, constituted "dangerous or defective conditions” of facilities operated by the department.23
The Court, in Reardon, observed that "the assaults were the result of the act of an intervening party rather than a dangerous or defective condition of the building itself,” and stated, and I continue to agree, that "the Legislature intended to impose a duty to maintain safe public buildings, but not necessarily safety in public buildings” and *178concluded "that the public building exception does not apply under the facts of these cases”24
A
The majority in the instant case states that although Reardon is "factually distinguishable from the instant case, the holding in Reardon delineating the public building exception is controlling”25
It is unclear on what basis the majority concludes that Reardon is controlling. I agreed with the dispositions in Reardon, read the opinion of the Court as deciding a lawsuit, not as a tour de force, and signed the opinion of the Court. The "holding” in Reardon is not even pertinent to, let alone controlling of, the correct resolution of the issue presented for the first time in the instant case.
Courts in other jurisdictions have concluded, as did this Court in Reardon, that a governmental agency is not subject to liability for physical assaults under a statutory building exception worded much like this state’s building exception, and yet have concluded that a governmental agency is subject to liability for a "transitory” dangerous condition26 *179and for a maintenance failure.27
B
The constant reiteration in the instant case of the phrase "of the building itself” taken from Reardon, suggests that, although that phraseology was indeed used in Reardon — in the context of distinguishing between an assault by an "intervening party” and "a condition of the building itself ” —the word "of” and the word "itself” mean to the majority that, in construing the exception, the word "building” is so far paramount that it trumps "dangerous or defective” and mandates judicial desuetude for "repair and maintain.”
The majority then expands "of the building itself” by adding a gloss limiting "building” to "permanent structure or physical integrity of the building.” Having made that leap, the majority continues its activism, expanding the judicially created limitations by adding, as well, the "transitory” and the "more-than-negligence” limitations.
The majority argues that grease or oil on a hallway floor is a condition in a building and not a *180condition of the building,28 and therefore is not a "condition of the building itself.”29 To be sure, a condition in or on a floor of a building is a condition in a building because a floor is in the building. A condition, in or on a floor, is nonetheless also a condition of the building.
If a floor of a building was structurally uneven, it would be both a condition in the building and a condition of the building. That such a condition is in the building does not mean that it is not also a condition of the building.
The emphatic appositive "itself” means "that identical one,”30 and adds nothing, when employed in a judicial opinion, to, nor can it modify, "building,” the word used in the statute. "Itself,” when employed in a judicial opinion, means in this context "that very building.” The use of "itself” in Reardon did not and could not change the meaning of "building,” the word used in the statute without "itself.”
c
This Court is called upon in this case to expound concerning the building exception, not Reardon. As appears from the majority opinion, opinions of this Court are increasingly ephemeral. The statute is more enduring.
The majority appears to read out of the statute, for the time being or until possibly the next case, both the first prong, "repair and maintain,” and the second prong, "dangerous or defective condition,” of the building exception._
*181In the next case, the Court could continue in the direction in which it appears to be headed and declare, on the basis of the analysis and language employed in the instant case, that "of the building itself ” includes only the roof and four outer walls,31 but then only if the governmental agency has, possibly, been reckless or grossly negligent, not "merely” negligent, in selecting the contractor who installed the roof and four outer walls, but not if there was a design32 or foundation defect because a design or foundation defect is not "of the building itself ” — a foundation defect is not in or of the building, but underneath the building.
III
The majority has developed its construction of the meaning of the building exception without considering either decisions in other jurisdictions construing similar statutory language or whether the limitations it has imposed by judicial construction are consistent with the construction this Court has, in earlier decisions, placed on the highway33 *182and motor vehicle34 exceptions.
A
Courts in other jurisdictions, construing "dangerous condition of a public building,” have concluded that failures of maintenance are included.35
Statutes in a number of other jurisdictions use the term "property” or "real estate” rather than "building” in stating the exception.36 I would read the legislative intent in using the word "building,” rather than "property” or "real estate,” as excluding parks and recreational facilities, but not as excluding areas that are part of the curtilage of the building. Such a construction would be consistent with the constrüction of the building exception by this Court in Pichette v Manistique Public Schools, 403 Mich 268; 269 NW2d 143 (1978),37 and
*183with a correct construction of the highway exception.38 Such a construction would also be consistent with the statement in Reardon that the Legislature imposed "a duty to maintain safe public buildings.”39
On extensive research of the statutes of other states, no case has been found in any jurisdiction limiting recovery under a building exception to a "condition” that relates to the "permanent structure or physical integrity of the building”40 or that *184would exclude "transitory” conditions. Recovery for "mere negligence” is the most usual basis of recovery in other jurisdictions under a building exception, and also under highway and motor vehicle exceptions. No case was found imposing a higher standard.
A number of cases were found where the courts held that a governmental agency was subject to liability for maintenance failures under statutes worded similarly to the Michigan statute, i.e., liability was imposed for a dangerous condition of a building, or for failure to maintain.41
B
This Court has not imposed with respect to the highway and motor vehicle exceptions the "transitory,” "permanent structure or physical integrity,” *185or "mere negligence” limitations imposed today with respect to the building exception.42 Imposing such limitations with respect to the building exception is not consistent with this Court’s decisions construing the other exceptions.
C
The majority’s reliance on Ross v Consumers Power Co (On Rehearing), 420 Mich 567; 363 NW2d 641 (1984), in justification of its construction of the building exception, is misplaced. Ross concerned the meaning of the term "governmental function” as used in the section of the governmental tort liability act stating that a governmental agency shall be immune from tort liability when "engaged in the exercise or discharge of a governmental function.”43
While Ross does indicate that a majority of the Court took a broad view of the scope of the term "governmental function,” and was of the opinion that the scope of the term embraced most governmental activities, it does not follow that the Court, as then constituted, would have read the building exception or any of the other exceptions providing for governmental liability as narrowly as the Court today reads the building exception.
In all events, the correct construction of the highway, automobile and building exceptions, subjecting governmental agencies .to liability, were not in issue in any of the nine cases consolidated in Ross._
Governmental agencies have the obligation to repair and maintain public buildings under their control when open for use by members of the public. Governmental agencies are liable for bodily injury and property damage resulting from a dangerous or defective condition of a public building if the governmental agency had actual or constructive knowledge of the defect and, for a reasonable time after acquiring knowledge, failed to remedy the condition or to take action reasonably necessary to protect the public against the condition. Knowledge of the dangerous and defective condition of the public building and time to repair the same shall be conclusively presumed when such defect existed so as to be readily apparent to an ordinary observant person for a period of 90 days or longer before the injury took place. [MCL 691.1406; MSA 3.996(106).]
Or other possible substance that plaintiff’s proofs, were this case to be remanded for trial, might tend to show.
Ante, pp 160-161. The order granting leave to appeal did not, contrary to an intimation of the majority, state an issue. 437 Mich 972 (1991).
See Wade v Dep’t of Corrections, 182 Mich App 519, 521; 453 NW2d 683 (1990), where the bench opinion of the circuit judge is set forth.
Id., p 525.
Ante, p 161 (emphasis added).
The majority similarly states "no defect of the building itself was pleaded.” Id., p 171.
Id., p 168.
Id., p 170.
See n 1 for text.
Ante, p 164.
Reardon, supra, p 409 (emphasis added). See n 18 for full text.
Id., p 410 (first emphasis added). See n 18 for full text.
Ante, p 161.
Id., p 168.
M, p 170.
It is unclear which of these alternative judicial formulations is the basis of decision in this case, and thus they all may be regarded as obiter dictum.
Reardon, supra, pp 412-413 (emphasis added).
In Reardon, supra, pp 409-410, this Court said:
The first sentence [of the building exception] imposes upon governmental agencies the duty to "repair and maintain public buildings under their control . . . .” In Bush v Oscoda Area Schools, 405 Mich 716; 275 NW2d 268 (1979), we held that this duty is not strictly limited to the repair or maintenance of public buildings. Instead, we held that "a building may be dangerous or defective because of improper design, faulty construction or the absence of safety devices.” Id. at 730. We reiterate this proposition, as the holding in Bush is entirely consistent- with today’s conclusion that the injury must be occasioned by the dangerous or defective physical condition of the building itself. As long as the danger of injury is presented by a physical condition of the building, it little matters that the condition arose because of improper design, faulty construction, or absence of safety devices. However, while the public building exception is not strictly limited to failures of repair or maintenance, the Legislature’s choice of those terms to define the governmental duty is indicative of its intention regarding the scope of the exception. The duty to repair and maintain a premises clearly relates to the physical condition of the premises.
In addition, the second sentence of the exception imposes liability on governmental agencies for injuries "resulting from a dangerous or defective condition of a public building . . . .” (Emphasis supplied.)
Ante, pp 170-171.
See text accompanying ns 17-18.
Reardon, p 409 (emphasis added).
Because this case has not been tried, the cause of the accumulation of oil or grease, whether a structural defect or not, has not been established. Contrary to the assertion of the majority, an injured person is not required to plead with particularity the source of the accumulation.
It does not appear that those lapses were claimed to have constituted a failure to "repair and maintain.”
Reardon, supra, p 417 (emphasis added).
Ante, p 164 (emphasis added).
A Pennsylvania court held that the state was subject to liability, under a statute providing for liability where there is a " 'dangerous condition of Commonwealth real estate,’ ” where rocks were thrown at motorists from an overpass, because the state had failed to erect protective fencing or barricades that would have prevented the throwing of rocks onto the highway. Mistecka v Commonwealth, 46 Pa Commw Ct 267, 272; 408 A2d 159 (1979). (Although, in Snyder v Harmon, 522 Pa 424, 435, n 7; 562 A2d 307 [1989], the Pennsylvania Supreme Court disavowed the statutory distinction made by the Mistecka court, this does not undercut the ruling for which Mistecka is cited.)
Users of Michigan expressways observe such protective fencing on overpasses in urban areas.
*179The Supreme Court of Missouri, en banc, under a statute providing for liability for " '[ijnjuries caused by the condition of a public entity’s property,’ ” held that the state was subject to liability for the alleged placement of a temporary partition against a ladder on which a worker was working while servicing the elevator of a state building that resulted in the worker falling and sustaining injuries. Alexander v State, 756 SW2d 539, 541 (Mo, 1988).
Failure of custodial crew to remove a stick from a lawn before another crew mowed the lawn causing injury to the plaintiif who was struck by the flying stick, subjected the governmental agency to liability under an exception for injuries caused by a " 'condition of the public entity’s property.’ ” Jones v St Louis Housing Authy, 726 SW2d 766, 774 (Mo App, 1987). See Mo Rev Stat, § 537.600.1(2).
Failure to trim foliage found to be causally related to surprise attack by a mugger, subjected a governmental entity to liability under an exception for " 'dangerous condition of its property ....’” Peterson v San Francisco Community College Dist, 36 Cal 3d 799, 809; 205 Cal Rptr 842; 685 P2d 1193 (1984).
Ante, p 163. See also id., p 164.
Id., pp 161 and 168.
See, e.g., Webster’s Third New International Dictionary, p 1204: "The letter itself was missing.” (Emphasis added.) The Random House Dictionary of the English Language (2d ed, unabridged), p 1017: "Even without flowers, the bowl itself is beautiful.” (Emphasis added.)
Under the lexicon which the majority is developing, a dangerous or defective .condition of a tile, dirt or mud floor might not be encompassed by the building exception because the "permanent structure or physical integrity of the building” is unaffected by the floor, or whether there even is a floor. A roof and four outer walls would constitute a "permanent structure” and there would be "physical integrity of the building” even if there is an abyss where one would ordinarily expect to find a floor.
In Reardon, supra, p 410, this Court said that it reiterates the proposition that a building may be dangerous or defective because of "improper design.” See n 18 for full text.
Each governmental agency having jurisdiction over any highway shall maintain the highway in reasonable repair so that it' is reasonably safe and convenient for public travel. [MCL 691.1402(1); MSA 3.996(102)(1).]
Governmental agencies shall be liable for bodily injury and property damage resulting from the negligent operation by any officer, agent, or employee of the governmental agency, of a motor vehicle of which the governmental agency is owner .... [MCL 691.1405; MSA 3.996(105).]
See n 41 and accompanying text.
See, e.g., Tenn Code Ann, § 9-8-307(a)(1)(C); Tex Civil Practice & Remedies Code Ann, § 101.021(2); Mo Rev Stat, § 537.600.1(2); Ill Rev Stat, ch 85, ¶ 3-102.
The Ohio statute speaks of "public grounds” rather than "public building.” See Ohio Rev Code Ann, § 2744.02(3).
In Reardon, supra, p 413, this Court said:
In Pichette v Manistique Public Schools, 403 Mich 268; 269 NW2d 143 (1978), the plaintiff was injured on a permanently attached playground slide immediately adjacent to the defendant’s school building. In an opinion joined by four other justices on the public building exception issue, Justice Fitzgerald held that the Legislature intended that the statutory exceptions to governmental immunity impose upon governmental entities the duty to maintain safe public places. Id. at 285. Thus, the Court found the building exception applicable to the admittedly dangerous and defective slide, despite the fact that the slide itself was not a building. See also Tilford v Wayne Co General Hosp, 403 Mich 293; 269 NW2d 153 (1978) (building exception applicable where plaintiff injured on sidewalk immediately adjacent to hospital). This legislative purpose to maintain safe public places was later echoed in Bush, supra at 731-732 (public building exception applicable where claimed defect *183is absence of safety features), and Lockaby v Wayne Co, 406 Mich 65, 76-77; 276 NW2d 1 (1979) (building exception applicable where plaintiff alleged lack of padding in cell where he was being held).
In Tilford, supra, this Court concluded that the entrance walk of a public building was within the building exception. No one opinion was signed by four justices, but in opinions written by Justices Fitzgerald, Moody and Ryan, six justices so agreed. Justice Ryan’s commentary on the argument that an entrance sidewalk is not within the building exception applies with equal force to the suggestion that the condition of a floor of a public building is not within the building exception:
The defendant argues that the Legislature, in employing the term "building,” intended to impose liability on governmental agencies that was extremely narrow in scope and applicable only to acts or omissions in connection with the care and maintenance of the walled, roofed edifice itself and no more.
In my view, that is an inappropriately narrow reading of the legislation and of the legislative purpose. [Id., p 303.]
See Scheurman v Dep’t of Transportation, 434 Mich 619; 456 NW2d 66 (1990), opinion by Boyle, J., p 637, opinion by Brickley, J., p 637.
Reardon, supra, p 415 (emphasis added).
While New Mexico courts at one time required a finding of "physical defect” in a building, this "narrower view” has been abandoned in more recent cases. See Bober v New Mexico State Fair, 111 NM 644, 653; 808 P2d 614 (1991) (overruling the rationale adopted in the following cases: Wittkowski v State, 103 NM App 526; 710 P2d 93 [1985], overruled on other grounds Silva v State, 106 NM 472; 745 P2d 380 [1987]; Gallegos v State, 107 NM App 349, 351; 758 P2d 299 [1987]; Martinez v Kaune Corp, 106 NM App 489, 491; 745 P2d 714 [1987]; Pemberton v Cordova, 105 NM App 476, 478; 734 P2d 254 [1987] ). See also Castillo v Santa Fe Co, 107 NM 204, 205; 755 P2d 48 (1988) .
See ns 26 and 27.
Additionally, a number of cases were found where the courts held that a governmental agency could be subject to liability for negligent maintenance such as failure to pick up loose shells on the shoulder of a state highway, L & R Leasing v Allstate Ins Co, 561 So 2d 1011 (La App, 1990), failure to provide traffic control on state fairgrounds, Bober v New Mexico State Fair, n 40 supra, and failure to trim back a tree that blocked the sidewalk, Verity v Danti, 585 A2d 65 (RI, 1991).
Cases were found where courts held, under fact patterns quite similar to the instant case, that a governmental agency could be subject to liability for negligent maintenance. In Aubrey v Schenectady Co, 46 AD2d 714; 360 NYS2d 307 (1974), the Supreme Court of New York, Appellate Division, affirmed the trial court’s denial of defendant’s motion to dismiss where a prisoner brought an action for injuries sustained when he slipped in water on the floor of his cell. The court held that the county could be held liable for negligent "maintenance of the penitentiary, and, more specifically, . . . maintenance of the plumbing and the cell wherein the plaintiff was confined [and] negligent maintenance of the physical plant of the county penitentiary.” In Harris v Ohio Dep’t of Rehabilitation & Correction, 61 Ohio Misc 2d 21; 573 NE2d 213 (1989), the Court of Claims of Ohio concluded that the plaintiff, an inmate at the Ohio Reformatory for Women, had presented sufficient evidence to prevail against the state for negligent maintenance where she slipped and fell on an unsecured manhole cover while traversing the reformatory grounds.
A governmental agency may be subject to liability for a highway design defect. See, e.g., Killeen v Dep’t of Transportation, 432 Mich 1; 438 NW2d 233 (1989).
MCL 691.1407(1); MSA 3.996(107)(1).

=== CASE 9740669 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:01.108335+00 ===

OPINION
VAIDIK, Judge
Case Summary
Appellant, Vincent Evans, appeals the denial of his Motion to Correct Erroneous Sentence. Specifically, Evans contends that the State violated the terms of his "no recommendation" plea agreement when a police officer made a recommendation to the judge at the sentencing hearing. Because we find that the police officer, as a victim of Evans' crime, had a statutory right to give a victim's impact statement and that the recommendation was from the officer's personal experience with Evans, we affirm.
Facts and Procedural History
The record reveals that on July 13, 1994, Indianapolis Police Officer Randall Staab saw Evans' car blocking traffic across the northbound lanes of Pendleton Pike. Officer Staab smelled alcohol on Evans breath. Evans offered Officer Staab money to let him go and then proceeded to kick Officer Staab. The State charged Evans with Bribery, a class C felony, three counts of Battery, all class D felonies, and Operating a Vehicle While Intoxicated, a class D felony.
Evans entered into a written plea agreement with the State. Evans agreed to plead guilty to bribery, one count of battery, and OWI. The State agreed to dismiss the other charges and make no sentencing recommendation except that the sentences should run concurrently. The court accepted the plea agreement and set the case for sentencing.
During the December 7, 1994 sentencing hearing, Officer Staab testified as the victim of Evans' battery. He asked the court for the maximum sentence "on behalf of the law enforcement officers that have dealt with this individual in the past and *247those who will deal with him in the future." Record at 101. Evans objected that the comments qualified as testimony on behalf of the State. The court agreed and instructed Officer Staab that he could only offer a recommendation based on his personal experience with Evans. Officer Staab then recommended that Evans be made to take responsibility for his actions. The State did not present any argument as to the sentencing. The trial court sentenced Evans to eight years for his bribery conviction and three years for both his battery and OWI convictions, with all sentences to be served concurrently.
On August 4, 2000, Evans filed a Motion to Correct Erroneous Sentence, claiming that the State violated the terms of the plea agreement by allowing Officer Staab's recommendation at the sentencing hearing. The trial court denied Evans' motion. This appeal ensued.
Discussion and Decision
Initially, we address the State's argument that our court cannot consider Eiv-ans' argument because the proper forum for raising this issue is in a petition for post-conviction relief. However, precedent dictates that we must consider this motion as a petition for post-conviction relief. Gordon v. State, 645 N.E.2d 25, 27 (Ind.Ct.App.1995), trans. denied; see also State ex rel. Gordon v. Vanderburgh Court, 616 N.E.2d 8, 9 (Ind.1993) (motion to correct erroneous sentence filed pursuant to Ind.Code § 35-88-1-15 must be considered a petition for post-conviction relief).
Because this appeal must be treated as a petition for post-conviction relief, Evans bears the burden of establishing his grounds for post-conviction relief by a preponderance of the evidence. Ind. Post Conviction Rule 1(5). Because he is now appealing from a negative judgment, to the extent his appeal turns on factual issues, Evans must show that the evidence as a whole leads unerringly and unmistakably to a decision opposite that reached by the post-conviction court. Spiller v. State, 740 N.E2d 1270, 1273 (Ind.Ct.App.2001) (citing Harrison v. State, 707 N.E.2d 767, 773 (Ind.1999), cert. denied, 529 U.S. 1088, 120 S.Ct. 1722, 146 L.Ed.2d 643 (2000)), trans. denied. When reviewing a denial of post-conviction relief, we neither reweigh the evidence nor judge the credibility of witnesses. Thacker v. State, 715 N.E.2d 1281, 1284 (Ind.Ct.App.1999), trams. denied.
Evans contends that the State failed to comply with its promise to make no sentencing recommendation when the prosecution allowed Officer Staab to address the court at the sentencing hearing. Clearly, prosecutors must honor their promises given in exchange for guilty pleas. Harris v. State, 671 N.E.2d 864, 870 (Ind.Ct.App.1996) (citing Santobello v. New York, 404 U.S. 257, 262, 92 S.Ct. 495, 30 LEd.2d 427 (1971), trans. denied. Failure to adhere to a promise that induces a guilty plea would constitute a breach of the plea agreement and would render the plea involuntary. Harris, 671 N.E.2d at 870 (citing Ryan v. State, 479 N.E.2d 517, 519 (Ind.1985)).
Evans argues that the plea agreement must be vacated because the State did not honor its promise when Officer Staab testified at the sentencing hearing. See Thompson v. State, 634 NE.2d 775, 777-78 (Ind.Ct.App.1994). We do not agree. The legislature has enacted a statutory framework detailing the rules of plea bargaining, and to achieve the balance of rights struck by the legislature, the parties must adhere to all of the statutory rules. Reffett v. State, 571 NE.2d 1227, 1229 (Ind.1991). One rule mandates that the prosecutor notify the victim of the crime, Officer Staab, that he is entitled to be *248present at the sentencing and may address the court. Ind.Code § 35-35-3-2; see also Ryan v. State, 479 NE.2d 517, 520 (Ind.1985). The prosecution must comply with this statute. Additionally, when a victim is present at a sentence hearing, "the court shall also offer the victim, ... an opportunity to make a statement concerning the crime and the sentence." I.C. § 35-35-3-5.
Apparently, the State did notify Officer Staab of the plea agreement and of his right to address the court. Officer Staab then indicated to the prosecutor that he wanted to offer his own recommendation to the court based on his experience with Evans. Consequently, the prosecutor introduced Officer Staab, as a victim, requesting to make a victim's impact statement. Officer Staab initially proceeded with a recommendation on behalf of all law enforcement officers who have dealt or will deal with Evans. The court did not allow this testimony and ordered Officer Staab to make his recommendation based only on his personal experience and opinion. Officer Staab continued by recommending that Evans be made to take responsibility for his "disrespect for law enforcement based upon his criminal history and based upon my personal observations of him...." Record at 109.
In a similar case, Harris 671 N.E.2d 864, we held that it was not error for a detective who was not a victim of the crime, but was investigating a crime to make a sentencing recommendation to the court despite a plea agreement calling for the State to offer no sentencing recommendations. We found that the detective's testimony did not equate to a sentencing recommendation because the testimony was based on the detective's own personal experience. Id. at 871. Furthermore, we stated the trial court did not err when it allowed the detective to comment on the defendant's criminal history because the pre-sentence report already contained that evidence. Id. at 871.
Here, Officer Staab was not only the officer in charge of the investigation, but also the victim of the crime committed by Evans. As such, he had a statutory right to address the court at the sentencing hearing. Ind.Code § 35-35-38-5. Officer Staab's comments at sentencing did not represent a sentencing recommendation by the State, but were his own personal opinions that he was entitled to give. Further, Officer Staab's comments on Evans' criminal history were appropriate because that information was already before the court in the pre-sentence report.
Judgment affirmed.
ROBB, J., concurs.
BROOK, J., concurs with separate opinion.

=== CASE 9740670 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:01.112513+00 ===

BROOK, Judge,
concurring
I fully concur with Judge Vaidik's reasoning and result in this case, but I write separately to suggest a way of avoiding future confusion as to the meaning of similar "no recommendation" provisions in plea agreements.
When the State promises a criminal defendant under a plea agreement that it will offer no sentencing recommendation to the trial court, the better practice might be for the plea agreement to specify that although the prosecuting attorney could not offer such a recommendation, (1) any witness, whether a private citizen or a State agent, may do so by leave of court; and (2) any victim of the defendant's crime, whether a private citizen or a State agent, is entitled to do so under Indiana Code Section 35-85-38-5(b). A "no recommendation" provision is obviously meaningful to a criminal defendant, who might understandably yet mistakenly believe that no one, *249particularly a State agent, will be permitted to make a recommendation at the sentencing hearing. Although prosecutors and defense counsel will be familiar with the meaning of "no recommendation" provisions as explained in Harris and the instant case, it is safe to assume that most criminal defendants will not be. For reasons of fundamental fairness, then, I would encourage its inclusion in written plea agreements where applicable. See Sinn v. State, 693 N.E.2d 78, 80 (Ind.Ct.App.1998) ("The concept of plea bargaining contemplates an explicit agreement between the State and defendant which is binding upon both parties when accepted by the trial court. Strict adherence to the agreement is essential.") (emphasis added) (citation omitted).

=== CASE 9740688 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:22.478651+00 ===

Per Curiam.
Defendant, Charles G. Lewis, Jr., was charged with driving while under the influence of intoxicating liquor, in violation of Lincoln Mun. Code § 10.52.020, and with operating a snowmobile on a public street, in violation of Lincoln Mun. Code § 10.65.010. The county court for Lancaster County, following trial on stipulated facts, found the defendant guilty on each charge and sentenced him to 1 year’s probation, a $200 fine, and a 60-day driver’s license suspension. Defendant appealed the driving while under the influence charge to the district court for Lancaster County, which affirmed. This appeal followed. In this court, defendant contends that a snowmobile is not a motor vehicle under the Lincoln Municipal *643Code provision which prohibits driving a motor vehicle while under the influence. We affirm.
The provisions of the Lincoln Municipal Code under which the defendant was convicted and sentenced are not in the record. This court will not take judicial notice of a city ordinance which does not appear in the record.
When an ordinance charging an offense is not properly made a part of the record, an appellate court presumes the existence of a valid ordinance creating the offense charged, and an appellate court will not otherwise take judicial notice of the ordinance. ... In the absence from the record of the applicable municipal ordinance, an appellate court presumes that the evidence sustains the findings of the trial court and that a sentence is within the limits set out in the applicable ordinance.
State v. King, 239 Neb. 853, 854, 479 N.W.2d 125, 126 (1992). See, also, State v. Topping, 237 Neb. 130, 464 N.W.2d 799 (1991); State v. Cottingham, 226 Neb. 270, 410 N.W.2d 498 (1987); State v. Lynch, 223 Neb. 849, 394 N.W.2d 651 (1986); State v. Bruce, 213 Neb. 661, 330 N.W.2d 752 (1983).
When the applicable ordinance is not in the record, the district court, on the initial appeal to that court, and the appellate court, on appeal from the district court, will presume that the evidence before the trial court supports the findings of the trial court. State v. Topping, supra; State v. Cottingham, supra. The order of the district court, affirming the order of the county court, is affirmed.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 9740689 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:22.482911+00 ===

Shanahan, J.,
concurring.
This court continues to use a strange standard for disposition of a case involving an omitted ordinance, namely:
When an ordinance charging an offense is not properly made a part of the record, an appellate court presumes the existence of a valid ordinance creating the offense charged .... In the absence from the record of the applicable municipal ordinance, an appellate court presumes that the evidence sustains the findings of the trial court and that a sentence is within the limits set out in the applicable ordinance.
*644The preceding incantation is used to pull no fewer than two “presumptions” out of a judicial hat to affirm Lewis’ conviction. As the result of those unwarranted and untenable presumptions, the majority relieves the State from the fundamental requirement of establishing a valid basis for taking away a defendant’s liberty or property. Rather than indulge in such dispensation, other courts in several jurisdictions have concluded that the State’s failure to establish the ordinance on which a prosecution is based requires reversal of the conviction and dismissal of the proceeding; for instance, see State v. Pallet, 283 N.C. 705, 198 S.E.2d 433 (1973) (State’s failure to establish the municipal ordinance on which the prosecution is based required dismissal of the prosecution); Sisk v. Town of Shenandoah, 200 Va. 277, 280, 105 S.E.2d 169, 171 (1958) (conviction based on a municipal ordinance prohibiting drunk driving is, in the absence of the municipal ordinance in the record, reversed because “[fjair trial practice required that the defendant be afforded the opportunity to know the provisions of the ordinance she is charged with violating”); Hishaw v. City of Oklahoma City, 822 P.2d 1139 (Okla. Crim. App. 1991) (conviction reversed because municipal ordinance was absent from record presented to appellate court); Peters v. City of Phenix City, 589 So. 2d 800 (Ala. Crim. App. 1991) (failure to introduce into evidence the ordinance on which the charge was brought rendered the evidence insufficient to sustain a conviction); Gonon v. State, 579 N.E.2d 614 (Ind. App. 1991) (ordinance’s absence from the record renders the evidence insufficient to sustain a defendant’s conviction). Thus, prosecution of a defendant for violation of an ordinance without including the ordinance in the case against the defendant implicates due process and the right to a fair trial.
Although one might contend that a defendant can offer a certified copy of the ordinance at some stage of the proceeding before judgment in the trial court, the fact remains that the prosecution should be required to prove a prima facie case against a defendant, including existence of the very ordinance under which the prosecution is maintained. Otherwise, this court condones and even assists in the deprivation of a *645defendant’s liberty or property, as the result of prosecution under an ordinance which may, or may not, exist. Moreover, any litigant whose success in an action depends on existence of an ordinance should have the burden to establish existence of the ordinance. Also, in Zybach v. State, 226 Neb. 396, 401, 411 N.W.2d 627, 631 (1987) (quoting Nevels v. State, 205 Neb. 642, 289 N.W.2d 511 (1980)), this court stated that “ ‘a party seeking the benefit of such provisions [of an ordinance or regulation must] plead and prove the existence of the ordinance or rule.’ ” Thus, in cases involving an alleged violation of an ordinance, this court “presumes the existence of a valid ordinance creating the offense,” while simultaneously requiring that a party who seeks to benefit from the provisions of an ordinance must “ ‘plead and prove the existence of the ordinance.’ ” Judicial doublethink!
Furthermore, the standard employed in Lewis’ case may effectively eliminate appellate review of a conviction, since the prosecution, by omitting the crucial ordinance from the record in the trial court, can obviate a defendant’s successful appeal from a conviction based on the ordinance. The standard in Lewis’ case may also lead to certain undesirable and peculiar results, such as this court’s upholding a conviction obtained under an unconstitutional ordinance. For example, suppose that a defendant is prosecuted for violating a municipal ordinance which prohibits an individual’s criticism of city government or a public official, or suppose that a defendant is charged with violating an ordinance which forbids the presence of a particular racial minority within a city, a racial minority which includes the defendant. In the foregoing examples, notwithstanding that the defendant has properly challenged the constitutionality of the ordinance that is omitted from the trial, the defendant’s conviction under a constitutionally suspect ordinance must be upheld, even if the unconstitutional ordinance is missing from the prosecution’s case through oversight or deliberate deletion. Could not happen? Take a look at State v. Sator, 194 Neb. 120, 230 N.W.2d 224 (1975); State v. Radcliff, 188 Neb. 236, 196 N.W.2d 119 (1972); and State v. Novak, 153 Neb. 596, 45 N.W.2d 625 (1951).
The only explanation for the strange standard used by the *646majority regarding the missing ordinance in Lewis’ case is the rationalization: “Even though wrong, we’ve always done it this way.” Under that approach to jurisprudence, trial by ordeal and dousing suspected witches would still be acceptable methods to ascertain truth of allegations.
As an alternative to the standard employed by this court regarding an omitted ordinance, Lewis has supplied us with certified copies of applicable Lincoln ordinances pertinent to the prosecution and requests that this court take judicial notice of those ordinances as adjudicative facts. The State does not question the authenticity of the ordinances presented for judicial notice by this court; hence, the applicable Lincoln ordinances are beyond question in Lewis’ appeal.
The Nebraska Evidence Rules allow the judicial notice requested by Lewis, for Neb. Evid. R. 201(2) provides: “A judicially noticed fact must be one not subject to reasonable dispute in that it is . . . (b) capable of accurate and ready determination by resort to sources whose accuracy cannot reasonably be questioned.” Neb. Evid. R. 201(6) states that “ [j judicial notice may be taken at any stage of the proceeding.” Therefore, an appellate court can take judicial notice of an adjudicative fact.
Various commentators have emphasized the propriety and practicality concerning judicial notice of a municipal ordinance.
In the case of local ordinances, judicial notice was originally withheld by courts other than those of the local adoptive government. The reason is that only the judge of the local court was likely to have knowledge about or access to the ordinance. Therefore the rule of availability would naturally be limited to that court. The facts do not support the rule. Regardless of the court, if the ordinance is available, is reliable and is known to the court, it should be judicially noticed. Today a growing number of cities are publishing their ordinances. Where ordinances are available or are actually known to the court, the formal rule limiting judicial notice to municipal courts should be abandoned.
2 Norman J. Singer, Statutes and Statutory Construction *647§ 39.01 at 163-64 (4th ed. 1986). As pointed out in 2 McCormick on Evidence § 335 at 415 (John William Strong 4th ed. 1992),
municipal ordinances . . . are not commonly included within the doctrine of judicial notice and these must be pleaded and proved. To the extent that these items become readily available in compilations, it may be expected that they will become subject to judicial notice; whereas, in the meantime, it would appear appropriate for judges to take judicial notice of both private laws and municipal ordinances if counsel furnish a certified copy thereof.
Consequently, court after court has recognized that a municipal ordinance may be judicially noticed in a trial court and at the appellate level. See, Barberton v. O’Connor, 17 Ohio St. 3d 218, 478 N.E.2d 803 (1985); Concrete Contractors, Inc. v. City of Arvada, 621 P.2d 320 (Colo. 1981); Wessel v. Erickson Landscaping Co., 711 P.2d 250 (Utah 1985); State v. Duranleau, 99 N.H. 30, 104 A.2d 519 (1954); Martinez v. City of San Antonio, 768 S.W.2d 911 (Tex. App. 1989); Lowery v. Bd. of Cty. Com’rs for Ada Cty., 115 Idaho 64, 764 P.2d 431 (Idaho App. 1988); Forks v. Fletcher, 33 Wash. App. 104, 652 P.2d 16 (1982); Powers v. State, 370 So. 2d 854 (Fla. App. 1979); People v Miller, 77 Mich. App. 381, 258 N.W.2d 235 (1977).
However, as requested by Lewis, judicial notice of Lincoln ordinances affords no solace to Lewis, for Lincoln Mun. Code § 10.04.216 (1982) states: “Snowmobile shall mean a self-propelled motor vehicle designed to travel on snow or ice on a natural terrain steered by wheels, skis, or runners and propelled by a belt-driven track with or without steel cleats.” (Emphasis supplied.) Other Lincoln ordinances pertaining to snowmobiles prohibit operation of this type of motor vehicle on a public street, Lincoln Mun. Code § 10.65.010 (1986), and on private property, Lincoln Mun. Code § 10.65.040 (1986), within the city of Lincoln, but permit snowmobiling in Lincoln parks, Lincoln Mun. Code § 12.08.021 (1986). Nevertheless, the fact remains that, under Lincoln ordinances pertinent to Lewis’ case, a snowmobile is a type of motor vehicle that is subject to the Lincoln ordinances governing operation of a *648motor vehicle within the city limits of Lincoln. Stipulated evidence established that on January 20, 1990, two Lincoln police officers, apparently on cruiser patrol, saw Lewis driving his snowmobile at a high rate of speed on public streets within Lincoln; that the officers later stopped Lewis on his snowmobile and administered field sobriety tests and a “preliminary breath test” to Lewis, who failed those tests; that, subsequently, an Intoxilyzer test, properly administered to Lewis, disclosed that he had a breath alcohol level prohibited by Lincoln ordinance concerning operation of a motor vehicle; and that the officers had formed the opinion that Lewis “was under the influence of an alcoholic beverage at the time they saw him operating the snowmobile on the public street.” Therefore, in light of judicial notice concerning the Lincoln ordinances, the State charged and proved that Lewis operated his snowmobile, which is a motor vehicle, in violation of the Lincoln ordinance that prohibits a person’s operation or physical control of a motor vehicle while that person is under the influence of alcoholic liquor. For that reason, Lewis’ conviction must be affirmed.
Were it not for appellate judicial notice of the Lincoln ordinances as requested, Lewis’ conviction would have to be set aside, with this cause remanded for dismissal of the prosecution as the result of the State’s omitting proof of the ordinances.

=== CASE 2224485 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:23.117131+00 ===

193 Mich. App. 166 (1992)
483 N.W.2d 656
MARTIN
v.
EAST LANSING SCHOOL DISTRICT
Docket No. 125831.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided March 2, 1992, at 9:25 A.M.
Hankins & Associates, P.C. (by Dan E. Hankins and Randie K. Black), for the plaintiffs.
Miller, Johnson, Snell & Cummiskey (by Peter A. Patterson and W. Scott Szpara), for East Lansing School District.
White, Beekman, Przybylowicz, Schneider & Baird, P.C. (by Thomas A. Baird and Michele R. Eaddy), for East Lansing Education Association and Jean Cusick.
Before: MacKENZIE, P.J., and SULLIVAN and G.S. ALLEN,[*] JJ.
G.S. ALLEN, J.
Plaintiffs, six school teachers and *169 one social worker employed by defendant school district, appeal as of right from a January 24, 1990, opinion and order of the Ingham Circuit Court granting summary disposition to defendants, East Lansing School District, East Lansing Education Association, and Jean Cusick. Plaintiffs' complaint seeks to avoid a January 28, 1988, arbitrator's opinion and award affecting salary levels paid pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement between defendants district and association.
Plaintiffs were hired by defendant district between 1983 and 1986 and each plaintiff was given one hundred percent credit for previous teaching experience. Each employment contract was made subject to the 1983-1986 collective bargaining agreement, which contained a step-scale salary schedule. Article XXVI(B) of that agreement expressly provided that new hires would receive one-half credit for all prior teaching experience. Article XXVI(D) provided that "all teachers shall be compensated in accordance with Article XXVI without deviation." Article XIX(B) prescribed a grievance procedure culminating at level four:
Level Four: If the Association elects to submit the grievance to arbitration, it shall notify in writing the Superintendent within 21 days following the disposition at Level Three.
* * *
(b)... The arbitrator's decision shall be in writing.... The arbitrator shall be without power and authority to make any decision which requires the commission of an act prohibited by law or which is violative of the terms of this Agreement.
Despite the language of Article XXVI(B), the district interpreted that article as establishing minimum rather than maximum criteria for granting credit for prior teaching experience. Teachers who *170 upon hire did not receive full credit brought the discrepancy to the attention of the association, which in the fall of 1985 formally disputed the district's interpretation as violative of Article XXVI(B). On July 2, 1986, the association filed a grievance and, as relief, asked not that persons granted full credit be reduced to half credit, but that persons not given full credit be given back pay for the period they were not compensated at that level of the salary schedule.
The grievance was not resolved, and in September 1986, pursuant to Article XIX(B)4, the association submitted the dispute to the American Arbitration Association, which selected Barry Brown as arbitrator. Arbitration commenced on October 25, 1987, and on January 26, 1988, Brown entered a written opinion and award. The arbitrator ruled against the district's interpretation of XXVI(B) and held that those teachers who had been given full credit for prior teaching experience had been overpaid. However, the arbitrator rejected the association's request for relief, viz.: that teachers not receiving full prior credit should receive an increase in pay. Instead, the arbitrator ruled that all teachers, including plaintiffs-appellants, who were given more experience credit than that to which they were entitled under the agreement
must have their salary red circled. They should not be moved on the salary schedule until the improperly credited steps are made up. For example, teacher Conway was given full credit for six years experience when he/she was hired in 1985. This teacher will now remain at his/her present salary level for two or three years to remove the effects of gaining more than one-half credit at the time of employment. In other words, all teachers hired at an improperly high starting rate in the 1983-86 period must continue at their present salary until the overpayment is made up. Some teachers may have to forego general increases and *171 step increases for several years for the remedy to be reached.
The contract violation established was improper and disparate placement on the salary schedule for several teachers hired under the coverage of this labor agreement. Increasing the salary of all other teachers is not appropriate, feasible or within the arbitrator's authority. Decreasing the salary of those improperly paid is inequitable and a harsh remedy.
Feeling aggrieved by the "red circling" of their salaries, plaintiffs filed a four-count complaint in circuit court on September 13, 1988. Count I (against the district and the association) alleged a violation of procedural due process because of arbitration without notice or opportunity for plaintiffs' participation. Count II (against the district only) alleged breach of an implied verbal contract under a theory of promissory estoppel. Count III (against the district only) alleged unjust enrichment. Count IV (against the association and Cusick) alleged a violation of the duty of fair representation by submitting the dispute to grievance and arbitration proceedings, by failing to give plaintiffs an opportunity to participate in the proceedings, and by failing to appeal the arbitrator's award.
Defendants moved for summary disposition. On July 25, 1989, the trial court entered an order granting the association and Cusick's motion with respect to counts I and IV. However, plaintiffs were allowed to amend their complaint with regard to count IV. Subsequently, plaintiffs filed an amended complaint that added count v (against the district only), alleging that the district violated the collective bargaining agreement by paying plaintiffs an excessive salary and again by freezing plaintiffs' salaries in accordance with the arbitrator's award.
Defendants again moved for summary disposition,[1]*172 and on January 24, 1990, the trial court granted the motions with respect to each of the five counts. Basically, the court found:
1. The arbitrator had not exceeded his authority and was within the parameters of the master contract by freezing plaintiffs' salaries.
2. Count I: Plaintiffs' due process rights had not been violated (a) by the association and Cusick because of lack of state action, or (b) by the district because plaintiffs had no property interest grounded in contract, express or implied, in annual salary progressions.
3. Count II: The express provisions of the master contract precluded any action against the district based on promissory estoppel.
4. Count III: Unjust enrichment against the district is barred as a matter of law by the existence of the master contract.
5. Count IV: Action against the association and Cusick for breach of the duty of fair representation is precluded because of plaintiffs' failure to establish a breach of contract.
6. Count V: Breach of contract by the district was not established with respect to Article XXVI because plaintiffs were not harmed and with respect to Article XIX plaintiffs' salaries were frozen rather than reduced.
On appeal, plaintiffs do not challenge seriatim the trial court's findings but, instead, raise six claims of alleged error, as hereinafter described.
*173 I. DID THE TRIAL COURT ERR IN GRANTING DEFENDANTS' MOTIONS FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT?
The portion of plaintiffs' brief regarding this issue is devoted to the assertion that numerous issues of material fact exist, which may not be disposed of by summary judgment under the standard of review governing motions under MCR 2.116(C)(10). Unfortunately, plaintiffs' brief does not state what these factual issues are. We do not quarrel with the rule as stated by plaintiffs, but are unable to find error because of their failure to identify these purported factual issues.
II. DID THE TRIAL COURT ERR IN RULING THAT THE ARBITRATOR WAS WITHIN HIS AUTHORITY AND THE MASTER CONTRACT BY FREEZING OR "RED-CIRCLING" PLAINTIFFS' SALARIES?
The question whether the arbitrator exceeded his authority was addressed by the trial court in connection with the breach of contract claim raised in count V. As noted earlier, count V was added because plaintiffs had not alleged a breach of contract claim in conjunction with their claim of unfair representation in count IV. Specifically, plaintiffs contend that the arbitrator breached Article II(A) of the master agreement when ordering a freeze of plaintiffs' salaries. Article II(A) reads in relevant part:
As a duly elected body exercising governmental power under color of the law of the state of Michigan, the Board undertakes and agrees that it will not directly nor indirectly discourage or deprive or coerce any teacher in the enjoyment of any rights conferred by Act 379 or other laws of Michigan or the Constitutions of Michigan and the United States; that it will not discriminate against any *174 teacher with respect to hours, wages or any terms or conditions of employment by reason of membership in the Association, participation in any activities of the Association or collective professional negotiations with the Board, or institution of any grievance, complaint, or proceeding under this Agreement or otherwise with respect to any terms or conditions of employment. [Emphasis added.]
We disagree. First, in their original motion brief filed on July 7, 1989, plaintiffs mentioned a breach of Article II(A) by the district, but no mention was made of a breach by the arbitrator. When given an opportunity to amend, plaintiffs made no mention in count v that Article II(A) was violated. Nor did plaintiffs mention any violation of Article II(A) by either the district or the arbitrator in opposing the motions for summary disposition filed after the first amended complaint. Thus, plaintiffs' reliance on Article II(A) as showing a triable factual issue comes too late and should not be considered on appeal.
Second, Article II(A) is limited to discrimination occurring by reason of a teacher's union membership. We find nothing in the pleadings or the file suggesting that plaintiffs were being discriminated against because of union membership. Further, the arbitrator's carefully drawn opinion shows that he was cognizant that he could not apply the master agreement in a discriminatory manner.
Third, plaintiffs assert that by "red-circling" their salaries, the arbitrator exceeded his authority or, at the very least, misinterpreted the master agreement, because the master agreement expressly entitled plaintiffs to annual step increases.[2] Again we disagree. The arbitrator's action did not preclude the annual step increases, but caused *175 these increases to be credited toward the salary overpayment already received by plaintiffs. The flaw in plaintiffs' argument is that, unlike other teachers, plaintiffs had incurred indebtedness to the district, and their annual step increases, when made, were credited toward that indebtedness, rather than being paid in cash. Given these circumstances, we conclude that the arbitrator neither exceeded his authority nor misinterpreted the master agreement.
III. DID THE TRIAL COURT ERR IN RULING THAT THERE WAS NO BREACH OF CONTRACT, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED?
A. EXPRESS CONTRACT CLAIMS. (COUNT V)
First, plaintiffs point to Article XXVI(A) and argue that the trial court erred in ruling that annual step increases were not "guaranteed." For the reasons set forth in our discussion of issue II, supra, we find the error harmless. Whether the salary step increases were "guaranteed" becomes immaterial because no claim is made that the step increments were not paid when due and the court's opinion clearly states that whenever step increments were paid, plaintiffs were to be given credit toward the overpayment previously made by defendant district. This issue is further addressed in connection with plaintiffs' due process claim raised in issue v, infra.
Second, plaintiffs assert on appeal for the first time that the language of Article XXVI(B) is ambiguous and that they should be allowed to introduce parol evidence to clarify the ambiguity. Because this issue was not raised by affidavit or other documentary evidence in the trial court, summary disposition was appropriate and the issue may not be raised on appeal. Further, once the question of *176 the meaning of Article XXVI(B) was submitted to and decided by the arbitrator, any ambiguity was removed. To hold otherwise would violate the basic rule that review of an arbitrated matter is limited to determining whether the arbitrator acted within the scope of his authority and disclosed any bias. No claim of bias is made in this case, and in issue II, supra, this Court has found that the arbitrator was acting within the scope of his authority. Further, even without the decision of the arbitrator, our review of the master agreement discloses no ambiguity.
Third, plaintiffs contend that the trial court erred in ruling that the "freezing" of plaintiffs' salaries did not violate Article XVI(C) of the master agreement. That section reads in relevant part:
No teacher shall be reprimanded, disciplined, reduced in rank or compensation, or deprived of any professional advantage without just cause. Any such reprimand, discipline, or reduction in rank, compensation or advantage, including adverse evaluation of teacher performance or violation of professional ethics asserted by the Board or any agent or representative thereof shall be subject to the Professional Grievance Procedure hereinafter set forth. [Emphasis added.]
Plaintiffs admit that they were not reprimanded, disciplined, or reduced in rank, but claim the freezing of their salaries "effectively discontinued" a continual climb in their rank, compensation, and professional advantage. We find the argument flawed in obvious respects. As noted earlier, plaintiffs' salaries were not "reduced" from what the salaries should have been under Article XXVI of the master agreement. Even if it is assumed arguendo that the freezing of salaries was tantamount to a reduction in rank or professional advantage, it *177 was ordered by the arbitrator "for just cause." Therefore, there was no violation of Article XVI(C). Further, in ordering the freeze, defendant district merely complied with the binding award of the arbitrator in accordance with the grievance provisions of the master agreement.
B. IMPLIED CONTRACT CLAIMS.[3]
1. UNJUST ENRICHMENT. (COUNT III)
Count III of plaintiffs' amended complaint raised the claim of unjust enrichment. The trial court ruled that the claim must fail because it was barred by the existence of an express contract, viz.: the individual contract with each teacher, which makes the contract subject to the terms of the master agreement, including Article XXVI. Plaintiffs argue that this begs the question because Article XXVI(B), governing credits for prior work experience, which the trial court found clear and unambiguous, is ambiguous. This is the same claim of ambiguity raised by plaintiffs and rejected by us in issue III-A, supra.
Plaintiffs assert that defendant district has been unjustly enriched by receiving the services of the more qualified and experienced teachers without paying compensation for such services by reason of the red-circling freeze. In such instances, the law implies a contract to prevent unjust enrichment, which occurs when one party receives a benefit from another the retention of which would be inequitable. In re McCallum Estate, 153 Mich. App. 328, 335; 395 NW2d 258 (1986).
However, a contract will be implied only if there is no express contract. Campbell v City of Troy, 42 *178 Mich App 534, 537; 202 NW2d 547 (1972). In the present case, the individual contracts made with plaintiffs were expressly subject to the terms and conditions of the master agreement. Further, it is a gross mischaracterization to assert that defendant district paid no compensation for the prior work experience. As we have stated several times before, plaintiffs were in fact overpaid for prior work experience according to the master agreement, and the red-circling freeze was only imposed to recapture the amount of overpayment.
2. PROMISSORY ESTOPPEL. (COUNT II)
Count II of plaintiffs' amended complaint raised a claim of promissory estoppel. As with the claim of unjust enrichment asserted in count III, plaintiffs rely on the promises made to them during precontract negotiations that their salary levels would be based on one hundred percent credit for prior teaching experience. Plaintiffs assert that their reliance on those promises caused them to cease looking for other teaching positions and that, under such circumstances, the prior promises should be enforced if injustice is to be avoided.
Promissory estoppel arises in equity when (1) there is a promise (2) that the promisor should reasonably have expected to induce action of a definite and substantial character on the part of the promisee (3) which in fact produces reliance or forbearance of that nature (4) under circumstances such that the promise must be enforced if injustice is to be avoided. McMath v Ford Motor Co, 77 Mich. App. 721, 725; 259 NW2d 140 (1977). The promise must be definite and clear. Id. Where a defense under a statute of frauds has been raised, the rule applied has been that one must act to his detriment solely in reliance on the oral agreement, *179 or where its application is necessitated by the facts. Pursell v Wolverine-Pentronix, Inc, 44 Mich. App. 416, 419; 205 NW2d 504 (1973).
The trial court rejected the claim of promissory estoppel on the dual grounds that (1) MCL 380.1232; MSA 15.41232 extinguishes obligations existing before the written individual contracts were made and (2) the written individual contracts were expressly made subject to Article XXVI(B) of the master agreement, which prohibited more than fifty percent credit for prior teaching experience. On appeal, plaintiffs assert that MCL 380.1232; MSA 15.41232 does not apply. In pertinent part that statute provides:
The board of a school district, by agreement between the board and a teacher or by agreement between the board and an organization representing the teacher... may terminate an existing contract for the services of the teacher and substitute a new contract which provides increased benefits to the teacher. The new contract shall be binding without regard to preexisting duties or obligations of either the board or the teacher under the previous contract. [Emphasis added.]
We find that the trial court erred. As can be seen from the language of the statute, it applies to new contracts that provide "increased benefits to the teacher." The individual written contracts did not increase the benefits verbally promised in prior negotiations. Also, the language pertains to "existing contracts for services" that are terminated and for which new contracts are substituted. No evidence was presented that new contracts were substituted for the individual written contracts.
Nevertheless, although the trial court erred in part, the correct result was reached. The court *180 correctly rejected promissory estoppel on the first of the dual grounds recited above. Even if promissory estoppel was not barred by the subsequently written contracts, the implied promises were not in writing. As argued in defendant district's brief, contracts between teachers and boards of education must be in writing and signed by the proper entity. MCL 380.1231; MSA 15.41231. To allow verbal representations by staff administrators to bind the district without a written contract or action by the board itself would be to ignore the statute.
In summary, we find no error in the trial court's disposition of plaintiffs' express and implied claims in contract. The express contracts that plaintiffs signed were indisputably subject to the terms and conditions of the master agreement. The master agreement put plaintiffs on notice of defendant association's right to pursue grievances, including the language of Article XXVI(B) itself. To allow plaintiffs to now proceed in equity with respect to counts II and III on the basis of alleged promises, express or implied, would not only contravene the statutory requirements of a written contract, but would violate the parol evidence rule for contracts. Compare Edgecomb v Traverse City School Dist, 341 Mich. 106, 118; 67 NW2d 87 (1954).
IV. DID THE TRIAL COURT ERR IN RULING THAT PLAINTIFFS HAD NO CLAIM FOR BREACH OF FAIR REPRESENTATION? (COUNT IV)
This claim pertains only to defendants association and Cusick. The duty of fair representation by a labor organization is an implied duty that requires the labor organization to fairly and impartially represent all members of the bargaining unit. Humphrey v Moore, 375 U.S. 335, 342; 84 S Ct *181 363; 11 L. Ed. 2d 370 (1964); Goolsby v Detroit, 419 Mich. 651, 661; 358 NW2d 856 (1984). To prevail on a claim of unfair representation, the employee must establish not only a breach of the duty of fair representation but also a breach of the collective bargaining agreement. See Pearl v Detroit, 126 Mich. App. 228, 238; 336 NW2d 899 (1983), and Hines v Anchor Motor Freight, Inc, 424 U.S. 554, 570-571; 96 S. Ct. 1048; 47 L. Ed. 2d 231 (1976).
With respect to this claim, the trial court simply ruled that, because they had failed to establish a breach of an express or implied contract by any of the named defendants, plaintiffs "could not prevail on a fair representation claim and this Court need not decide further on that issue." Plaintiffs concede that proof of breach of contract was a condition precedent to establishing a breach of the duty of fair representation, and we have held in issue III, supra, that there was no breach of contract by any of the named defendants. Therefore, we affirm the trial court's decision and judgment regarding this issue.
V. DID THE TRIAL COURT ERR IN DETERMINING THAT PLAINTIFFS' DUE PROCESS RIGHTS HAD NOT BEEN VIOLATED? (COUNT I)
At the July 12, 1989, hearing regarding defendants' first motions for summary disposition, plaintiffs' counsel stipulated that plaintiffs would not contest dismissal of count I with regard to defendants association and Cusick. Count I of plaintiffs' amended complaint alleged no due process violation by the association or Cusick, and the trial court's final order expressly stated that there was no due process claim against defendants association and Cusick. Therefore, the issue is not preserved on appeal against these defendants.
*182 However, plaintiffs did preserve their due process claim against defendant district. With respect to this issue, plaintiffs contend that they have a property interest in annual progressions on the salary scale guaranteed them by Article XXVI(A) of the master agreement. This is the same claim raised by plaintiffs as an "express contract" claim in count V and rejected by us in issue III, supra. As we ruled then, we find no "guarantee" of annual salary progressions in Article XXVI(A). Nothing in that article guarantees plaintiffs the right to be overpaid or to annual progressions from an overly high salary base. Further, as we stated previously, no proofs were introduced showing that, when annual step increases were paid to teachers to whom only fifty percent credit had been given, equivalent step increases were not granted to plaintiffs. Rather, the arbitrator's decision caused step increases to be applied to plaintiffs' indebtedness caused by their employment being based on one hundred percent credit for prior work experience.
Unable to find a written agreement promising one hundred percent credit for prior work credit, plaintiffs claim the existence of a genuine issue of fact regarding whether they were hired under an unwritten credit policy "promulgated" by the district. In support of this "de facto" policy, plaintiffs cite Perry v Sindermann, 408 U.S. 593; 92 S. Ct. 2694; 33 L. Ed. 2d 570 (1972). This issue was not raised, either as a legal or factual issue, in the trial court. Under MCR 2.116(G)(4), plaintiffs are required to set forth specific facts disclosing an issue of fact for trial.
Also, unlike Perry, where the plaintiff had no formal contract, the present case involves a formal written contract required by statute, MCL 380.1231(1); MSA 15.41231(1), to be in writing and *183 signed by the board. Power specifically vested by statute in a public body to bind the state in the operation of its educational institutions and to expend public funds cannot be delegated, nor is the state bound by an implied contract. Sittler v Bd of Control of the Michigan College of Mining & Technology, 333 Mich. 681, 686-687; 53 NW2d 681 (1952).
Finding no error that requires reversal, we affirm the trial court's judgment of summary disposition for all defendants. Costs to defendants.
NOTES
[*]  Former Court of Appeals judge, sitting on the Court of Appeals by assignment.
[1]  Summary disposition of count I was sought pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(4) on the ground that the trial court lacked subject-matter jurisdiction. With respect to all five counts, summary disposition was sought pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(8) and (10) the on grounds that plaintiffs failed to state a claim upon which relief could be granted and that, except for the amount of damages, there was no genuine issue concerning any material fact.
[2]  This claim of error is again raised and discussed in issue III, infra.
[3]  This claim is raised against the district only.

=== CASE 2224492 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:23.25027+00 ===

483 N.W.2d 518 (1992)
Georgena LEUBNER, et al., Appellant,
v.
Barbara J. STERNER, M.D., et al., Respondents.
No. C5-91-2239.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
April 14, 1992.
Review Granted June 10, 1992.
*519 John W. Carey, Judy Emmings, Sieben, Gross, Von Holtum, McCoy, & Carey, Ltd., Fairfax, for appellant.
Kay N. Hunt, Phillip A. Cole, Lommen, Nelson, Cole & Stageberg, Minneapolis, for respondents.
Considered and decided by HARTEN, P.J., and PARKER and CRIPPEN, JJ.
OPINION
HARTEN, Judge.
Appellants Georgena and Richard Leubner sued respondent Ronald C. Jensen, M.D., for medical malpractice. After considering the Leubners' offer of proof of expert medical testimony, the trial court entered summary judgment, finding as a matter of law that the offered testimony stated neither a probable death nor a probability of causation. The Leubners appeal, arguing that liability can be imposed under the loss of chance theory for a decreased likelihood of survival. They also contend that aggravation of pre-existing disease and loss of consortium remain at issue. We affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand.
FACTS
While vacationing in May 1987, Mrs. Leubner experienced a burning sensation in her left breast. She detected two lumps. Dr. Barbara Sterner examined Mrs. Leubner on June 18, 1987 and confirmed the existence of nodules. A contemporaneous mammogram was negative. Dr. Sterner referred Mrs. Leubner to Dr. Jensen for an additional exam and biopsy.
On June 25, 1987, Dr. Jensen examined Mrs. Leubner, but did not order a biopsy. He scheduled a follow-up exam for December. On December 19, 1987, Dr. Jensen reexamined Mrs. Leubner, discovered the lumps were enlarged, and advised her to undergo a biopsy.
*520 Mrs. Leubner was in the process of transferring her health insurance coverage to another plan in which Dr. Jensen was not a treating physician. On January 1, 1988, Mrs. Leubner's new insurance took effect. A biopsy was performed in February 1988. Mrs. Leubner was diagnosed as having breast cancer and underwent a partial mastectomy of her left breast.
The Leubners commenced this malpractice action against Drs. Sterner and Jensen in June 1989. They subsequently dismissed Dr. Sterner from the suit. On November 30, 1989, the Leubners mailed an affidavit of expert testimony to Dr. Jensen pursuant to Minn.Stat. § 145.682 subd. 3(b) (1988). The affidavit contained the opinion of the Leubners' expert, Dr. Alan Newman, that Dr. Jensen's delay resulted in Mrs. Leubner having:
twice the risk for having positive nodes and for distant metastases [than] she would have had if the diagnosis and treatment had been carried out in June of 1987.
In November 1989, an additional lump was discovered in Mrs. Leubner's left breast, and a mastectomy was performed. Chest wall lesions were excised in November 1990 and April 1991.
At a pre-trial hearing in August 1991, the parties agreed to present the Leubners' theory of causation to the trial court as a question of law. The parties stipulated to Dr. Newman's qualifications for purposes of the hearing. On the record, the Leubners stated Dr. Newman's opinion that:
[I]t's more likely than not, given the growth behavior of the tumor, that the tumor was indeed less than 2.0 centimeters in diameter, possibly even less than 1.5 centimeters in diameter, at presentation in June of 1987. At that time, I also believe it is more likely than not that lymph node involvement had not yet taken place since the likelihood of positive nodes with tumors of that size is less than fifty percent, whereas, when the tumor was 3.8 centimeters in diameter in 1988, the likelihood of having positive nodes was greater than fifty percent. Also, her chance of having distant metastasis has probably doubled in that time period.
The Leubners further asserted Dr. Newman's opinion that:
[B]ecause of the rate of growth of the tumor, * * * the patient went from a seventy to eighty percent chance of being free of disease in five years, for example, to approximately a forty percent chance.
The Leubners offered Dr. Newman's opinion that Mrs. Leubner's five year survival rate had decreased from "approximately ninety-six percent to approximately eighty percent." Additionally, they submitted the following written offer of proof:
Dr. Newman will opine that if [Mrs. Leubner] had been diagnosed and surgically treated in July 1987, rather than February 1988, she would possess an increased chance of survival from her disease of breast cancer, in contrast to [a] present chance of survival with diagnosis and treatment in February of 1988. Her decreased chances of survival [were] directly caused by the delay in diagnosis and treatment.
Dr. Jensen moved for summary judgment.
The trial court granted summary judgment.[1] It ruled that Minnesota does not allow recovery for loss of chance and that causation cannot be submitted to a jury:
when the necessary medical expert opinion evidence does not state that it is more likely than not * * * that the consequences opined about will occur.
ISSUES
1. Did the trial court err in granting summary judgment on the loss of chance claim?
*521 2. Did the trial court err in granting summary judgment on the aggravation of pre-existing disease claim?
3. Did the trial court err in granting summary judgment on the loss of consortium claim?
ANALYSIS
In a summary judgment appeal, this court ascertains whether there are genuine issues of material fact and whether the trial court applied the law correctly. Hubred v. Control Data Corp., 442 N.W.2d 308, 310 (Minn.1989). A summary judgment decision embraces the pleadings and affidavits on file. Minn.R.Civ.P. 56.03. The evidence is viewed in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party. Vacura v. Harr's Equip., Inc., 364 N.W.2d 387, 391 (Minn.1985).
The elements of a prima facie case of medical malpractice are: (1) the applicable standard of care recognized by the medical community, (2) the defendant deviated from the standard, (3) the deviation directly caused injury, and (4) damages. Reinhardt v. Colton, 337 N.W.2d 88, 94 (Minn.1983).
A plaintiff must introduce expert testimony to establish the first three elements if such issues are not within the common knowledge of laymen. Id. at 95. Despite heightened public awareness, diagnosis and treatment of breast cancer are not within a layman's common knowledge.
1. The Leubners argue that Dr. Jensen is liable on their loss of chance claim for lessening Mrs. Leubner's chance of survival from 96% to 80%.
Loss of chance involves the premise that a doctor, by doing something wrong, has decreased the patient's chance of survival (or even caused the death of a patient).
Kalsbeck v. Westview Clinic, P.A., 375 N.W.2d 861, 870 (Minn.App.1985), pet. for rev. denied (Minn. Dec. 30, 1985) (citing Hamil v. Bashline, 481 Pa. 256, 392 A.2d 1280 (1978) (doctor's failure to promptly treat heart attack, terminating 75% chance of survival, was proximate cause of death)); see also Herskovits v. Group Health Coop., 99 Wash.2d 609, 664 P.2d 474 (1983) (doctor's failure to timely diagnose lung cancer, resulting in decrease in survival likelihood from 39% to 25%, was sufficient evidence of causation to create jury issue on proximate cause of death).
Minnesota has neither expressly adopted nor rejected the loss of chance doctrine. Kalsbeck, 375 N.W.2d at 870 (citing Cornfeldt v. Tongen, 295 N.W.2d 638, 641 n. 4 (Minn.1980)). Application of the doctrine only arises when negligence has already been established. Kalsbeck, 375 N.W.2d at 870.
Once a jury has found negligence on the part of a doctor, loss of chance is one of different theories a court can use to instruct a jury on the other needed threshold, i.e., proximate cause.
Id.
The loss of chance doctrine is misplaced in the present case. Negligence has not been established. Taking the Leubners' offer of proof in the most favorable view, at worst Mrs. Leubner's chances of 5 year survival declined from 96% to 80%. An imminent death with attendant injuries is certainly not present. See, e.g., Roers v. Engebretson, 479 N.W.2d 422, 423 (Minn. App.1992) (damages awarded for loss of consortium related to imminent death of spouse).
The Leubners have not offered an opinion that Dr. Jensen's negligence "terminated [Mrs. Leubner's] chance of recovery." Cornfeldt, 295 N.W.2d at 641 n. 4. Nor have they introduced medical testimony that death will more probably than not result from Dr. Jensen's alleged negligence. See id. at 640 (failure to disclose pre-operative indication of liver malfunction was not proximate cause of death). Rather, in Dr. Newman's statistical opinion, death is overwhelmingly improbable. The trial court properly granted summary judgment on the Leubners' loss of chance claim.
2. The Leubners argue that Dr. Jensen's malpractice exacerbated Mrs. Leubner's pre-existing disease. Minnesota has long recognized a cause of action for *522 negligent aggravation of pre-existing disease. Schore v. Mueller, 290 Minn. 186, 189, 186 N.W.2d 699, 701 (1971); Bloomquist v. Minneapolis Furniture Co., 112 Minn. 143, 148, 127 N.W. 481, 482 (1910). The medical community is cognizant that:
Delay in treatment [of cancer] almost invariably results in a more serious prognosis. Clinical Oncology for Medical Students and Physicians at 41 (P. Rubin 3d ed. 1970-1971).
Evers v. Dollinger, 95 N.J. 399, 471 A.2d 405, 410 n. 4 (1984).
The Leubners seek damages for Mrs. Leubner's injuries, offering Dr. Newman's opinion that Dr. Jensen's negligence resulted in a decline from 70-80% to a 40% chance of being free of disease 5 years after the initial 1987 examination. Consistent with that opinion, Dr. Newman's earlier affidavit stated that Dr. Jensen's negligence caused "twice the risk for having positive nodes and for distant metastases."
The Leubners have also presented prima facie evidence of resultant injuries occurring during a four year period after Dr. Jensen's initial examination  a partial mastectomy, a mastectomy, and two chest wall lesion surgeries. Under Reinhardt, the Leubners have stated a prima facie case of medical malpractice resulting in aggravation of pre-existing disease. The trial court erred in granting summary judgment on the aggravation claim.
3. Mr. Leubner alleges damages for loss of consortium. Given Dr. Newman's affidavit and the oral offer of proof at the hearing, and for the same reasons applicable to the aggravation claim, Mr. Leubner has presented a prima facie case of loss of consortium. The trial court erred in granting summary judgment as to that claim.
DECISION
The trial court erred in granting blanket summary judgment on the entire action, rather than partial summary judgment on the loss of chance claim.
Affirmed in part, reversed in part, and remanded.
NOTES
[1]  Consideration of the "loss of chance" claim dominated the summary judgment proceedings. Little attention was given to the aggravation of pre-existing disease claims; however, the trial court's memorandum indicated that summary judgment was appropriate for the entire case.

=== CASE 9740671 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:08.763474+00 ===

RATLIFF, Senior Judge.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
In 1984, Robert Correll was convicted of criminal confinement as a class B felony; burglary as a class B felony; burglary as a class C felony; and two counts of theft, class D felonies.1 His convictions were affirmed by the supreme court on direct appeal. Correll v. State (1985), Ind., 486 N.E.2d 497. He now appeals from the denial of his petition for post-conviction relief. We remand with instructions to reduce the confinement conviction to a class D felony, and we affirm in all other respects.
ISSUES
Correll raises the following issues for review.
I. Did fundamental error occur, and was Correll thereby deprived of due process, when Correll was convicted of criminal confinement-an element of which is its being committed while armed with a deadly weapon-and the information charged him with kidnapping and made no reference to a deadly weapon?
II. Was Correll denied his constitutional right to testify in his own behalf?
III. Was Correll denied his constitutional right to effective assistance of counsel at trial and on his appeal?
IV. Did the post-conviction court err in relying upon the doctrine of "invited error" to deny Correll's petition for post-conviction relief?
*679FACTS
As previously described by the supreme court, the following events gave rise to Cor-rell's charges and convictions.
"[Correll] escaped from the Indiana State Farm on January 26, 1983. Police officers discovered [Correll's] prison clothes in the basement of a house belonging to Donald Blue located one and one quarter (1%) miles from the State Farm. Blue's house was broken into and clothes, food, and a shotgun were taken. A chair was found overlooking the house trailer of Mary Jo Kellam, located across the street from Blue's house. Kellam arrived home from work at about 1:00 a.m. that night. Shortly thereafter [Correll], armed with the stolen shotgun, broke into Kellam's trailer and demanded beer and a ride to Indianapolis. At Indianapolis, while the temperature was below freezing, [Correll] forced Kellam into the trunk of the car, from which she eventually escaped."
Id. at 499.
After his direct appeal, Correll filed a verified pro se petition for post-conviction relief in 1989. A State Public Defender filed an entry of appearance later in 1989. In September, 1992, Correll's current State Public Defender filed her appearance for Correll, and on March 25, 1998, Correll's motion to amend his petition for post-conviction relief was filed. The amended petition raised the first three issues specified above. Correll's petition was heard on June 29, 1998. Both Correll and his original trial counsel testified. The court denied Correll's petition, finding "that in balancing the caselaw against the doctrine of invited error presented in this case, and the other issues, that the doctrine of invited error must prevail and therefore denie[d]" Correll's petition.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
A claim of fundamental error can be raised in a petition for post-conviction relief regardless of whether the issue normally would have been waived on direct appeal. Haggenjos v. State (1986), Ind., 493 N.E.2d 448. Fundamental error is "blatant" error which, if not rectified, would "deny the petitioner 'fundamental due process'" Id. at 450. In this case, Correll failed to preserve for review on direct appeal the errors here asserted. Therefore, unless these errors are of fundamental magnitude, they are deemed waived.
At the outset, we note that Ind.Post-Conviction Rule 1 § 6 requires the trial court "make specific findings of fact, and conclusions of law on all issues presented." The court's decision refers only to "the doctrine of invited error" in denying Correll's petition. That doctrine does not address his assertions of being denied his right to testify and his right to the effective assistance of counsel. However, we do not find that a remand for more specific findings is warranted as "the facts underlying appellant's claims are not disputed and the issues are sufficiently presented for appeal." State v. Grigsby (1987), Ind., 503 N.E.2d 394, 397.
I. Confinement Conviction
The information filed against Correll charged him with kidnapping, a class A felony pursuant to I.C. 85-42-3-2, for "having knowingly and intentionally remove[d] by force from one place to another with intent to aid in" his own escape and having "force[d] one Mary Jo Kellum to remove herself from her place of residence into her own automobile, and to take" Correll to Indianapolis "to aid in his escape from the Indiana State Farm." R. at 19. Accordingly, the trial court provided the jury with an instruction which defined the erime of class A felony kidnapping and which stated that
"to convict the defendant ... the State must have proved each of the following elements: the defendant
1. knowingly or intentionally
2. removed another person, by fraud, enticement, force or threat of force, from one place to another with intent to obtain the release, or intent to aid in the escape of any person from lawful detention."
R. at 91.
Correll tendered an instruction regarding the "crime of criminal confinement" whereby one "knowingly or intentionally:
1. confines another person without his consent;
*6802. removes another person, by fraud, enticement, force, or threat of force, from one place to another."
R. at 92. The tendered instruction said that if the State proved the defendant "committed these acts" of confinement "while armed with a deadly weapon, you should find him guilty of criminal confinement, a class B felony.2 Id. The court gave the jury an instruction on the crime of confinement, using Correll's language.
Correll contends that as the kidnapping charge did not mention a "deadly weapon," Correll was convicted of a crime which includes an element not contained in the charging information, and such is fundamental error according to Yarbrough v. State (1986), Ind., 497 N.E.2d 206. The State argues that Correll "invited" the error by tendering his instruction with the "language he now complains of," specifically, the "while armed with a deadly weapon" language. The State refers to a series of cases standing for the proposition that "error invited by the complaining party is not reversible error." Ap-pellee's brief at 8.
Yarbrough was originally charged with one count of battery as a class C felony, alleging that he struck a child "in the face" with resulting "serious bodily injury" and another count of battery as a class D felony, alleging that his striking the child resulted in "bodily injury" to a person under thirteen years of age. Yarbrough, supra at 207. Yarbrough moved to dismiss the first count (battery causing serious bodily injury), and the motion was granted. Thus, Yarbrough was tried on a single charge by information of "battery, class D felony" with the allegation "that his act resulted in bodily injury." Id. As in the case at bar, Yarbrough submitted a jury instruction which described another crime. Yarbrough's tendered instruction defined the "crime of Recklessness" and specified the different classes of recklessness. The instruction included the statement that "A person who recklessly, knowingly or intentionally inflicts serious bodily injury on another person commits criminal recklessness, a class D felony." Id. at 208 (emphasis added). The instruction tendered by Yarbrough was modified by the court (a reference to class A misdemeanor recklessness, which includes the use of a vehicle or deadly weapon, was stricken), but the instruction as given to the jury included Yarbrough's language defining class D felony recklessness as that inflicting serious bodily injury. As in the case at bar, the State argued that "Appellant invited this error by submitting the instruction authorizing the jury to find the defendant guilty of criminal recklessness." Id. at 208-209. To which Yarbrough responded that as this was fundamental error, it "transcends Appellant's act of inviting error." Id. Our supreme court declared that "we need not discuss" such meritorious contentions, because "Indiana courts consistently have found it to be fundamental error to convict a defendant for an offense which includes an element not included in the charge." Id.
We find no basis on which this case may be distinguished from Yarbrough In order to convict Correll of class B felony confinement, the state was required to allege that Correll was armed with a deadly weapon. The state's failure to so do so constitutes fundamental error. We therefore remand this cause to the trial court with instructions to enter a judgment modifying Correll's conviction, to show Correll guilty of the offense of confinement as a class D felony.
II. Right to Testify
The right to testify on one's own behalf in a criminal proceeding has been described by the U.S. Supreme Court as "a right implicit in the Constitution." U.S. v. Dunnigan (1998), - U.S. -, --, 113 S.Ct. 1111, 1117, 122 L.Ed.2d 445.
Correll was provided appointed counsel. A hand written letter from Correll to the judge, dated April 16, 1984 and file-marked April 17th (the day on which Correll's trial began), expressed Correll's dissatisfaction *681with the counsel for several reasons including that "he dosen't [sic] want me to testifi [sic] in my owne [sic] behalf" R. at 69. An accompanying document listed the eight chapters of Article 36 "Pretrial Notices, Motions and Procedures" of Title 35. Outside the presence of the jury and at the very beginning of the trial, the trial court judge heard Correll's testimony about his appointed counsel, that "he doesn't want me to testify in my own behalf." R. at 200. The court then denied Correll's purported motions. Correll argues that there is "no evidence on the record that he ever voluntarily waived his right to testify," and that under these circumstances "the trial court had a duty to insure that Correll personally made a knowing and intelligent waiver of his constitutional right to testify." Appellant's brief at 14-15.
Correll cites Winkelman v. State (1986), Ind.App., 498 N.E.2d 99 for the right of an accused under the Indiana Constitution "to be heard by himself and counsel" and the duty of the judge "to insure that Correll personally make a knowing and intelligent waiver of his constitutional right to testify . and to make a record of such waiver." Appellant's brief at 14-15. Mr. and Mrs. Winkelman represented themselves at trial on charges of neglect (following the death of their three week old son from pneumonia) for refusing to provide conventional medical care and instead relying on prayer and religious beliefs. In a colloquy between the Winkel-mans and the judge, at the point where they were to present their defense, the judge told them that they would have the opportunity to make a statement to the jury during final argument. Consequently, neither testified. Under these cireumstances, the Winkelmans were found to not have "knowingly and intelligently waive[d] their right to be heard as the trial judge did not explain to them that they could testify as witnesses in their own behalf." Id. at 101. The "duty" which we ascribed to the trial judge was "to clearly explain to the Winkelmans that they could offer testimony, including their own, at the end of the state's case" and to "make a record of the explanation." Id. That the Winkelmans were acting pro se at trial must be considered to distinguish their case from Correll's. Further, the Winkeiman facts demonstrate the active involvement of the court in the Winkelman's failure to testify.3
The State directs our attention to Underwood v. Clark, 989 F.2d 478 (7th Cir.1991). Underwood considered a claim that counsel "was 1) ineffective in counseling him not to testify, and 2) actually forbade him to testify." Id. at 474. Judge Posner wrote that "the lawyer's advice was sound" and also "wasn't likely to change the outcome of the trial-in legalese, it was not 'prejudicial.' " Id. at 4745. The "more substantial issue" related to Underwood's not testifying was "whether his lawyer did not merely counsel Underwood not to do so but forbade him." Id. The court looked at the "grave practical difficulty in establishing a mechanism that will protect a eriminal defendant's personal right (that is, a right that is not waivable by counsel) to testify in his own behalf without rendering the criminal process unworkable." Id. Because "it is extremely common for criminal defendants not to testify, and there are good reasons for this," the mere assertion after being convicted that "my lawyer wouldn't let me testify" is "insufficient to require a hearing or other action on his claim that his right to testify in his own defense was denied him." Id. at 476. Rather, "some substantiation is necessary, such as an affidavit from the lawyer who allegedly forbade his client to testify." Id.
More recently, the Seventh Cireuit has rejected the claim that the trial court "was required, under the Due Process clause in the Constitution, to inquire specifically whether [a defendant] was knowingly and *682intelligently waiving his right to testify at trial." U.S. v. Curry, 977 F.2d 1042, 1058 (7th Cir., 1992), cert. denied sub nom. Holland v. U.S., - U.S. -, 113 S.Ct. 1357, 122 L.Ed.2d 737 (1993). "We have rejected this identical claim on numerous occasions." Id.
Correll's trial counsel testified at the post-conviction relief petition hearing. He said Correll "wanted to take the stand and I, obviously I told him not to." P.C.R.R. at 118. Counsel said he had "decided on balance, it was better that if, that he not testify." P.CRR. at 117.
Correll testified at the post-conviction relief petition hearing that he understood the judge's ruling on his hand written document about motions to mean that he could not take the stand. P.C.R.R. at 102.
Correll did not testify that his counsel forbade him to testify. There is no evidence of such action by trial counsel. Rather, we have Correll's perception that he would not be allowed to testify. Such a perception on the part of a defendant does not rise to the level of substantiation required to establish the denial of one's right to testify in one's own behalf.
IIL Ineffective Assistance of Counsel
Correll contends he was denied effective assistance of counsel both at trial and on direct appeal. Specifically, he argues that appellate counsel's failure to raise the substantive issues discussed in sections I. and II. constitutes ineffective assistance of counsel. He argues that trial counsel's tender of an instruction which was "improper since it listed criminal confinement with a deadly weapon as a lesser included offense, which it was not," his failure to object to the incorrectness of the instruction as given, and his "failure to yield control of this fundamentally personal decision [about testifying] to his client," constitute ineffective assistance. Appellant's brief at 17-18.
Upon a showing that "counsel's performance fell below an objective standard of reasonableness and that said deficient performance so prejudiced defendant as to deprive him of a fair trial," reversal for ineffective assistance of counsel is appropriate. Bellmore v. State (1992), Ind., 602 N.E.2d 111, 123, citing Strickland v. Washington (1984), 466 U.S. 668, 104 S.Ct. 2052, 80 L.Ed.2d 674.
"A claim of ineffective assistance must identify the claimed errors of counsel so that the court may determine whether, in light of all cireumstances, counsel's actions were outside the range of professionally competent assistance. The proper measure of attorney performance is reasonableness under prevailing professional norms. It shall be strongly presumed that counsel rendered adequate assistance and made all significant decisions in the exercise of reasonable professional judgment. Judicial scrutiny of counsel's performance is highly deferential and should not be exercised through the distortions of hindsight. Isolated poor strategy, inexperience, or bad tactics do not necessarily amount to ineffectiveness of counsel. If deficient performance of counsel can be proven, defendant must further show a reasonable probability that it altered the outcome of the case."
Id.
As to the claim regarding the confinement instruction, Correll's attorneys should have been aware of the discrepancy in the specified elements as compared to the factual allegations in the information. However, because the "proper remedy in this situation is to remand" for entry of judgment of conviction of class D confinement, Correll has "failed to demonstrate that any ignorance on the part of his attorneys would require a complete reversal." Heyward v. State (1988), Ind.App., 524 N.E.2d 15, 20. See also Folland v. State (1993), Ind.App., 609 N.E.2d 429.
As to the claimed error of denial of Cor-rell's right to testify, we have already determined that Correll has failed to demonstrate that his trial counsel forbade his testifying. Absent such forbidding by counsel, neither the trial counsel's action nor failure of appellate counsel to raise the issue leads to the conclusion that specific harm to Correll resulted from his not testifying.
*683IV. Invited Error Doctrine
Lastly, Correll claims the post-conviction court erred in relying on the invited error doctrine in denying him relief. As our supreme court said in Yarbrough, "we need not discuss" that contention as fundamental error lies in Correll's having been convicted for an offense which includes an element not included in the charging information. Yar-brough, supra at 209.
Affirmed and remanded with instructions.
RILEY and BAKER, JJ., concur.
. In a separate cause, Correll was also charged with and convicted of escape as a class D felony.
. The tendered instruction would also have allowed the jury to convict Correll of "criminal confinement, a class D felony," a crime not entailing the presence of a deadly weapon. The judge crossed through this language. Thus, the instruction provided the jury a single additional option to conviction for kidnapping: conviction for criminal confinement as a class B felony.
. In his reply brief, Correll cites our supreme court stating the Indiana Constitution's "language places a unique value upon the desire of an individual accused of a crime to speak out personally in the courtroom and state what in his mind constitutes a predicate for his innocence of the charges." Campbell v. State (1993), Ind., 622 N.E.2d 495, 498. Thus, Correll argues, he was "like Campbell ... precluded from speaking out personally in the courtroom." Reply brief at 3. Campbell's testimony was excluded by the trial court because he had failed to comply with the alibi notice statute. Here, the trial court did not rule that Correll could not testify. Thus, he was not precluded "like Campbell."

=== CASE 2224499 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:23.426382+00 ===

639 N.E.2d 168 (1994)
266 Ill.App.3d 99
203 Ill. Dec. 129
In re the LIQUIDATION OF PINE TOP INSURANCE COMPANY (Stephen F. Selcke, Director of Insurance of the State of Illinois, as Liquidator of Pine Top Insurance Company, Petitioner-Appellant, v. Joseph A. Duncavage, Administrator of the Estate of Mary Beth Duncavage, Claimant-Appellee; Illinois Insurance Guaranty Fund, Intervening-Petitioner-Appellee).
No. 1-93-0640.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, Fourth Division.
August 11, 1994.
*169 Sidley & Austin, Chicago (James R. Stinson, Ellen S. Robbins/Peter G. Gallanis & Daniel A. Guberman, of counsel), for appellant.
Cichocki & Armstrong, Ltd., Chicago (Jon A. Duncan & Kelli K. Chase, of counsel), Chuhak & Tecson, Chicago (Cary S. Fleischer, of counsel), for intervening appellees.
Lord, Bissell & Brook, Chicago (Rowe W. Snider, Mark R. Goodman & Brian T. Garelli, of counsel), for claimant-appellee.
Presiding Justice HOFFMAN delivered the opinion of the court:
In a proceeding involving the liquidation of Pine Top Insurance Company (Pine Top), the circuit court of Cook County entered an order on January 15, 1993, approving a claim in favor of Joseph Duncavage, individually, and as administrator of the estate of Mary Beth Duncavage, deceased. The Director of Insurance of the State of Illinois (Director), acting in his capacity as liquidator of Pine Top, appeals from that order.
BACKGROUND
In June 1984, Duncavage filed a multicount complaint in the circuit court of Cook County against the owners of a residential apartment building in which Mary Beth Duncavage was killed as a result of a criminal assault by Tommy Lee Jackson. The specific facts of that suit are not pertinent to this appeal. It is sufficient to note that each of the defendants in that action, except the assailant, were covered under a primary liability insurance policy issued by Commercial Union Insurance Company which provided coverage up to $500,000 and an excess umbrella policy issued by Pine Top with a liability limit of $2 million.
In 1986, liquidation proceedings were commenced against Pine Top in the circuit court of Cook County. On January 16, 1987, an order was entered in that action finding that Pine Top was insolvent and appointing the Director as liquidator. On that same date, the court entered an order fixing the time and procedure for filing claims against Pine Top. Because of the action then pending against Pine Top's insureds for the death of Mary Beth Duncavage, Duncavage submitted a proof of claim on October 26, 1987 to the Director for $2 million which was the policy limit of the Pine Top policy.
On March 11, 1988, Duncavage entered into an agreement entitled "Covenant Not To Execute on Judgment" (covenant) with Pine Top's insureds and Commercial Union. Pursuant to the terms of the covenant, Duncavage received $500,000 and agreed, inter alia, that notwithstanding any judgment that could be rendered in the then pending action against Pine Top's insureds, not to seek to enforce any such judgment against them or Commercial Union. Additionally, the covenant provided that it should not be construed to prevent Duncavage from pursuing any claims that he may have against Pine Top Insurance Company, the Director, the Illinois Insurance Guaranty Fund, the Office of the Special Deputy representing the Director, and Tommy Lee Jackson.
On May 10, 1988, after being informed of the settlement between Duncavage and Pine Top's insureds and Commercial Union for the coverage limit of the Commercial Union policy, the Illinois Insurance Guaranty Fund (Guaranty Fund) determined that Duncavage's claim was a valid "covered claim" under the Guaranty Fund Act (Ill.Rev.Stat. 1987, ch. 73, par. 1065.82 et seq.), and paid Duncavage $150,000, the statutory limit on his claim (see Ill.Rev.Stat.1987, ch. 73, par. 1065.87-2). As a consequence of its payment to Duncavage, the Guaranty Fund became a *170 claimant in the liquidation of Pine Top. Ill. Rev.Stat.1987, ch. 73, par. 1065.95.
Because Duncavage's claim against the estate of Pine Top in liquidation remained unresolved, on November 12, 1991, he filed a petition in the liquidation proceeding seeking approval of the claim and a motion requesting a hearing date to adjudicate the claim. On January 9, 1992, the circuit court ordered the Director to make a recommendation on the Duncavage claim. On April 8, 1992, the Director recommended that Duncavage's claim be denied and filed a motion seeking approval of that recommendation. On January 15, 1993, the circuit court approved Duncavage's claim in the sum of $1.85 million which was the gross claim of $2 million less the $150,000 payment received from the Guaranty Fund. The Director appeals from that order.
OPINION
In urging reversal, the Director contends that: (1) the Pine Top policy was one of indemnity and because Pine Top's insureds did not pay any sums in excess of their primary insurance for the death of Mary Beth Duncavage, no valid claim existed against Pine Top in favor of Duncavage; (2) Duncavage's execution of the covenant precluding recovery against Pine Top's insureds for any amount in excess of their primary insurance extinguished any recovery under Pine Top's policy; (3) allowing Duncavage's claim exposed Pine Top to greater liability under its policy than its total liability would have been if it were not in liquidation; and (4) the circuit court erred by fixing the amount of Duncavage's claim in its order of January 15, 1993.
We address first the question of whether the Pine Top policy was a liability policy or an indemnity policy. The policy provides in pertinent part:
"I. COVERAGE
To indemnify the INSURED for ULTIMATE NET LOSS, as defined hereinafter, in excess of RETAINED LIMIT, as herein stated, all sums which INSURED shall be obligated to pay by reason of the liability imposed upon the INSURED by law or liability assumed by the INSURED under contract or agreement for damages and expenses * * *."
Based upon this language, the Director contends that the policy is an indemnity policy. From this premise, the Director concludes that because Pine Top's insureds never paid any sums in excess of their "Underlying Limit," which was the limit of their primary insurance, for the death of Mary Beth Duncavage, there is no right of recovery under Pine Top's policy and Duncavage's claim in the liquidation proceeding should have been denied.
The function of a liability policy is to shield an insured from being required to make payment on a claim for which he is liable. Under an indemnity contract, the insurer agrees to pay to the insured any sums that the insured has paid or been compelled to pay on a covered claim. The substantive distinction between indemnity and liability policies is that payment of a claim by the insured is a condition precedent to an insured's right to recover under the former, but not the later. (12 M.S. Rhodes, Couch on Insurance 2d § 44:250, at 387 (1982).) The liability of an insurer under a liability policy attaches at the time the liability of the insured is fixed for a covered claim; however, the liability of an insurer under an indemnity policy affixes at the time the insured makes payment on a covered claim. (6B J.A. Appleman & J. Appleman, Insurance Law & Practice § 4261, at 72 (1979).) In this case, the parties do not dispute that Pine Top's insureds never made any payment to Duncavage in excess of their primary insurance coverage. Therefore, resolving the question of whether the Pine Top policy is for liability or indemnity is critical. If the policy is one of indemnity only, no claim would lie against Pine Top absent payment by its insureds; and, as a consequence, no claim would lie against Pine Top's estate in liquidation because the liability of an insurer in liquidation can be no greater than its liability were it not in liquidation. Ill.Rev.Stat.1987, ch. 73, par. 821(4).
The policy in question is entitled "Umbrella Liability Policy." It obligates Pine Top to "indemnify" the insured for sums which the insured "shall be obligated to pay by reason *171 of the liability imposed upon the insured by law." Additionally, it provides that no action shall lie against Pine Top unless, as a condition precedent, "the insured's obligation to pay shall have been finally determined either by judgment against the insured after actual trial or by written agreement of the insured, the claimant and the company [Pine Top]." There is little question from the clear language of the policy that it is a liability policy and not an indemnity policy as the Director argues. The policy in issue is a contract to pay liabilities which does not require the insured to make any payment on a claim as a condition precedent to Pine Top's obligations. The "no action" clause of the policy sets forth the entry of judgment against the insured as the condition precedent not the payment of the judgment. Having found that Pine Top's policy is a liability policy, it follows that we reject the Director's argument that the absence of any payment to Duncavage by Pine Top's insureds in excess of their primary insurance coverage mandates disallowing Duncavage's claim in the liquidation proceeding.
We next address the effect that the covenant had upon Duncavage's claim against Pine Top. As stated earlier, under its policy, Pine Top was obligated to indemnify its insureds from liability for the payment of any sums in excess of their primary insurance coverage. The Director argues that by agreeing never to execute upon any judgment that might be rendered against Pine Top's insureds, Duncavage in effect released them from the payment of any sums in excess of their primary coverage. Because Pine Top's insureds could never be obligated to pay any sums in excess of their primary coverage, the Director concludes that Pine Top could never be obligated to pay any sums under its policy (see Childress v. State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co. (1968), 97 Ill.App.2d 112, 239 N.E.2d 492), and Duncavage's claim should have been disallowed. We disagree.
The greater weight of authority supports the proposition that covenants not to execute upon the assets of a tortfeasor except to the extent of available insurance coverage do not violate public policy and do not per se relieve the tortfeasor's insurer from liability under its policy. (Bishop v. Crowther (1981), 101 Ill.App.3d 933, 57 Ill. Dec. 341, 428 N.E.2d 1021; Elas v. State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co. (1976), 39 Ill. App. 3d 944, 352 N.E.2d 60.) While the wording of the covenant in this case is not couched in terms of an exemption from execution (see Bishop, 101 Ill.App.3d at 936-37, 57 Ill. Dec. 341, 428 N.E.2d 1021), when read as a whole and in light of Pine Top's insolvency, we believe that the covenant has the same effect.
The object of judicial construction of a non-execution covenant, like any other contract, is to determine the intent of the parties. (Northern Trust Co. v. Tarre (1981), 86 Ill. 2d 441, 56 Ill. Dec. 671, 427 N.E.2d 1217.) Absent ambiguity, the parties' intent is discerned from the language used and the circumstances of the transaction. Once determined, the intent of the parties controls the scope and effect of the agreement. Shultz v. Delta-Rail Corp. (1987), 156 Ill.App.3d 1,108 Ill.Dec. 566, 508 N.E.2d 1143; La Grange Federal Savings & Loan Association v. Rock River Corp. (1981), 97 Ill.App.3d 712, 53 Ill. Dec. 112, 423 N.E.2d 496.
As a general statement, Illinois public policy prohibits an injured party from maintaining a direct action against an insurance carrier for the actions of its insured which fall within the coverage of its policy prior to obtaining a judgment against the insured. (Richardson v. Economy Fire & Casualty Co. (1985), 109 Ill. 2d 41, 92 Ill. Dec. 516, 485 N.E.2d 327; Marchlik v. Coronet Insurance Co. (1968), 40 Ill. 2d 327, 239 N.E.2d 799.) However, once a liquidation order has been entered against an insurance carrier, any person who has a cause of action against one of its insureds covered under a liability policy has the right to file a claim directly against the carrier in the liquidation proceeding, regardless of the fact that the liability of the insured has not yet been determined by judgment. (Ill.Rev.Stat.1987, ch. 73, par. 821(4).) Further, any judgment that might be entered against an insured after the entry of a liquidation order against the insurer may not be considered in the liquidation proceeding *172 as evidence of liability on the part of the insured or the amount of damages sustained by the injured party. (Ill.Rev.Stat.1987, ch. 73, par. 821(4).) The statutory scheme set forth in section 209(4) of the Insurance Code (Ill.Rev.Stat.1987, ch. 73, par. 821(4)), provides an injured party with a direct claim against the estate of a tortfeasor's insolvent insurance carrier while at the same time protecting that estate from the conclusive effect of any judgments which might be entered against its liability policyholders after the date of an order of liquidation.
At the time Duncavage entered into the covenant with Pine Top's insureds, the order of liquidation had already been entered. Consequently, Duncavage had a right to file a direct claim against Pine Top's estate in liquidation and by the clear and unambiguous terms of the covenant, Duncavage retained that right. Absent a liquidation order, an injured party in Duncavage's position would accept the limits of the tortfeasor's primary insurance coverage and agree not to execute against the tortfeasor's property except to the extent of the proceeds of any excess insurance coverage. In a liquidation proceeding such as the instant case, the retention of an injured party's claim rights against the tortfeasor's insolvent liability carrier is the only effective means by which the injured party can contract to limit the source of his recovery to the protection afforded by the tortfeasor's insurance coverage.
Having determined that the Pine Top policy was for liability coverage and that the non-execution covenant did not extinguish any right of recovery thereunder, we also reject the Director's contention that allowing Duncavage's claim exposed Pine Top to greater liability under its policy than it would have been exposed to had it not been in liquidation in violation of section 209(4) of the Insurance Code. (Ill.Rev.Stat.1987, ch. 73, par. 821(4).) The limit of liability under Pine Top's policy was $2 million. The trial court approved Duncavage's claim in the sum of $1.85 million and the Guaranty Fund has a claim for the remaining $150,000. The record before us fails to demonstrate that Pine Top has been exposed to any liability in excess of what it would have been exposed to if it had not been in liquidation, which was its policy limit of $2 million.
For his final contention, the Director argues that the trial court erred in fixing the amount of Duncavage's claim in its order of January 15, 1993. The Director contends that he did not have notice the court would fix the amount of Duncavage's claim and, as a result, was deprived of an opportunity to present evidence which would negate coverage under Pine Top's policy and to present argument relating to the proper valuation of the claim.
The order fixing the time and procedure for filing claims against Pine Top was entered on January 16, 1987. Paragraph I of the order provided that the Director was to examine, review, and evaluate the claims and report his recommendations to the court for their allowance or disallowance. Upon the filing of the Director's report and any objections thereto, the order provided that the court would take such further action as may be required. The Director does not dispute that Duncavage filed a timely proof of claim on October 26, 1987, as required under section 208 of the Insurance Code and that it was in the form prescribed by section 209(1). (Ill.Rev.Stat.1987, ch. 73, pars. 820, 821(1).) Nor does the Director dispute that at the time Duncavage filed the petition for approval of his claim on November 12, 1991, no recommendation had been made to the court on the claim. In response to Duncavage's petition, the trial court ordered that the Director make his recommendation on the claim by April 8, 1992. The Director complied, and in addition to filing his recommendation that the claim be denied, he filed a memorandum in support. In that memorandum, the Director acknowledged that Duncavage filed a timely proof of claim and also submitted documentation in support, but contended that the claim should be denied because of the effect of the non-execution covenant. The Director made no argument in his recommendation or in his memorandum that the amount of the claim was being questioned.
The parties briefed their respective positions for the trial court. In response to the Director's memorandum, Duncavage again *173 moved the court to approve his claim in the sum of $1.85 million and stated that because the Director objected to the claim on only one ground, if the Director's legal arguments were rejected, he assumed that the court would approve the claim in its entirety. In his reply memorandum in further support of his recommendation, the Director again argued that the non-execution covenant relieved Pine Top of any liability under its policy and characterized the policy as one of indemnity. However, the Director did take issue with Duncavage's contention that, if the Director's recommendation were rejected by the court, the Director could not then evaluate the claim to make a recommendation to the court as to the amount at which the claim should be fixed.
On August 4, 1992, the trial court heard the arguments of the parties. The Director made the same three arguments before the trial court which we have already addressed and rejected. During the course of those proceedings, the trial court twice indicated that it had no quarrel with Duncavage's assessment of the value of the claim and that in its opinion a jury would award a sum in excess of that amount. The court identified the issue before it as one of law concerning Pine Top's status as an indemnitor and the effect that the non-execution agreement had upon Duncavage's claim. Also, although the attorney for the Director stated that the issue presented to the court was not the valuation of Duncavage's claim but its existence, he presented no argument in opposition to the amount requested and acknowledged that he was aware the court was inclined to approve the claim in the sum of $1.85 million if it ruled adversely to the Director on his recommendation to deny the claim. After hearing the arguments of the parties, the court took the matter under advisement.
Before the trial court could rule, the Guaranty Fund filed a petition to intervene in the proceedings to assert its claim for the $150,000 payment to Duncavage. This motion triggered a new round of briefs by the parties. The Director again argued essentially the same points that he raised in his original memorandum in support of his recommendation to disallow Duncavage's claim and the arguments that he raised in the previous hearing. But, as before, the Director did not dispute the valuation of the claim. Duncavage submitted an additional brief responding to each of the Director's arguments and again requested that his claim be approved in the sum of $1.85 million.
The matter was reargued before the trial court on December 1, 1992. As to Duncavage's claim, the Director argued the same points that he had raised in his argument on August 4, 1992, but again made no argument directed to the valuation of the claim should it be allowed. After the argument, the court again took the matter under advisement and, on January 15, 1993, entered its order approving the claim in the sum of $1.85 million.
Section 209(4)(a) of the Insurance Code provides that a claim may be allowed "if it may be reasonably inferred from the proof presented upon such claim that such person would be able to obtain a judgment upon such cause * * *." (Ill.Rev.Stat.1991, ch. 73, par. 821(4)(a).) Nothing in this section evinces any intent on the part of the legislature that an evidentiary hearing must be held before the court approves a contingent claim. To the contrary, the plain language of the section states that the claim may be approved if it could be reasonably inferred the claimant would have been entitled to obtain a judgment. The "proof presented upon such claim" to which this section refers is the proof of claim filed by the claimant as provided in section 209(1). (Ill.Rev.Stat.1991, ch. 73, par. 821(1).) It is the court's ultimate responsibility to determine who the creditors of an insolvent insurance carrier are and to fix the amount of their claims. See Evans v. Illinois Surety Co. (1925), 319 Ill. 105, 149 N.E. 802.
At the time the trial court entered its order approving Duncavage's claim in the sum of $1.85 million, it had before it both Duncavage's proof of claim and the memorandum and documentation in support of the claim which Duncavage had filed with the Director. The Director was ordered to make his recommendation on the claim. He did so, but he never objected to the amount of the claim. We have examined the same documentation *174 that was before the trial court and cannot conclude the court abused its discretion when it fixed the value of the claim at $1.85 million. From the documentation present in this record, we find no error or abuse of discretion in the finding that is implicit in the court's order of January 15, 1993; namely, that it could be reasonably inferred that Duncavage would have been able to obtain a judgment in the sum of $2 million or more had his cause of action proceeded to trial against Pine Top's insureds.
As for the Director's contention that he was somehow deprived of an opportunity to present evidence which would negate coverage under Pine Top's policy or that he was prevented from presenting argument on the valuation of Duncavage's claim, the record reflects that he was ordered to make his recommendation and permitted to file memoranda in support of that recommendation. If the Director had other arguments in opposition to the approval of the claim or its valuation, he should have made them before the trial court, but he did not. We believe the record is clear and establishes that the Director was aware that if the trial court rejected his recommendation and approved Duncavage's claim, it would also fix the claim in the sum of $1.85 million. That was the relief Duncavage had requested in every document he filed in support of his petition to approve the claim and in opposition to the Director's recommendation to deny the claim. Also, during the hearing on August 4, 1992, the trial court stated twice that it did not disagree with Duncavage's assessment as to the valuation of the claim. Further, during the same hearing, the Director's own attorney acknowledged he was aware that if the Director's recommendation was rejected, the court was inclined to approve the claim and fix the sum at $1.85 million. Lastly, if the Director was taken by surprise when the trial court fixed the amount of the claim in its order of January 15, 1993, he could have filed a motion before the trial court requesting it to vacate its order and afford him an opportunity to address the valuation issue, but he did not.
The record before us clearly shows that the Director was not prevented from presenting evidence or argument before the trial court on the valuation of Duncavage's claim; rather, the record establishes that he never attempted to do so. Issues not raised or argued before the trial court cannot be argued for the first time on appeal. In re Estate of Halas (1991), 209 Ill.App.3d 333, 154 Ill. Dec. 170, 568 N.E.2d 170; Printpack, Inc. v. Container Technologies, Inc. (1984), 124 Ill.App.3d 568, 79 Ill. Dec. 700, 464 N.E.2d 298.
For all of the reasons stated in this opinion, we affirm the order of the circuit court of Cook County entered on January 15, 1993, which approved Duncavage's claim and fixed its valuation at $1.85 million.
Affirmed.
JOHNSON and THEIS, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9740673 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:11.463508+00 ===

DONIELSON, Presiding Judge.
This appeal arises from the Black Hawk County Juvenile Court’s decision affirming the juvenile court referee’s order terminating a mother and father’s parental rights to their two children. The father has appealed the judgment. The mother, having acquiesced to the termination of her parental rights, has joined with the State and the guardian ad litem as an appellee on appeal. On our review, we affirm the judgment of the juvenile court.
B.K.J., Sr., the appellant/father in this action, is an angry and violent man. At twenty-five years old, he has already spent many years leading the type of dismal existence which, for most, is merely the subject of an occasional nightmare. There must be no mistake, however, that much of B.K.J., Sr.’s depressing life has been the result of his own making. Surely, he has caused both himself and those around him a great deal of anguish.
B.K.J., Sr. has spent the majority of the last six years under the control of alcohol and the correctional system. He is a chronic substance abuser who has committed various sundry offenses including drunk driving, assault, public intoxication, theft, criminal trespass, criminal mischief, and burglary. While not otherwise engaged, he has found the time and energy to repeatedly beat his girlfriend, M.J., who is the mother of the two children here involved.
B.K.J., Sr. has not, however, ever harmed his children. Indeed, it is the children’s mother, M.J., who has brutilized them, beating them, burning them, and breaking their bones. B.K.J., Sr. claims to sincerely care for his children and asserts that he merely needs more time and services to adequately develop his parenting skills.
B.K.J., Sr. began living with M.J. in 1987. As a result of that relationship, two children were born; B.K.J., Jr. in March 1988, and D.G.J. in April 1987. Due to parole violations, B.K.J., Sr. was incarcerated from May 1989 until April 1990 on his suspended sentence for previous burglary and theft charges. During this period, both children were adjudicated children in need of assistance based on several incidents of physical abuse by the mother, and *610both children were removed from the mother’s home.
A dispositional hearing was held in March 1990. At this time, the father was granted supervised visitation, and both parents were required to participate in parenting classes. After the father’s release from jail, he and the mother attempted to reconcile, but the attempt failed. The father, having been assessed to be chemically dependent on alcohol, was placed on intensive supervised parole in December 1990.
In January 1991, a petition to terminate the parental rights of the mother and father of the children was filed. The petition noted the mother’s abuse of the children as well as the failure of both parents to participate in family and parenting services. The father’s failure to obtain mental health services and his physical abuse of the mother were also noted. The hearing was set for April, and in March 1991, the father entered a thirty-day inpatient treatment program for substance abuse. The father filed a motion for continuance of the hearing and for a parent/child evaluation, but his motion was denied by the court on March 29, 1991.
The father completed treatment on April 9, and the hearing was held on April 10,11, and 19. Prior to the hearing, the mother consented to termination of her parental rights. Following the hearing, the juvenile court terminated the parental rights of both parties. The father has filed this appeal.
Appellate review of termination proceedings is de novo. In re W.G., 349 N.W.2d 487, 491 (Iowa 1984), cert. denied, 469 U.S. 1222, 105 S.Ct. 1212, 84 L.Ed.2d 353 (1985). We give weight to the juvenile court’s factual findings, especially when considering the credibility of witnesses, but we are not bound by those determinations. Id. at 491-92.
Central to a determination of this nature are the best interest of the child. In this connection we look to the child’s long range as well as immediate interest. Hence, we necessarily consider what the future likely holds for the child if returned to his or her parents. Insight for this determination can be gained from evidence of the parent’s past performance, for that performance may be indicative of the quality of the future care that parent is capable of providing.
In re T.D.C., 336 N.W.2d 738, 740-41 (Iowa 1983) (quoting In re Dameron, 306 N.W.2d 743, 745 (Iowa 1981)) (citations omitted).
I. Sufficiency of Evidence. The juvenile court ordered termination of the father’s parental rights pursuant to Iowa Code section 232.116(1)(g) (Supp.1991). The father concedes that all the statutory grounds have been met except for subsection (4) which necessitates a finding that the child cannot be returned to the custody of the parent at the time of the hearing. A child cannot be returned to the custody of the parent, within the meaning of section 232.116(1)(g), when any one of the grounds listed in section 232.2(6) (child in need of assistance) can be proven by clear and convincing evidence. See, e.g., In the Interest of A.M.S., 419 N.W.2d 723, 725 (Iowa 1988). The father argues the State has not proven this requirement by clear and convincing evidence. We disagree.
There is no question that the record contains clear and convincing evidence that if the children were returned to their father’s custody at the time of the hearing, they would be children in need of assistance under Iowa Code section 232.2(6)(n) (Supp.1991) (child whose parent’s alcohol abuse results in the child not receiving adequate care). At the time of the termination hearing, the father was not following the recommendations regarding treatment of his substance abuse. He had not participated in out-patient counseling, and he had not completed parenting classes. He was in a chaotic relationship with a girlfriend. He was unemployed; on intensive, supervised parole; and was being evicted from his apartment. Even the father testified he needed four to six more months to stabilize.
II. Adequacy of Services Provided. The father also argues that he was not provided-adequate services to prevent the need for termination of his parental rights. *611Again, we disagree. The Department of Human Services did not ignore the father’s needs.
Both children were separately adjudicated to be children in need of assistance, but by the time the termination petition was filed on January 18, 1991, both children had been out of the home for over twelve months. This led to a sense of urgency. See In the Interest of A.C., 415 N.W.2d 609, 614 (Iowa 1987), cert. denied, 485 U.S. 1008, 108 S.Ct. 1474, 99 L.Ed.2d 702 (1987). During this twelve-month period, the DHS offered the father parenting, psychological, family, and substance abuse services. He squandered these opportunities to turn his life around and improve his parenting skills. While the law demands a full measure of patience with a troubled parent who attempts to remedy a lack of parenting skills, Id. at 613, a child need not endlessly await the maturity of his or her natural parent. T.D.C., 336 N.W.2d at 744. A child should not be forced to endlessly suffer the parentless limbo of foster care. Long v. Long, 255 N.W.2d 140, 146 (Iowa 1977).
There are a number of stern realities faced by a juvenile judge in any case of this kind. Among the most important is the relentless passage of precious time. The crucial days of childhood cannot be suspended while parents experiment with ways to face up to their own problems. Neither will childhood await the wanderings of judicial process. The child will continue to grow, either in bad or unsettled conditions or in the improved and permanent shelter which ideally, at least, follows the conclusion of a juvenile proceeding.
A.C., 415 N.W.2d at 613.
III. Motion for Continuance. Finally, the father contends the juvenile court abused its discretion in denying his motion for a continuance and for a parent/child evaluation. At the time of the father’s motion, the children had been out of the home for over thirteen months. The father had been aware for years that he needed treatment for alcoholism. B.K.J., Sr. had completely failed to avail himself of the services offered to him earlier. We find no abuse of the juvenile court’s discretion.
The costs of this appeal are taxed to the father, B.K.J., Sr.
For all the reasons stated, the judgment of the juvenile court is affirmed.
AFFIRMED.
SCHLEGEL, J„ concurs.
SACKETT, J., specially concurs.

=== CASE 9740674 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:11.467966+00 ===

SACKETT, Judge
(specially concurring).
I concur with the majority that there is clear and convincing evidence supporting the allegations of the State’s petition to terminate this father’s parental rights. Without question, this father has engaged in behavior that has been harmful to his children.
However, I cannot help but recognize the father was still a teenager when the first child was born. He has had a difficult life. The record clearly reflects he loves his children and has made attempts to gain the stability and maturity necessary to parent the children. Unfortunately, he has not been able to do so. He contends he has not been provided adequate services to prevent the need for termination. I agree with the majority that his needs were not ignored. But I also recognize the State, despite the expenditure of considerable resources, has not been able to provide services of a kind that the father was able to utilize to correct his problems. This obviously was in a large part the father’s fault, but when offered services fail to accomplish their intended goals, it is fair to ask why, so that maybe next time the services can be more responsive.
We must continue to assess ways to make services more responsible. There are a large number of children in this state whose parental rights have been terminated who have not been adopted. Termination of these rights does not carry with it any guarantee the child will go to a stable home with loving parents. While the termination has severed the children from an inadequate parent, it has also severed them *612from a loving parent with whom they are biologically tied. The children who are four and five years old know their father and will suffer from the biological bond being severed and from the fact there never will be a solution to their problems with their father.
The State’s inability to place m adoptive homes the large number of children whose parental rights are being terminated, makes a strong argument to continue to work harder to help biological parents parent.

=== CASE 2224506 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:23.566817+00 ===

639 N.E.2d 907 (1994)
266 Ill.App.3d 781
203 Ill. Dec. 348
Carl HERINGTON and Robert Cowder, Plaintiffs,
v.
J.S. ALBERICI CONSTRUCTION COMPANY, INC., Defendant and Third-Party Plaintiff-Appellant (Shield Painting Company, Third-Party Defendant-Appellee).
No. 5-93-0284.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Fifth District.
August 18, 1994.
*908 Stephen J. Maassen, Hoagland, Fitzgerald, Smith & Pranaitis, Alton, for appellant.
Burroughs, Hepler, Broom, MacDonald & Hebrank by J. Todd Hayes, Edwardsville, for appellee.
Justice MAAG delivered the opinion of the court:
Carl Herington and Robert Cowder filed suit against J.S. Alberici Construction Co., Inc. (Alberici), for injuries sustained on November 27, 1989. Herington and Cowder were employed by Shield Painting Co. (Shield) at the time of their injury. The plaintiffs were engaged in work taking place on Lock and Dam 22, which spans the Mississippi River from Missouri to Illinois. Each plaintiff sought damages due to alleged violations of the Illinois Structural Work Act (740 ILCS 150/0.01 et seq. (West 1992)) and common law negligence. It is undisputed that the injuries occurred in Illinois.
Alberici initially filed several procedural motions which are unrelated to this appeal, and then on January 4, 1991, it filed its answer to plaintiffs' complaint, along with a four-count third-party complaint seeking contribution from Shield under the Joint Tortfeasor Contribution Act (Contribution Act) (740 ILCS 100/0.01 et seq. (West 1992)).
The third-party complaint was amended twice. In the second amended third-party complaint, Alberici requested in separate counts both contribution under the Contribution Act and "indemnification" from Shield "in such an amount as is attributable to Shield's share of the liability". The "indemnity" claim was based on paragraph 8(c) of *909 the general conditions of the written subcontract between Alberici and Shield. Paragraph 8(c) states:
"(c) For all Subcontract work performed in Illinois or performed by Illinois Subcontractors, the following term is in effect:
Subcontractor hereby assumes the entire liability for its own negligence and the negligence of its own employees; in addition, Subcontractor hereby assumes the entire liability arising from any alleged violation of the Structural Work Act (Chapter 48, Sections 60-69 Ill. Revised Statutes) that Subcontractor knew of or by the exercise of ordinary care should have known of; Subcontractor agrees to indemnify and save harmless Contractor and its agents, servants and employees, from and against all loss, expense, damage or injury, including legal fees, that Contractor may sustain as a result of any claims predicated or [sic] said allegations of Subcontractor's own negligence or on Subcontractor's alleged violation of the Structural Work Act as above set forth. This provision shall specifically not require Subcontractor to indemnify Contractor from Contractor's own alleged negligence in violation of Chapter 29, Section 61 of the Illinois Revised Statutes. In the event claim of any such loss, expense, damage or injury, as above defined and limited, is made against Contractor, its agents, servants or employees, Contractor may: (1) withhold from any payment due or hereafter becoming due to Subcontractor under the terms of this contract, an amount sufficient in Contractor's judgment to protect and indemnify Contractor from all such claims, expenses, legal fees, loss, damage or injury as above defined and limited; or (2) require Subcontractor to furnish a surety bond in such amount so determined; or (3) require Subcontractor to provide suitable indemnity acceptable to Contractor."
Shield moved to dismiss the complaint. Three arguments were advanced below and in this court in support of the motion: (1) The indemnification agreement contravenes public policy as set forth in the Construction Contract Indemnification for Negligence Act (the Anti-Indemnity Statute) (740 ILCS 35/1 (West 1992)); (2) The indemnification agreement contravenes public policy because it attempts to convert an indemnity action into an agreement for contribution without the good faith settlement provisions and dismissal which flow from a settlement under the Contribution Act; and (3) The prayer for indemnification seeks to circumvent the decision in Kotecki v. Cyclops Welding Corp. (1991), 146 Ill. 2d 155, 166 Ill. Dec. 1, 585 N.E.2d 1023, which limits an employer's contribution liability to the amount of the worker's compensation liability.
The circuit court granted the motion to dismiss the indemnity counts. The dismissal order was certified pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 304(a) (134 Ill.2d R. 304(a)), and Alberici appealed. The plaintiffs have settled their claims and are not parties to this appeal.
Alberici advances several arguments in support of its appeal of the dismissal order. These will be addressed seriatim.
I
Alberici first claims that Missouri law should be applied to this case. The following facts are cited by Alberici: (1) The subcontract contains a choice-of-law provision which specifies Missouri law as applicable to the subcontract; (2) Shield and Alberici are both Missouri Corporations; (3) The contract was entered into in Missouri; (4) The work was to be performed in both Missouri and Illinois; and (5) Both plaintiffs are domiciled in Missouri.
According to Alberici, these Missouri contacts, along with the choice-of-law provision in the contract, require the application of Missouri law. Alberici claims that the indemnification requested is permissible under Missouri law. No authority is cited in support of the claim that Missouri law would allow the indemnification request. Rather, Alberici focuses exclusively on a choice-of-law argument.
The primary authority that Alberici relies upon to support its position is Jarvis v. Ashland Oil, Inc. (1985), 17 Ohio St. 3d 189, 17 OBR 427, 478 N.E.2d 786. Jarvis is similar *910 to the case at bar, but it is also factually distinct. Jarvis concluded that under the facts of that case and the principles set forth in Restatement (Second) of Conflicts section 187 (1969), a similar choice-of-law provision should be applied.
In response, Shield argues that under choice-of-law rules applied in Illinois (See Cook v. General Electric Co. (1992), 146 Ill. 2d 548, 167 Ill. Dec. 957, 588 N.E.2d 1087), Illinois law must be applied. Shield bases this argument on the fact that plaintiffs were working in Illinois at the time of injury. Shield does not dispute that Missouri would allow indemnity, but like Alberici Shield cites no authority in support of this proposition.
We decline the invitation to enter this debate. The contract itself resolves the dispute. Therefore, common law choice-of-law principles need not be applied, and we need not analyze the authorities and arguments advanced regarding the common law choice-of-law debate.
It is true that one portion of the subcontract (paragraph 31) specifies that Missouri law shall "govern and be applied" to the subcontract. But the very provision of the contract pleaded in Alberici's third-party complaint as the basis for the indemnity claim (paragraph 8(c)) is a specific provision applicable to work performed in Illinois. This Illinois-specific provision contemplates the application of Illinois law to "all Subcontract work performed in Illinois." As stated earlier, the work performed under the subcontract was performed in both Missouri and Illinois. But the work taking place at the time of plaintiffs' injuries was being performed in Illinois, and the plaintiffs were injured in Illinois.
"Where one intention is expressed in one clause of an instrument and a different, conflicting intention appears in another clause of the same instrument, full effect should be given to the clause which is the more principal and specific, and the general clause should be subjected to such modification or qualification as the specific clause makes necessary." McDonalds Corp. v. Butler Co. (1987), 158 Ill.App.3d 902, 909, 110 Ill. Dec. 735, 740, 511 N.E.2d 912, 917.
We conclude that the specific provision must control over the general one. Illinois law applies.
II
Alberici next argues that if Illinois law applies, the agreement does not contravene the Anti-Indemnity Statute. The Anti-Indemnity Statute states:
"With respect to contracts or agreements, either public or private, for the construction, alteration, repair or maintenance of a building, structure, highway bridge, viaducts or other work dealing with construction, or for any moving, demolition or excavation connected therewith, every covenant, promise or agreement to indemnify or hold harmless another person from that person's own negligence is void as against public policy and wholly unenforceable." 740 ILCS 35/1 (West 1992).
Alberici contends that no indemnity is being sought by it for liability arising from its own negligence. Rather, indemnity is sought only for that portion of the liability attributable to Shield's own negligence or violation of the Structural Work Act. Thus, it is claimed that paragraph 8(c) of the subcontract does not violate the statute. Relying upon Dixon v. Northwestern Publishing Co. (1988), 166 Ill.App.3d 745, 117 Ill. Dec. 581, 520 N.E.2d 932, Alberici argues that contractual indemnity provisions of the type contained in the Alberici/Shield subcontract are outside the scope of the statute because indemnity is being sought from Shield only for liability that attaches to Alberici by virtue of Shield's own fault.
Alberici's argument is tantalizingbut wrong; its conclusion is correct. We agree that the Anti-Indemnity statute is inapplicable. We disagree as to the reason.
We disagree because Alberici's argument and the Dixon decision proceed from a false premise. There is a difference between paying for a piece of apple pie and paying for the entire pie.
"There is an important distinction between contribution, which distributes the loss among the tortfeasors by requiring each to *911 pay his proportionate share, and indemnity, which shifts the entire loss from one tortfeasor who has been compelled to pay it to the shoulders of another who should bear it instead." Prosser, Law of Torts, sec. 51, at 310 (4th ed. 1971).
Where Alberici and Dixon go astray is in concluding that such a thing as "partial indemnity" exists. It does not. Our supreme court clearly delineated the difference between contribution and indemnity in Skinner v. Reed-Prentice Division Package Machinery Co. (1977), 70 Ill. 2d 1, 7, 15 Ill. Dec. 829, 831, 374 N.E.2d 437, 439, and quoted Professor Prosser on this distinction. (See also Stevens v. Silver Manufacturing Co. (1977), 70 Ill. 2d 41, 46, 15 Ill. Dec. 847, 849, 374 N.E.2d 455, 457 (where a prayer for "partial indemnity" was construed as a contribution claim).) The legal effect to be given an instrument is not determined by the label it bears or the technical terms it contains. Bonde v. Weber (1955), 6 Ill. 2d 365, 128 N.E.2d 883.
In sum, to the extent that Alberici seeks reimbursement from Shield based upon paragraph 8(c) of the subcontract and describes the prayer as one for "partial indemnity", we conclude that what is really requested is contribution. Stevens, 70 Ill. 2d 41, 15 Ill. Dec. 847, 374 N.E.2d 455.
Because we now must consider a contribution claim and not a partial indemnity claim, the Anti-Indemnity statute is not violated. But that is because the statute deals with indemnity, not contribution.
The question then becomes: Is there such a thing as contractual contribution? We conclude that if paragraph 8(c) were construed to create a cause of action for contractual contribution, independent of the Contribution Act, such a construction would contravene the public policy of Illinois.
Our Contribution Act was carefully crafted by the legislature as a codification of the Skinner decision. A key provision of the Contribution Act (740 ILCS 100/2(d) (West 1992)) provides that upon a finding that a good faith settlement has been entered into between the plaintiff and one of the joint tortfeasors, the settling party is entitled to be dismissed from the action. It is elementary that the public policy of Illinois favors settlement. (Rakowski v. Lucente (1984), 104 Ill. 2d 317, 325, 84 Ill. Dec. 654, 658, 472 N.E.2d 791, 795.) If a contractual contribution claim were allowed without the accompanying dismissal provision in the event of settlement, our public policy in favor of settlement would be frustrated. Such a result would effectively eliminate settlements by joint tortfeasors under the Contribution Act.
But we do not believe that paragraph 8(c) created a new cause of action. As will be explained in part III, we believe that paragraph 8(c) of the subcontract merely modified the legal relations and available defenses of the parties under the law.
We agree with the court in Pettie v. Williams Brothers Construction Inc. (1992), 225 Ill.App.3d 1009, 168 Ill. Dec. 55, 589 N.E.2d 169, that a cause of action based on contractual contribution cannot be allowed (at least without a good-faith-settlement provision) because it would run afoul of the good-faith-settlement and dismissal provisions of the Contribution Act.
III
We have addressed the first two arguments that were advanced in the trial court as a basis for dismissal. We must still address the third ground that was raised.
Paragraph 8(c) is not void and against public policy. Only a construction of that paragraph that would allow a separate contractual contribution action without the good-faith-settlement provisions of the Contribution Act is improper. The construction of a contract is a question of law to be resolved by the courts. (Fields v. Franklin Life Insurance Co. (1983), 115 Ill.App.3d 954, 71 Ill. Dec. 776, 451 N.E.2d 930.) It is, therefore, our job to construe paragraph 8(c) and determine the bargained-for rights of the parties.
Shield argued below and argues in this court that allowing a cause of action to flow from paragraph 8(c) would circumvent the decision in Kotecki, which limited an employer's contribution liability to the amount of worker's compensation liability.
*912 We conclude for the reasons that follow that Shield has contractually waived the worker's compensation defense enjoyed by employers and discussed in Kotecki, and Shield is liable for unlimited contribution, undiminished by the worker's compensation limitation.
In paragraph 8(c), Shield assumed "the entire liability" for its own negligence and the "entire liability" arising from any violation of the Structural Work Act on its part. Shield agreed to "indemnify and save harmless" Alberici from any damages Alberici may be required to pay because of negligence on Shield's part or a violation of the Structural Work Act by Shield. We have previously held that this agreement was in truth an agreement to make contribution. Just as our supreme court in Stevens concluded that a prayer for partial indemnity was really a prayer for contribution, we believe that the subject of paragraph 8(c) was contribution.
Even if paragraph 8(c) were omitted from the subcontract, Shield would have had a legal obligation to pay contribution if found liable. Kotecki merely limited this obligation to the amount of the worker's compensation liability. Paragraph 8(c) explicitly provides that Shield assumes its "entire liability". This may exceed its worker's compensation liability.
The defense afforded employers under the Worker's Compensation Act (820 ILCS 305/11 (West 1992)), which was recognized in Kotecki as limiting an employer's liability, is not automatic. It is an affirmative defense that must be pleaded and proven. An employer, to gain the benefits of the defense, must raise it or it is no defense at all. Doyle v. Rhodes (1984), 101 Ill. 2d 1, 77 Ill. Dec. 759, 461 N.E.2d 382.
Under Doyle, if the defense is not raised, common law liability attaches. Doyle recognizes that there may be valid reasons for an employer to choose not to raise the defense, e.g., the employer may believe that "the plaintiff will be unable to prove negligence to a jury's satisfaction". (Doyle, 101 Ill.2d at 10, 77 Ill. Dec. at 764, 461 N.E.2d at 387.) Our supreme court specifically held that the employer is a person `subject to liability in tort' for purposes of the Contribution Act. Doyle, 101 Ill.2d at 11, 77 Ill.Dec. at 764, 461 N.E.2d at 387.
If an employer is free to choose whether to raise the worker's compensation defense after suit is filed, we see no reason why an employer may not bargain away that defense as part of a subcontract. Just as an employer may choose not to raise the defense in a direct suit by an employee because it may believe it will prevail, the employer may agree to waive the defense as part of the contract bargaining process.
Parties to contracts frequently adjust their legal rights and give up defenses by contract. Village of Lake in the Hills v. Illinois Emcasco Insurance Co. (1987), 153 Ill.App.3d 815, 106 Ill. Dec. 881, 506 N.E.2d 681 (agreement by contract to modify the statute of limitations upheld); Redarowicz v. Ohlendorf (1982), 92 Ill. 2d 171, 65 Ill. Dec. 411, 441 N.E.2d 324 (agreement by city to forego prosecution for building code violations in exchange for promise to make repairs upheld); ETA Trust v. Recht (1991), 214 Ill. App. 3d 827, 158 Ill. Dec. 210, 574 N.E.2d 4 (agreement to submit to jurisdiction upheld).
We believe that when Shield entered into the subcontract with Alberici containing the terms set out in paragraph 8(c) of the subcontract, it waived the worker's compensation limits recognized in Kotecki as a defense in a contribution claim, but only as between it and Alberici. The defense of limited liability under the Worker's Compensation Act was bargained away.
Conclusion
We therefore hold that paragraph 8(c) of the subcontract constitutes a waiver of the Kotecki limitations. This waiver contravenes no public policy and is in conformity with the choice available to employers, i.e., whether or not to raise the defense. (Doyle, 101 Ill. 2d 1, 77 Ill. Dec. 759, 461 N.E.2d 382.) However, as a matter of pleading we believe the dismissed counts were surplusage. The original counts seeking contribution under the Contribution Act gave Shield the opportunity to raise the Kotecki/worker's compensation defense as an affirmative defense. Alberici *913 then could have pleaded paragraph 8(c) either by motion or as a reply to the affirmative defense. For these reasons, we affirm the dismissal of the counts, but we modify the court's order pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 366(a)(5) (134 Ill.2d R. 366(a)(5)) so as to make the dismissal without prejudice. Further, Alberici shall have 30 days after the mandate issues to plead by motion or in reply to Shield's affirmative defense that Shield has waived any contribution limitation by virtue of its subcontract with Alberici.
Affirmed as modified, with directions, and remanded.
GOLDENHERSH and WELCH, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2224509 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:23.641084+00 ===

639 N.E.2d 286 (1994)
James H. KINDRED, Appellant-Defendant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee-Plaintiff.
No. 55A01-9403-CR-74.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, First District.
August 4, 1994.
James H. Kindred, pro se.
Pamela Carter, Atty. Gen., Deana McIntire Smith, Deputy Atty. Gen., Office of Atty. Gen., Indianapolis, for appellee.
ROBERTSON, Judge.
James H. Kindred appeals the denial of a motion to correct erroneous sentence which he filed on April 14, 1993, following conviction of conspiracy to commit escape and adjudication as a habitual offender on January 23, *287 1985. Kindred argues in his motion and in this appeal that the trial court lacked the statutory authority to order the thirty-four year sentence to be served consecutively "to any other sentences" as reflected in the Abstract of Judgment.
Kindred did not obtain a ruling upon his motion to correct erroneous sentence. Apparently, when no ruling upon his motion was forthcoming, Kindred sought to have the special judge removed. That motion has not been made a part of the record but the record reflects that it was denied by the clerk of the Morgan Superior Court on November 15, 1993, the clerk having construed Kindred's motion to correct erroneous sentence as a second motion to correct error. Kindred then sought to have a special judge appointed by the Indiana Supreme Court pursuant to Ind.Trial Rule 53.1. When that attempt failed, see, State ex rel. Gordon v. Vanderburgh Circuit Court (1993), Ind., 616 N.E.2d 8, he initiated this appeal.
In his praecipe, Kindred requested that the clerk include in the record a true and correct copy of the transcript of the sentencing hearing with court reporter and judge's certificates. Special Judge Kern instructed the court reporter to provide Kindred with a photocopy of the transcript of the sentencing hearing because Kindred had already had a copy prepared by a court reporter at the county's expense. The record requested by Kindred thus does not contain an executed court reporter's certificate and does not contain a judge's certificate. Kindred brought these omissions to the clerk's attention but the desired certificates were not forthcoming. Kindred then petitioned this court for an order to supplement the record. That petition has not yet been ruled upon. The State argues that the appeal should be dismissed because the certificates have been omitted from the record.
Kindred's allegation of error can be reviewed without resort to the transcript of the sentencing hearing or any other evidence of record. His claim is simply that the sentencing judge was without authority to require his sentence to be served consecutively to "any other sentences." That such a condition was imposed by the judge is evidenced by the Abstract of Judgment which is a part of the record certified by the clerk. A judge's certificate is therefore unnecessary. State ex rel. O'Neal v. Cros (1978), 177 Ind. App. 68, 71, 378 N.E.2d 10, 11.
Kindred has met his burden of providing the reviewing court with a record sufficient to permit consideration of his claimed error. Hughes v. Hughes (1976), 171 Ind. App. 255, 260, 356 N.E.2d 225, 228. Dismissal is not warranted on this basis. See Stewart v. State (1980), 273 Ind. 134, 135, 402 N.E.2d 973, 974.
However, we do conclude that dismissal of the appeal at this time is the appropriate outcome. Many of the appellate decisions equate a motion to correct erroneous sentence with a petition for post-conviction relief, but do not dismiss upon the technical ground that a petition for post-conviction relief is the preferred procedure. See Reffett v. State (1991), Ind., 571 N.E.2d 1227, 1229; Poore v. State (1993), Ind. App., 613 N.E.2d 478. Contrary to the State's assertions, there is nothing inappropriate about Kindred's chosen method of presenting his consecutive sentencing question to the trial judge. See Watkins v. State (1992), Ind. App., 588 N.E.2d 1342. Nonetheless, the trial rules do not explicitly provide Kindred with an avenue for compelling a ruling upon his motion. See Ind.Trial Rule 53.1(B)(4); State ex rel. Gordon, 616 N.E.2d 8. This court has no jurisdiction to review the action of the Indiana Supreme Court. Justok v. Bochnowski (1979), 181 Ind. App. 439, 448, 391 N.E.2d 872, 878, cert. denied, 449 U.S. 828, 101 S. Ct. 92, 66 L. Ed. 2d 31. The denial of Kindred's motion for removal is the ruling from which he brought this appeal.
"The Indiana Rules of Procedure for Post-Conviction Remedies `comprehends and takes the place of all other common law, statutory, or other remedies heretofore available for challenging the validity of the conviction or sentence and ... shall be used exclusively in place of them.'" State ex rel. Gordon, 616 N.E.2d at 9 citing P.-C.R. 1, § 1(b). The Post-Conviction Rules permit the summary disposition of a legal question upon motion by either party. Ind.Post-Conviction *288 Rule 1, § 4(f). A judgment obtained pursuant to the Post-Conviction Rules is a final appealable judgment. P.-C.R. 1, § 6.
This court has no final appealable order before it to review. Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed. Were Kindred's motion verified, it could proceed as a petition for post-conviction relief. He should be permitted to refile his motion as a post-conviction petition. See Poore, 613 N.E.2d 478.
Appeal dismissed.
NAJAM and FRIEDLANDER, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9740675 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:16.372174+00 ===

Michael J. Kelly, J.
Following a jury trial, defendant Ronnie Gonzales was convicted of first-degree criminal sexual conduct and kidnapping. MCL 750.520b; MSA 28.788(2); MCL 750.349; MSA 28.581. The trial court sentenced him to two concurrent prison terms of fifteen to forty years. The sentences were to be served consecutively, to a term that defendant was serving for second-degree murder. On appeal, defendant argues that the trial court should have granted his motion for a mistrial based on the complainant’s unresponsive outburst before the jury. We affirm.
Defendant’s single-issue claim of error urges reversal for the trial court’s failure to grant a mistrial following questioning by defense counsel during cross-examination of the victim:
Q. (By Mr. Evelyn): I’m showing yu [sic] Defendant’s Exhibit A, letters that you sent to Mr. Gonzales when he was in the Wayne county jail.
That’s kind of more in the nature of a form card that you buy at the store, isn’t that right, ma’am?
A. Did I buy this card? No.
*265Q. No, I’m not asking you where you got it.
It isn’t really a letter in the sense that everything on it is in your handwriting, is that right?
A. Pardon me?
Q. Do you see what I just told you?
A. No—I’m going to tell you something: You get the letters analyzed.
I have never slept with the scum and what happened to me is not right, and I’m through cooperating with you; do you understand me?
He’s an ass hole, murderer, and I don’t care if I blew this case.
The harm posited by the defendant as requiring reversal is that the victim’s outburst brought to the attention of the jury inadmissible evidence of a prior conviction.
If there was any error, we find it harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. People v Nichols, 341 Mich 311, 322; 67 NW2d 230 (1954).
The response was elicited by defense counsel through cross-examination. Before that, defense counsel had brought to the attention of the jury the fact that defendant had been in jail, not once, but five times. Even after the victim’s response, defense counsel continued to bring to the jury’s attention defendant’s prior incarcerations.
It is well settled that the grant or denial of a mistrial is within the sound discretion of the trial court, and there must be a showing of prejudice to the defendant’s rights if error requiring reversal is claimed. The trial court’s ruling must be "so grossly in error as to deprive a defendant of a fair trial or to amount to a miscarriage of justice.” People v Holly, 129 Mich App 405, 415; 341 NW2d 823 (1983). In response to defendant’s motion for a mistrial or, in the alternative, a request for curative instruction, the trial court cautioned the jury:
*266The Court: Good afternoon. I want to caution you to disregard the outburst that you witnessed this morning; and it is in no way to be considered by you—you’re not to use that in considering your verdict in this matter here, what occurred.
And certainly in no way is anything said there to be interpreted to you by [sic] evidence or in any way at all to be used to determine the guilt or innocence of the defendant here.
The improper outburst was not solicited by the prosecutor. Nor does the claim of error involve the erroneous admission of evidence. When error involves the unsolicited outburst of a witness, the correct standard of review is whether the trial court abused its discretion in denying the defendant’s motion for a mistrial. A mistrial should be granted only where the error complained of is so egregious that the prejudicial effect can be removed in no other way. People v Lumsden, 168 Mich App 286, 299; 423 NW2d 645 (1988).
In this case, the jury was properly instructed to disregard the witness’ statement. The statement came after considerable sparring between defense counsel and the witness during which the victim amply displayed her animosity, hostility, and outrage. Whether it served defense counsel well or ill is a result not separable from the question of trial strategy. We cannot lightly disregard the context in considering the predicate for the outburst. Furthermore, to permit reversal might improperly encourage overly aggressive, combative, cross-examination tactics, in the hope of soliciting an untoward outburst to harbor as appellate error in the event of an adverse trial result.
This Court in People v Lumsden, supra, p 299, held that "an unresponsive, volunteered answer to a proper question is not cause for granting a *267mistrial.” The trial court did not abuse its discretion in denying the motion for a mistrial.
Affirmed.
Weaver, P.J., concurred.

=== CASE 9740676 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:16.376776+00 ===

Marilyn Kelly, J.
(dissenting). I respectfully dissent, as I do not believe that the complainant’s outburst was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
When a witness gives an unresponsive answer containing inadmissible evidence, the case must be very peculiar and strong to justify reversal. People v Tutha, 276 Mich 387, 393; 267 NW 867 (1936); People v Lumsden, 168 Mich App 286, 299; 423 NW2d 645 (1988). However, we scrutinize an unresponsive, inadmissible statement more carefully when the witness was in a position to know that his or her testimony was improper. See People v Holly, 129 Mich App 405, 415-416; 341 NW2d 823 (1983).
Immediately before her outburst, complainant learned that defendant’s prior convictions would not be admissible. On cross-examination by defense counsel, she lashed out at defendant calling him a murderer. She then stated, "I don’t care if I blew this case.”
I am unable to conclude that the reference to defendant as a murderer was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Although the jury was aware defendant was in prison, it had no reason to believe he was a murderer. Since the contents of complainant’s outburst were both knowingly inadmissible and prejudicial, I believe the trial court erred in failing to grant the motion for mistrial. Tutha, 393.
I would reverse.

=== CASE 9740677 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:17.032867+00 ===

LEVINE, Justice.
The North Dakota Workers’ Compensation Bureau (the Bureau) appeals from a district court judgment reversing the Bureau’s denial of home nursing care benefits to Marvin Schmidt. We affirm the district court judgment.
On November 21, 1985, Marvin suffered severe burns to fifty percent of his body, including his entire back, his arms and hands, his buttocks and legs, as well as his scalp and face. He was hospitalized until December 13, 1985.
Upon release from the hospital, Marvin required considerable home care, including special ointment and bandages for the burn areas which Marvin could not himself apply. His bed linens had to be sterilized and *187changed every day. His bathing required assistance. Marvin’s wife, Linda, provided this necessary help, estimated to take four and one-half hours a day, thereby eliminating the need for other assistance.
The Bureau accepted liability for Marvin’s claim and paid temporary total disability benefits. On January 2, 1986, the Bureau awarded Marvin a $250-a-month home nursing care allowance to compensate Linda for her services, with review of the allowance in three months.
Marvin underwent skin grafting surgery in March of 1986, and required continued assistance at home. His bandages had to be changed several times a day. He needed help to sit up, to arise from bed and to get up from a chair. He required frequent daily sponge baths. He could not put his hands in water and was fitted with special gloves. Linda continued to assist Marvin with these daily needs. She applied the prescribed ointment and followed the Doctor’s instructions in changing Marvin’s bandages.
On April 9, 1986, Marvin requested the Bureau to extend his home nursing care allowance. He was fitted with a Jobst garment1 that required two people to put on and take off and he continued to require ointment applied to the burn areas twice daily. The Bureau renewed Marvin’s home nursing care allowance for no more than three months.
In a letter to the Bureau dated June 11, 1986, Dr. Gruver, Marvin’s doctor, said:
“I believe that the care necessary for Mr. Schmidt at this point would be only that which a wife would normally be considered to provide for her husband. This consists of washing his pressure shirt and putting a fresh [shirt] on daily along with bandages on a couple of spots. This may have to be done twice a day but should not take more than fifteen minutes twice a day.”
Based upon this personal expression, the Bureau terminated the home nursing care allowance effective June 1, 1986.
On December 16, 1987, Marvin requested the Bureau to reinstate the home nursing care allowance as of May, 1986. The Bureau denied Marvin’s request. In its findings, the Bureau stated: “The Bureau has paid for home nursing care allowance through May of 1986. There is insufficient evidence that home nursing care is required to treat claimant’s injury.” Marvin requested a rehearing. Before the Bureau could rule on Marvin’s request, it received a letter from Dr. Juhala2 advising:
“Marvin also relates to me that his wife is helping him with daily dressing changes and with daily application of the creams and medications that are applied to his hypertrophic scars. He needs almost 1½ hours a day for the dressing changes, applications and the daily cleansing of his Jobst garments.”
The letter apparently precipitated a stipulation3 between the Bureau and Marvin. See Ekstrom v. N.D. Workers’ Comp. Bu*188reau, 478 N.W.2d 380 (N.D.1991). The Bureau agreed to “continue to pay the sum of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) monthly as reimbursement to claimant for home nursing services provided by claimant’s wife, so long as such services are reasonable and determined to be necessary for claimant’s care.”
The stipulation also provided for a reevaluation of the need for Linda’s services:
“4. It is expressly understood and agreed that the need for such services will be re-evaluated by claimant’s physician in or about July of 1988. Continued payment for home nursing services beyond the date of the re-evaluation of the need for such services by claimant’s physician, will be based on the evaluation and the recommendation of claimant’s physician.”
The stipulation was enforced and Marvin continued to receive home nursing care benefits until May 30, 1990. Then, the Bureau denied benefits4 because of a letter *189from Dr. Juhala, which confirmed that Marvin continued to need special care but questioned the need for payment for that care:
“Marvin Schmidt is in need of compression garments, including gloves as well as the sleeve garments that he has had. I am not 100% sure whether this will be life-long but it usually takes between 3 and 5 years of continued pressure. I believe the patient is now approaching his 3rd year.
“The question about continued care for him being rendered by his wife is a question that will be addressed. I do not think that continued care needs to be rendered at this point and that the patient is totally sufficiently able to take care of himself at this point. There may be times when his wife will need to assist him but I don’t think it renders that type of payment any more.”
Marvin requested a rehearing. The hearing officer heard testimony from Marvin, Linda and Dr. Juhala. Linda testified to the daily application of the cream and the washing and fitting of the Jobst garment. These tasks, she said, took over an hour each day. Dr. Juhala thought that the time for applying the ointment was excessive but he did not know the time required in washing the garment. The hearing officer found that Marvin required assistance in applying the cream and that his Jobst garments needed special washing which Linda provided and which, impliedly, Marvin could not. The hearing officer concluded that Marvin was entitled to a home nursing care allowance.
Counsel for the Bureau petitioned the Executive Director for reconsideration, stressing that only skilled care or substantial care deserved compensation. Agreeing with counsel for the Bureau, the Bureau’s Executive Director issued an order denying home care benefits because the services provided were not compensable under NDCC § 65-05-07. Marvin then appealed to the district court.
The district court noted that Marvin could not reach all of the burned areas or properly place or maintain the Jobst garments. The court overruled the Bureau’s conclusion that the statute allows compensation for only skilled care. Instead, services need only be “reasonable and appropriate to the nature of the injury” and the services provided by Linda were reasonable and appropriate. The court reversed the Bureau’s decision and ordered the Bureau to provide the allowance from May 30, 1990. The Bureau appealed to this court.
Generally, we review the Bureau’s decision and not the decision of the district court. Braun v. N.D. Workers’ Comp. Bureau, 472 N.W.2d 457 (N.D. 1991). However, we recognize that the district court’s analysis is important and entitled to respect. Holmgren v. N.D. Workers’ Comp. Bureau, 455 N.W.2d 200 (N.D. 1990). We will affirm the Bureau’s decision unless its findings of fact are not supported by a preponderance of the evidence or its conclusions are not supported by the findings. NDCC § 28-32-19. In determining if the findings are supported by a preponderance of the evidence, we do not make independent findings of our own *190but determine whether or not the record reflects that a reasoning mind could have determined that the factual conclusions were proven by the weight of the evidence. - Westman v. N.D. Workers’ Comp. Bureau, 459 N.W.2d 540 (N.D.1990); Risch v. N.D. Workers’ Comp. Bureau, 447 N.W.2d 308 (N.D.1989).
The Bureau argues the care given by Linda is not skilled care and, therefore, not compensable.
Under the stipulation, home nursing care services were compensable “so long as such services are reasonable and determined to be necessary.” Marvin’s physician was to reevaluate the need for home nursing care services. Dr. Juhala reevaluated and confirmed the continuing need for home nursing care. He acknowledged “[t]here may be times when [Marvin’s] wife will need to assist him” but opined that Linda’s assistance should be gratuitous. In effect, the Doctor gave his legal opinion on compensation. There is no dispute as to his medical opinion that Marvin requires Linda’s services as part of his treatment. Under the stipulation, Dr. Juhala was to reevaluate the need for services, not their compensability under workers’ compensation law. Dr. Juhala’s legal opinion of the duties of a wife is irrelevant in resolving the issue of whether the Bureau must compensate Linda for her services.
It is the stipulation that controls. The Bureau, in effect, promised to pay Linda so long as her services were “reasonable and determined necessary” for claimant’s care. While Dr. Juhala testified, and the Bureau found, that the claimant was able to take care of himself, the Doctor also said that Marvin would need Linda’s assistance. That concession confirms that Linda’s services were reasonable and necessary for Marvin’s continuing care.
In Ekstrom, supra, we reversed the trial court for ignoring or misinterpreting the effect of a stipulation entered into by the Bureau and the claimant. We explained that the Bureau was authorized to undertake a stipulation to preserve its funds and that the stipulation must not be ignored. Here, the Bureau erred in ignoring or misinterpreting its stipulation and discontinuing home nursing care benefits. The district court judgment is therefore affirmed.
ERICKSTAD, C.J., MESCHKE, J., and HUNKE, District Judge, concur.
HUNKE, District Judge, sitting as a member of the Court to fill the vacancy created by the resignation of H.F. GIERKE III. Justice JOHNSON, not being a member of this Court at the time this case was heard, did not participate in this decision.
. Dr. Juhala, Marvin’s treating physician, described a Jobst garment as a "pressure graded elastic garment that's made by the Jobst Company.” Dr. Juhala indicated that Marvin’s primary treatment was compression treatment which consisted of wearing the Jobst compressive garment and using a special type of cream that keeps the garment from breaking apart and the burn scar soft.
. In 1986, the Bureau referred Marvin to Dr. Juhala, who continues to treat him.
. The Bureau’s order said:
"FINDINGS OF FACT "I.
"An application for workers’ compensation benefits was filed on November 29, 1985, in connection with an alleged work injury on November 21, 1985.
"II.
"On the alleged date of injury, the claimant was employed by Melroe of Bismarck, North Dakota, as a spray painter.
"III.
"Claimant was diagnosed as having thermal burns to 50 percent of his body.
"IV.
"The Bureau accepted liability and awarded benefits, including associated medical expenses and temporary total benefits from November 20, 1985, through July 31, 1986. Claimant’s disability benefits were discontinued since the claimant had returned to work on August 1, 1986, in a lower wage classification without a reduction of wages until January 1, 1988. Temporary partial benefits were paid from January 1, 1988, through October 9, 1988, since the claimant was unable to return to his pre-injury wage classification. Claimant's temporary partial disability benefits were discontinued when the claimant's wage had reached below a 10 percent differential of his present job classification and pre-injury classification, temporary partial disability benefits from October 4, 1989, through March 1, 1990, when the new law was enstated. The claimant was not earning over 90 percent of his pre-injury wage.
“V.
"The Bureau authorized a home nursing care allowance on January 2, 1986, to claimant's wife to apply ointment and dressing for the treatment of claimant’s burns.
"VI.
"A final Order Denying Home Nursing Care Allowance was issued on February 1, 1988, since the claimant’s care consisted of washing a shirt and putting on a bandage twice daily.
“VII.
"Claimant requested on June 26, 1986, a further home nursing allowance for his wife to assist him with the JOBST garment.
"VIII.
"A stipulation agreement was entered into on September' 20, 1988, wherein the Bureau agreed to pay claimant's wife a nursing home *189allowance as long as services are reasonable and determined necessary for claimant’s care.
"IX.
"Dr. Juhala indicated on March 17, 1990, that the need for the home nursing care was not warranted any longer, since claimant was able to take care of himself.
"X.
“Dr. Juhala reported that claimant’s wife may need to assist the claimant, but that the payment for home care was not warranted. "CONCLUSIONS OF LAW
"I.
"Claimant sustained an injury by accident arising out of and in the course of his employment on November 21, 1985.
"II.
"Claimant has failed to prove that he is entitled to further home nursing care allowance beyond those previously provided by the Bureau.
"ORDER
"IT IS ORDERED that further home nursing care allowance beyond those previously provided by the Bureau is in all things denied;
"IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that a copy of this order be served on all parties in interest, as provided by law.”

=== CASE 9740757 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:41:23.898681+00 ===

Hood, P.J.
On May 20, 1985, following a bench trial before Detroit Recorder’s Court Judge Robert L. Evans, defendant, Randall Upshaw, also known as Randolph Upshaw, was convicted of involuntary manslaughter, MCL 750.321; MSA 28.553. This Court reversed in an unpublished opinion per curiam, decided March 25, 1987 (Docket No. 88718), finding the verdict to be against the great weight of the evidence. Upon remand, the case was again assigned to Judge Evans, and defendant again waived his right to a jury trial. The people’s motion to disqualify Judge Evans was denied by Judge Evans in an order entered on June 30, 1987, and the motion was then referred to Chief Judge Dalton A. Roberson, who also denied it by an order entered the same day. The people appealed to this Court. We now affirm.
The people argue that, as an automatic rule, a judge who sat as the factfinder at the first trial should be disqualified from sitting as the factfinder in the retrial. The people reason that a judge who has heard and weighed the evidence, and rendered a verdict, has necessarily prejudged the facts such that he or she cannot be a fair and impartial trier of fact when the same charges are tried in the new trial._
*388In order to disqualify a judge under MCR 2.003(B)(2), actual bias or prejudice must be shown. Impullitti v Impullitti, 163 Mich App 507, 514; 415 NW2d 261 (1987). Merely proving that a judge was involved in a prior trial or other proceeding against the same defendant does not amount to proof of bias for purposes of disqualification. People v White, 411 Mich 366, 386; 308 NW2d 128 (1981); Emerson v Arnold (After Remand), 92 Mich App 345, 353; 285 NW2d 45 (1979) (where the same judge conducted the summary disposition hearing and the bench trial). However, some panels of this Court, in cases involving circumstances not identical to the present, have expressed concern or caution when the judge serves as factfinder in the first trial. See Clemens v Bruce, 122 Mich App 35, 37; 329 NW2d 522 (1982), quoting Crampton v Dep’t of State, 395 Mich 347, 351; 235 NW2d 352 (1975), reh den 396 Mich 956 (1976); People v Lowenstein, 118 Mich App 475, 482, n 1; 325 NW2d 462 (1982), lv den 414 Mich 947 (1982).
Perhaps it is inevitable that suspicion about Judge Evans’ impartiality would arise when Judge Evans sits for the second time as the factfinder in defendant’s trial. However, suspicions do not constitute proof of partiality or prejudice. The people cite People v Gibson (On Remand), 90 Mich App 792; 282 NW2d 483 (1979), lv den 408 Mich 868 (1980), in which the trial judge’s statements at a codefendant’s bench trial indicated that the judge had made a prejudgment as to the guilt of the yet-to-be-tried defendant. Gibson is distinguishable since nothing in the record indicates that Judge Evans’ verdict in the first trial amounted to a prejudgment of the verdict in defendant’s second trial. As the Gibson Court itself stated, "[i]t is the trial judge’s prejudgment, rather than an exercise *389of his judgment, which requires disqualification in the present case.” 90 Mich 797, n 2.
In Crampton, supra, our Supreme Court stated that a judge may be disqualified without a showing of actual bias in situations where, inter alia, the judge or decisionmaker "might have prejudged the case because of prior participation as an accuser, investigator, factfinder or initial decisionmaker.” 395 Mich 351. However, the Crampton Court itself concluded that disqualification appeared to be necessary only when the adjudicators had personally conducted the initial investigation, amassed evidence, and filed and prosecuted the charges. In addition, the judicial exception to the general rule requiring actual bias outlined in Crampton has never been included as a ground for disqualification under MCR 2.003(B). We decline to adopt a rule of automatic disqualification solely because a judge has sat as a factfinder in a prior trial. We find that, unless there are special circumstances which increase the risk of unfairness, disqualification of a trial judge as factfinder in the second trial is not required solely because the trial judge sat as factfinder in the first trial. This conclusion is strengthened by the fact that the party the most at risk, namely, defendant, is apparently satisfied with the assignment of Judge Evans, and has waived his right to a jury trial.
The standard of review is whether the court abused its discretion in denying the motion for disqualification. People v Bero, 168 Mich App 545, 549; 425 NW2d 138 (1988). We hold that the circumstances presented here do not require automatic recusal of the trial judge, and that there was no abuse of discretion.
Affirmed.
Cynar, J., concurred.

=== CASE 2225326 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:43.410921+00 ===

330 Mass. 250 (1953)
112 N.E.2d 796
PILGRIM REAL ESTATE, INCORPORATED
vs.
SUPERINTENDENT OF POLICE OF BOSTON & another.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Suffolk.
May 5, 1953.
May 28, 1953.
Present: QUA, C.J., LUMMUS, RONAN, SPALDING, & COUNIHAN, JJ.
Richard A. Kaye, for the petitioner.
John V. Bonner, for the respondents.
RONAN, J.
This is a petition for a writ of mandamus by a domestic corporation owning residential real estate located upon a street opposite a public park, owned by the city and maintained under the supervision and control of the board of park commissioners, brought against the respondents, the superintendent of police of Boston and the commissioner of police respectively, seeking the revocation of an order given to the members of the police department "not to institute any criminal proceedings against motorists who park their vehicles in the park, the general intent of such order or orders being not to enforce rule § 11 [of the board of park commissioners] in so far as it applies to the park," and to require them to enforce the rule.[1] The petitioner appealed from a judgment dismissing the petition after the sustaining of the respondents' demurrer.
*251 This petition is not brought to protect any proprietary interest in property of the petitioner, nor to enforce any special or peculiar interest different in kind and nature from that possessed by citizens in common who reside in the general vicinity or who have occasion to travel along the highways in its neighborhood. The apparent object of the petition is to secure on the part of the respondents the performance of a public duty which, if it exists, was owed by them to all the citizens. In such a proceeding, the petitioner is a nominal party, for the real party in interest is all the people. The enforcement of this rule of the park commissioners, if we assume, without deciding, that it prohibits the parking of automobiles  which is the only matter complained of  is a matter of public interest. The only petitioner is a corporation and the question arises whether it alone[1a] has a standing to maintain the petition. It has been frequently decided that where the object of a petition is to procure the enforcement of the law, a petitioner "without special interest in the subject matter independent of the rights of the public has a standing by reason of his citizenship to maintain a petition for a writ of mandamus to enforce a public duty of interest to citizens generally." Police Commissioner of Boston v. Boston, 279 Mass. 577, 585. Kelley v. Board of Health of Peabody, 248 Mass. 165, 169. Sears v. Treasurer & Receiver General, 327 Mass. 310, 314-315.
A corporation, unlike a natural person, owes its existence to the sovereign, having such powers as have been expressly conferred upon it together with such powers as may be implied, or are incidental or auxiliary to the powers expressly granted, or are reasonably necessary in order to enable it to carry out the object for which it was organized. The scope of its powers and the extent of its liability are limited by the act creating it. Teele v. Rockport Granite Co. 224 Mass. 20, 24-25. Commercial Casualty Ins. Co. v. Daniel Russell Boiler Works, Inc. 258 Mass. 453, 455. American *252 Surety Co. v. 14 Canal Street, Inc. 276 Mass. 119, 125. Limerick Mills v. Royal Textile Co. 288 Mass. 479. A corporation, in the absence of a statute or some restrictions in its charter, may maintain all such actions as may be necessary to protect its rights and to secure compensation for damage to its property, and is liable for injuries caused to another, all upon similar grounds as natural persons and to the same extent. But the present proceeding does not involve rights of this character.
The rights now attempted to be asserted are those which arise out of citizenship. It is true, apart from any statute showing an intent to include a corporation as a citizen, that corporations are considered as citizens for some purposes, principally for the purpose of determining jurisdiction of the Federal courts, Swiss National Ins. Co. Ltd. v. Miller, 267 U.S. 42, 46, Puerto Rico v. Russell & Co. 288 U.S. 476, 479-480; but it is settled that a corporation is not a citizen within the meaning of the Constitution of the United States, art. 4, § 2, which provides that citizens of each State shall be entitled to all the privileges and immunities of citizens of the several States, Attorney General v. Electric Storage Battery Co. 188 Mass. 239, Arizona Commercial Mining Co. v. Iron Cap Copper Co. 236 Mass. 185, Waters-Pierce Oil Co. v. Texas, 177 U.S. 28, 45, Hemphill v. Orloff, 277 U.S. 537, nor within § 1 of the Fourteenth Amendment which prohibits a State from enforcing any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States. Bowe v. Secretary of the Commonwealth, 320 Mass. 230, 251. Western Turf Association v. Greenberg, 204 U.S. 359, 363. Asbury Hospital v. Cass County, 326 U.S. 207.
It was said in United States v. Cruikshank, 92 U.S. 542, 549, that "Citizens are the members of the political community to which they belong. They are the people who compose the community, and who, in their associated capacity, have established or submitted themselves to the dominion of a government for the promotion of their general welfare and the protection of their individual as well as their collective rights." The concept of citizenship "carries *253 the idea of connection or identification with the state, and a participation in its functions.... In the Constitution and laws of the United States the term is generally, if not always, used in a political sense to designate one who has the rights and privileges of a citizen of a state or of the United States." Harding v. Standard Oil Co. 182 Fed. 421, 424. It was stated in Luria v. United States, 231 U.S. 9, 22, "Citizenship is membership in a political society and implies a duty of allegiance on the part of the member and a duty of protection on the part of the society." A citizen has the right to participate in the administration of the local, State and national government. He has a voice in the form of government, the formulation of its policies, the selection of its officers, and the due and efficient functioning of the various governmental branches including the proper and faithful execution of the laws. Of course, his individual influence in such political matters is much greater in his local community than in a larger unit of government. Rights of this character can only be possessed and exercised by natural persons. There is no place in this field for corporate activity. "A corporation is not vested with all of the interests or rights in the administration of government inherent in the citizenship of a natural person." J.D.L. Corp. v. Bruckman, 171 Misc. (N.Y.) 3, 6. It was stated in United States v. Wilson, 33 App. D.C. 472, 479, "The relator, as a corporate entity, has no interest in the enforcement of duties owing by the Secretary to the public." We agree with Goodrich, J., in Gavin v. Hudson & Manhattan Railroad, 185 Fed. (2d) 104, 105, that "To call it [a corporation] a citizen of any state is unreal. People are citizens, not corporations, and the rights and duties that go with the concept of citizenship as applied to a human being are not applicable to corporations."
The order sustaining the demurrer was right and the judgment dismissing the petition is affirmed.
So ordered.
NOTES
[1]  This rule reads as follows: "No person shall ride or drive across any sidewalk, plantation or reservation or upon or over the space reserved for street railway cars and grass, except over an entrance or crossover approved by the Board of Park Commissioners or except by special permission from the Board." A penalty of $20 is provided for its violation.
[1a]  See D.N. Kelley & Son, Inc. v. Selectmen of Fairhaven, 294 Mass. 570; Cape Cod Steamship Co. v. Selectmen of Provincetown, 295 Mass. 65.

=== CASE 2225327 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:43.441199+00 ===

414 Ill. 537 (1953)
112 N.E.2d 126
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS, Defendant in Error,
v.
MOSE HIGHTOWER, Plaintiff in Error.
No. 32445.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
Opinion filed March 23, 1953.
Rehearing denied May 18, 1953.
*538 JULIUS LUCIUS ECHELES, of Chicago, for plaintiff in error.
IVAN A. ELLIOTT, Attorney General, of Springfield, and JOHN GUTKNECHT, State's Attorney, of Chicago, (JOHN T. GALLAGHER, RUDOLPH L. JANEGA, ARTHUR MANNING, and ELMER KISSANE, all of Chicago, of counsel,) for the People.
Judgment affirmed.
Mr. JUSTICE MAXWELL delivered the opinion of the court:
This case comes to this court on a writ of error to review a judgment of the criminal court of Cook County based on a jury verdict finding defendant, Mose Hightower, guilty of dispensing narcotic drugs in violation of *539 section 23 of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act of this State. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1951, chap. 38, pars. 192.1-192.28.
The court sentenced defendant to serve in the penitentiary not less than twenty-five years and not more than fifty years, since the jury also found defendant had previously been convicted of violating certain sections of the Federal narcotic laws.
Defendant's motions to quash the indictment, to strike certain portions from the indictment, for new trial, for judgment of acquittal notwithstanding the verdict, and for arrest of judgment were denied by the trial court. The indictment charged defendant had dispensed narcotic drugs in Cook County in violation of the statute and also charged he was the same person previously indicted and convicted in the Federal court for violation of the Federal statutes pertaining to narcotics. Specifically, the proof showed defendant entered a plea of guilty to four counts of the Federal indictment and served a term of three years in a Federal penitentiary. Defendant now attacks the constitutionality of the Illinois Uniform Narcotic Drug Act. He further urges that section 23 of the act is inapplicable to this case. Other errors assigned relate to proof and alleged prejudicial conduct during the trial.
The evidence in this case shows that one Langford was arrested in his apartment in Chicago by police officers who found narcotics in his possession. The officers then proceeded to the apartment of one Williams where narcotics were also found. These officers waited at the Williams apartment and caused him to call the defendant on the telephone several times. No response to these calls was received from the defendant because he was not there at the time. Two different numbers were called and both were listed at the same address, 3735 South Cottage Grove Avenue in Chicago. The defendant operated a cleaning store, record shop and livery service at the South Cottage Grove address. After several hours the defendant telephoned to *540 Williams at his apartment where the officers were. One of the officers listened to the phone conversation wherein the defendant stated he had just returned to his shop and asked Williams what he had wanted. Williams stated that he had called him four or five times trying to get in touch with him. Williams then asked the defendant how the merchandise was and stated that he needed some. The defendant replied, "I have not got any right now, but bring over the bread what you got." Williams testified that "bread" meant money and that he did have $210 for the defendant which he had received from Langford for narcotics. Langford testified he had been in the penitentiary for the possession of narcotics and that Williams told him he was working for Hightower, the defendant. Williams also testified he was working for the defendant. No narcotics were found at the South Cottage Grove address by the officers, nor were any found on the person of the defendant. Within his rights, the defendant made no statement and did not testify. The officers identified themselves at defendant's establishment in the presence of several persons who appeared to be customers there and thereupon much confusion and commotion resulted.
The seized capsules and powders coming from the possession of Langford and Williams, and testified to by Williams as having come from the defendant, were properly preserved and identified. The chemist testified they contained heroin, a narcotic. An authenticated copy of the defendant's previous conviction was introduced into evidence and the deputy United States Marshal who delivered defendant to the Federal penitentiary identified him as being the same person. Defendant's evidence consisted of the testimony of two witnesses introduced for impeachment purposes only.
Defendant now contends that section 23 of the Illinois Uniform Narcotic Drug Act is unconstitutional because it *541 was not passed by the legislature in accordance with the constitution of this State. The Illinois constitution provides, by article IV, section 13, that "Every bill shall be read at large on three different days, in each house." We have carefully examined House Bill 544 as first proposed, which was read at large in the House of Representatives. Upon the second reading the act as first proposed was amended to read as it now presently appears. The bill then went to a third reading in the House and had three readings in the Senate in present form. Defendant's contention that the bill as finally passed is a complete substitution of the original bill is without merit. Certain words were deleted from the original bill proposed and certain other minor changes were made by certain insertions and modifications in certain words and terms therein. It is a rule in this State that amendments germane to the subject matter may be made without the proposed act, as amended, being read three times in each house. In order to come within the rule that an amendment need not be read three times in each house, it must be germane to the general subject of the bill as originally introduced. (Giebelhausen v. Daley, 407 Ill. 25, at 46.) We find that the amendment is germane to the general subject of House Bill 544 as originally introduced.
Defendant further contends that this section of the act is unconstitutional for the reason that it is vague, indefinite and susceptible to many diverse interpretations. This section reads as follows:
"Whoever violates this Act by selling, prescribing, administering, or dispensing any narcotic drug, shall be imprisoned in the penitentiary for a term of not less than 1 year nor more than 5 years for the first offense. Whoever violates this Act by possessing, having under his control, manufacturing or compounding any narcotic drug shall be fined for the first offense not more than $5,000.00, or be imprisoned for a period of not less than 1 year nor more *542 than 5 years, or both. For any subsequent offense the violator shall be imprisoned in the penitentiary for any term from 2 years to life.
"Whoever violates this Act by selling, prescribing, administering, or dispensing any narcotic drug to any person under 21 years of age, shall be imprisoned in the penitentiary for any term from 2 years to life.
"Whoever is authorized in this Act to manufacture, possess, have under his control, sell, prescribe, administer, dispense or compound any narcotic drug, who violates this Act by failing to comply with any provision prescribed in this Act for the exercise of such authority, for a first offense, shall be fined not more than $1000 or be imprisoned in the county jail for a term of not more than 1 year, or both; and for any subsequent offense, shall be fined not more than $3000 or be imprisoned in the penitentiary for a term of not more than 5 years, or both.
"Any offense under this Act shall be deemed a subsequent offense if the violator shall have been previously convicted of a felony under any law of the United States of America, or of any State or Territory or of the District of Columbia relating to narcotic drugs."
It is evident from a reading of this section that the crime of possession, etc., of any narcotic drug is a misdemeanor, because it allows a fine. (People v. Bain, 359 Ill. 455.) Although no place of confinement is mentioned in the statute, it is an accepted rule of statutory construction that the omission of place of confinement in a penal statute raises a conclusive presumption that the confinement should be in the county jail. (24 Corpus Juris Secundum 1246, par. 2000.) There is no merit in defendant's claim that the punishment fixed for possession of narcotic drugs is indeterminate. Section 2 of the Sentence and Parole Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1951, chap. 38, par. 802,) provides for the imposition of an indeterminate sentence except for crimes enumerated in section 1, and a reading of this *543 entire section relating to indeterminate sentences clearly shows that it does not refer to, and in fact specifically exempts, county jail sentences.
We find no merit in defendant's contention that section 23 is inapplicable for the reason that the prior conviction occurred before the statute became effective. In People v. Hanke, 389 Ill. 602, at 604, we stated: "A statute increasing the punishment for a subsequent offense is not an ex post facto law merely because the prior conviction occurred before the statute was enacted or became effective." In Cooley on Constitutional Limitations, 8th ed. p. 553, the rule is stated as follows: "Heavier penalties are often provided by law for a second or subsequent offense than for the first, and it has not been deemed objectionable that in providing for the heavier penalty, the prior conviction authorized to be taken into account may have taken place before the law was passed. In such cases it is the second or subsequent offense that is punished, not the first."
Defendant seriously contends that the indictment was insufficient for the reason that his prior conviction and sentence to the Federal penitentiary for narcotics violation was not a felony. As authority for this proposition he relies on our opinion in the case of People v. Byrnes, 405 Ill. 103. The Byrnes case dealt with the Habitual Criminal Act of this State and is distinguishable from the present case. It is true that statutes which authorize the imposition of a more severe punishment and which are highly penal should not be applied to cases which do not by the strictest construction come under their provisions, as stated in the Byrnes case. We find, however, that under a strict construction of the act in question the legislature has specifically declared that a subsequent offense is one wherein the violator shall have been previously convicted of a felony under any law of the United States of America. At the time of the Federal conviction the defendant had committed a felony under Federal law and he therefore clearly *544 comes within the purview of this statute. We find little merit in defendant's argument that he was found guilty in the Federal court of a violation of the revenue law and not a narcotic law as provided for in the Illinois statute. Defendant's brief refers to the Harrison Act and states that the Federal government is at least equally concerned as is this State in prosecuting narcotic law violators. Defendant has cited many Federal cases which in effect hold that the Harrison Act is not a narcotic law but a revenue law. Little mention need be made of the fact that these cases are not in point, for the reason that the first section of the Illinois statute which contains several definitions refers to Federal narcotic laws. The Harrison Narcotic Act has been upheld as a valid enactment against contentions that it was not a revenue measure. While it may be assumed that the act has a moral end, and that the suppression of the drug habit by regulating the purchase, sale and distribution of narcotics is at least one of the incidental purposes of the legislation, nevertheless, it is held that the Harrison Narcotic Act will be treated as a revenue measure so that only such moral ends can be attained by it as such a construction permits. 17 American Jurisprudence, 850.
We have carefully examined the record in view of the claims of prejudice made by the defendant in respect to the conduct of the trial. It is true that in certain instances the assistant State's Attorneys could have been more cautious in respect to certain remarks pertaining to previous conviction of the defendant. However, this fact was clearly before the jury and properly so according to the provisions of section 23 of the act. We therefore find that no prejudicial error was committed by the court and assistant State's Attorneys in any remarks concerning this fact. We do not agree with defendant's contention that his prior conviction should have been deleted from the indictment. It is true that the Habitual Criminal Act of this State specifically provides that the fact of prior conviction and sentence in *545 the penitentiary must be pleaded in the indictment for the present offense and that the Illinois Uniform Narcotic Drug Act contains no such provision. However, we are of the opinion that it is necessary to plead this fact to justify a conviction and sentence under the aggravated penalty clause. In People v. Boykin, 298 Ill. 11, at page 21, we declared "Every fact necessary to sustain a sentence imposed by a court in a criminal case must be alleged in the information or in the indictment, and an indictment under which it is sought to impose a higher penalty by reason of a previous conviction must allege the fact of such conviction. (1 McClain on Crim. Law, section 28, p. 28.)" It is sufficient to state, in answer to defendant's contention that what seems to be a fair rule is practiced in the Federal courts, concerning the fact of prior convictions being omitted from the indictment and the jury's consideration, that such rule is founded on a specific statute governing such practice. This court is without power to adopt such practice without the prior sanction of the legislature.
Lastly, defendant complains of the sufficiency of the evidence and of the State's Attorney's failure to furnish him with the names of witnesses called by the prosecution. The record reveals that the trial court specifically considered this matter and gave counsel for defendant reasonable opportunity to talk to the witnesses and further gave defendant opportunity to make chemical analysis of the narcotics in evidence. We are of the opinion that the jury was justified under the evidence in this case in returning a verdict of guilty and that its verdict was not the result of any passion or prejudice. We are unable to say that defendant was prejudiced by anything that took place during the trial of this case and believe that he received a fair and impartial trial by both judge and jury.
For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the criminal court of Cook County is affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.

=== CASE 9740678 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:17.036949+00 ===

YANDE WALLE, Justice,
concurring specially.
I agree that the stipulation between Schmidt and the Bureau governs this case pursuant to our decision in Ekstrom v. N.D. Workers Comp. Bureau, 478 N.W.2d 380 (N.D.1991). Nevertheless, I believe a “reasoning mind” (see Power Fuels, Inc. v. Elkin, 283 N.W.2d 214 (N.D.1979)) could have determined, as did the Bureau, that Dr. Juhala was of the opinion that “the need for home nursing care was not warranted any longer, since claimant was able to take care of himself” within the terms of the stipulation.
Notwithstanding this belief, I concur in the result reached by the majority opinion. It was the responsibility of the Bureau to determine whether it was Dr. Juhala’s opinion on March 17, 1990, that Schmidt had improved to a point where the type of assistance needed was nonessential or different from that needed at the time of Dr. Juhala’s letter on February 10, 1988, thus expressing his medical opinion on a change in Schmidt’s condition, or whether, as the majority opinion finds, Dr. Juhala was expressing his “legal opinion on compensation”. See, e.g., Matuska v. North Dakota Workers Compensation Bureau, 482 N.W.2d 856 (N.D.1992). [Inconsistent medical opinions, not arising from leading questions on theoretical possibilities on cross examination must be explained.] Here, despite an October 31, 1990, deposition at which both the Bureau and Schmidt were represented, Dr. Juhala was not asked to compare his opinion in 1990 with *191that of 1988 and to explain any discrepancies between or misunderstanding of either opinion. That is the Bureau’s responsibility according to this Court’s decision in Claim of Bromley, 304 N.W.2d 412 (N.D. 1981) as explained in Kopp v. N.D. Workers Compensation Bureau, 462 N.W.2d 132 (N.D.1990), and Matuska, supra. Those decisions effectively hold that where there are apparent discrepancies in the medical opinion of a physician which are inherent in the opinions and not created as a result of leading questions as to possible alternative causes or diagnoses on cross-examination, and which are not explained by the physician, the Bureau may not rely on the part of the opinion favorable to its position and ignore the portion that is unfavorable to its opinion, without further clarification. There was no further clarification in this instance and I therefore concur in the result reached by the majority opinion.

=== CASE 9740679 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:17.593224+00 ===

WUEST, Justice.
Art and Verla Strain (The Strains), as special administrators of the estate of their son Tyler Strain (Tyler), deceased, commenced a wrongful death and survivorship action against Appellant, Harry Christians (Christians). The matter came on for trial before a jury. The jury returned a verdict in the Strains’ favor in the amount of $75,-000. Christians appeals. We affirm.
Tyler was fourteen years of age. He had lived on a farm most of his life. At the time of Tyler’s death, the Strains lived on a farm approximately one-quarter of a mile from Christians’ farm. Tyler worked for his father on the family farm, and, in 1986, began to work for Christians at his farm after school. Tyler did not operate Christians’ two big tractors. During his second year with Christians, Tyler started stacking hay bails and used small tractors and their attachments.
In the fall of 1987, when Tyler was thirteen years old, Mr. Strain began teaching him to use and operate the family's tractors, including a 1974 International model 1066 tractor.1 After Tyler had begun his third year of employment with Christians, in April 1988, he was allowed to operate Christians’ 1973 International model 1066 tractor in the farm field, stacking hay and pulling implements. The 1973 model 1066 was essentially the same as the Strains’ 1974 model 1066 tractor. Both the Strains’ and Christians’ tractors were more powerful than “twenty PTO horsepower.” Christians allowed Tyler to operate his tractor alone.
Tyler’s parents knew at the time Tyler was operating Christians’ tractor and did not object. Mr. Strain testified he had helped Christians in 1986 and had driven Christians’ tractor. He noted the steering on the tractor was loose and Christians’ tractor was difficult, if running at a high speed, to “keep ... between the ditches.”
Christians requested Tyler take a tractor operation safety course prior to his third year of employment with Christians. Completion of such a course permits employers to employ fourteen to sixteen-year-olds in an occupation involving such activities without violating the Fair Labor Standards Act (F.L.S.A.), discussed more fully in part I. On June 7-8, 1988, the Brookings County Extension Office put on a twenty-hour “Hazardous Occupation Safety Course” pursuant to part 570 of the Code of Federal Regulations,2 which will be discussed in more detail in part I.
Tyler successfully completed two written tests and a driving test during this program. On June 8, 1988, the county extension agent in charge of the safety program issued to Tyler a certificate certifying he had successfully completed the training program. Tyler was then certified to operate a tractor with over “twenty PTO horsepower,” and to “[connect or disconnect] an implement or any of its parts to or from such a tractor.”3 Mr. Strain acknowledged he and his wife were both aware Tyler had taken and successfully completed a tractor and farm machinery safety course at the request of Christians.
On the morning of June 11, 1988, Tyler went to work at Christians’ farm. He was to stack hay with Christians’ tractor; consequently, it was equipped with a bucket loader and a double bale fork. Tyler drove Christians’ tractor to the repair shop of *785Lyle Krueger (a self-employed welder and repairman) for the purpose of welding a hair-line crack on the reservoir of the loader. In response to a question by Krueger, Tyler stated he was having no problems with the tractor in its operation. At morning’s end, Tyler, Christians, and another farm hand went to town to have lunch. After lunch, Christians took Tyler to where the tractor was parked and told him to drive it back to Christians’ home. Christians then went home to take a nap. Shortly thereafter, the tractor was found upside down and on fire. It had rolled over, smashing the cab with Tyler inside. Tyler was killed.
The investigating officer stated it appeared the tractor had eased off the gravel at a very slight angle over a distance of approximately 100 to 125 feet. It appeared Tyler jerked the wheel of the tractor to get back onto the roadway surface. The tractor then slipped sideways and overturned.
The Strains commenced a wrongful death and survivorship action against Christians, alleging Christians had employed Tyler in an occupation dangerous to his life and health as prohibited by SDCL 60-12-3 (1978) (South Dakota’s child labor statute).4 Christians denied he had employed Tyler in a dangerous occupation. In the alternative, he asserted Tyler’s employment was with the knowledge and consent of his parents, and Tyler’s own negligence proximately caused his death.
During trial, the court ruled that neither party could present evidence pertaining to the contributory negligence of Tyler, or of Mr. or Mrs. Strain. The trial court refused to instruct the jury on the issues of contributory negligence of Tyler or of the Strains. Christians objected. At the end of the plaintiffs’ case, Christians’ counsel moved for a directed verdict arguing first, federal law preempted imposing civil liability against Christians under SDCL 60-12-3 and second, there was insufficient evidence for the jury to find Tyler was employed in an occupation hazardous to life or health. The trial court denied that motion. The jury returned a $75,000 verdict in favor of the Strains. The trial court entered judgment against Christians for that amount.
Christians appeals raising four issues:
I. Whether SDCL 60-12-3 has been preempted by the F.L.S.A. and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto.
II. Whether the trial court properly refused to admit testimony regarding the contributory negligence of Tyler and to give an instruction on the issue of contributory negligence of Tyler.
III. Whether the trial court properly refused to admit testimony regarding the parents’ knowledge of and consent to Tyler’s employment and to give an instruction on the defense of contributory negligence of the parents.
IV. Whether the jury verdict was against the law, and whether the $75,000 award was supported by sufficient evidence.
We will discuss these items seriatim.
I. CHILD LABOR STATUTE PREEMPTION.
Sections 3 and 12 of F.L.S.A. are substantively similar to SDCL 60-12-3. Section 125 prohibits employing “oppressive child labor” in commerce, and Section 36 provides employment of a child under *786the age of sixteen by any non-parent constitutes “oppressive child labor” unless the Secretary of Labor provides by regulation or by order that the employment of children between fourteen and sixteen years of age in occupations other than mining or manufacturing does not constitute “oppressive child labor.” 29 U.S.C. §§ 203(0, 212(c) (1988). An employer violating F.L.S.A. is subject to substantial criminal and civil penalties. 29 U.S.C. §§ 215-217 (1988).7
Subpart E-l of Chapter 5 of Title 29 of the Code of Federal Regulations addresses “occupations in agriculture particularly hazardous for the employment of children below the age of 16.” According to the Secretary of Labor, “[ojperating a tractor of over 20 PTO horsepower, or connecting or disconnecting an implement or any of its parts to or from such a tractor[ ]” is “particularly hazardous employment [for] children below the age of sixteen.” 29 C.F.R. § 570.71(a)(1) (1990). Thus, employment of a child under sixteen years of age by a non-parent in such an occupation would normally constitute “oppressive child labor.”
Pertinent exemptions do exist to the general rule stated above. Those exemptions are contained in 29 C.F.R. § 570.72 (1990):
(b) Federal Extension Service. The findings and declaration of fact in [section] 570.71(a) shall not apply to the employment of a child under 16 years of age in those occupations in which he has successfully completed one or more training programs described in paragraph (b)(1), (2), or (3) of this section provided he has been instructed by his employer on safe and proper operation of the specific equipment he is to use; is continuously and closely supervised by the employer where feasible; or, where not feasible, ... his safety is checked by the employer at least at midmorning, noon, and mid-afternoon.
Subparagraphs (1)-(3) of 29 CFR § 570.-72(b) describe various training programs, all of which require an employee or potential employee (1) to be fourteen years of age or older; (2) to complete a training program on safe operation of machinery; (3) to successfully complete a written examination covering safety; and (4) to demonstrate his or her ability to operate machinery safely. In addition, the regulation requires the employer to keep on file a certificate stating the child has completed all the required training and testing.
Where a child obtains certification pursuant to such a program, as Tyler did, an employer may hire him to operate tractors of greater than twenty PTO horsepower or other machinery without subjecting himself to criminal and civil penalties under F.L.S.A. Christians contends this statutory and regulatory scheme preempts South Dakota’s child labor statute. We disagree.
We have held whether employment is dangerous to the child’s “life, health or morals” is a question of fact for the jury. Koenekamp v. Picasso, 64 S.D. 567, 570, 269 N.W. 74, 77 (1936). Accord Dillman v. Madsen, 688 F.Supp. 1402, 1405 (D.S.D. 1988). Section 2 of F.L.S.A. states the policy of F.L.S.A. is to correct labor conditions detrimental to the health and well-being of workers. 29 U.S.C. § 202 (1988). Section 18 further indicates Congress’ intent was to provide a minimum floor for child protection, not a ceiling beyond which states could not exceed. 29 U.S.C. § 218 (1988). See also 48A Am.Jur.2d Labor and Labor Relations § 2210 (1979).
*787Section 18 provides: “[N]o provision of this Act relating to the employment of child labor shall justify noncompliance with any Federal or State law or municipal ordinance establishing a higher standard than the standard established under this Act.” 29 U.S.C. § 218 (1988). Accord 29 C.F.R. § 570.50(a) (1990). Indeed, regulations promulgated pursuant to F.L.S.A. expressly state: “[CJompliance with [F.L.S.A.] ... does not relieve any person of liability under other laws that establish higher child labor standards than those prescribed by or pursuant to the act.” 29 C.F.R. § 570.129 (1990). Thus, if an individual state where a child is employed has a stricter child labor code and standard of employment, the federal law will adopt and apply the state’s stricter standard. P. McGovern, Childrens Rights and Child Labor: Advocacy on Behalf of the Child Worker, 28 S.D.L.Rev. 293, 297-98 (1983).
Permitting an employer to be held liable for civil damages which result from his violation of SDCL 60-12-3 would not create an “obstacle to the accomplishment and execution of the full purposes and objectives” of F.L.S.A.’s child labor provisions. See Fidelity Federal Sav. & Loan Ass’n. v. De La Cuesta, 458 U.S. 141, 156, 102 S.Ct. 3014, 3024, 73 L.Ed.2d 664, 677 (1982) (actual conflict exists between regulations promulgated by Federal Home Loan Bank Board and state court decision); Doctors Hospital, Inc. v. Silva Redo, 558 F.2d 619, 622 (1st Cir.1977). Indeed, F.L.S.A. provides no private federal cause of action for its violation. Jensen v. Sport Bowl, Inc., 469 N.W.2d 370, 373 (S.D.1991); Breitwieser v. K.M.S. Industries, Inc., 467 F.2d 1391, 1394 (5th Cir.1972), cert. denied, 410 U.S. 969, 93 S.Ct. 1445, 35 L.Ed.2d 705 (1973). Therefore, the Secretary of Labor’s findings regarding employment of safety trained fourteen to sixteen-year-olds did not preempt the jury’s conclusion that Christians employed Tyler in an “occupation dangerous to life, health, or morals.” See Jensen, 469 N.W.2d at 373 (F.L.S.A. does not preempt South Dakota’s worker’s compensation law); Maccabees Mut. Life Ins. Co. v. Perez-Rosado, 641 F.2d 45, 46 (1st Cir.1981) (F.L.S.A. does not prohibit state legislation in the area of wages or working conditions, nor does it implicitly prohibit state regulation by occupying the whole field and leaving no room for supplementary state provisions); Divine v. Levy, 36 F.Supp. 55, 57-58 (D.C.La.1940). The Secretary’s findings merely placed Christians’ act of employing Tyler to operate a tractor with greater than twenty PTO horsepower outside F.L.S.A.’s prohibitions against “oppressive child labor.”
II. CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE OF THE DECEDENT.
During the trial, the court ruled that neither party would be permitted to present evidence regarding the contributory negligence of Tyler. The trial court refused, despite objections by Christians, to instruct the jury on the defense of contributory negligence.
Whether an occupation is dangerous to the life, health or morals of a child was determined in Koenekamp to be a jury question. Thus, in this case, Tyler’s safety training was relevant to the determination of whether a statutory violation existed. The trial court properly admitted evidence of Tyler’s safety training. The Koenek-amp court also held that violation of the child labor statute was sufficient, standing alone, to render an employer liable in the event of injury. Koenekamp, 269 N.W. at 77. However, the Koenekamp court declined to decide whether contributory negligence constituted a defense to a cause of action alleging a violation of SDCL 60-12-3. Id. As the Koenekamp court noted, a split of authority exists as to this issue. Id. This split exists because different courts have given different effects to the enactment of child labor statutes. See Annotation, Contributory Negligence as Defense to Cause of Action Based Upon Violation of Statute, 171 A.L.R. 894 (1947), superseded by 10 A.L.R.2d 853 (1950).
Some courts have held violation of a child labor statute constitutes “negligence per se.” See, e.g., Dillman, 688 F.Supp. at 1403-04, 1405. The plaintiff is required to prove violation of the statute proximately *788caused the child’s injuries. Accordingly, the child’s contributory negligence is a defense to such a cause of action. See Dar-sam v. Kohlmann, 123 La. 164, 48 So. 781 (1909) (contributory negligence a defense where child acted in violation of instructions and duties, reasoning that child labor statutes should not be construed to abrogate the ordinary rules relating to contributory negligence unless the statute is so worded as to leave no doubt such defense is to be excluded); Armstrong’s Adm’r. v. Sumne & Ratterman Co., 211 Ky. 750, 278 S.W. 111, 115 (1925) (in cause of action to recover for child’s death, child’s contributory negligence constitutes a defense); Besonen v. Campbell, 243 Mich. 209, 220 N.W. 301, 303 (1928).
However, the overwhelming majority of jurisdictions which have addressed this issue have held that contributory negligence is not a defense. Typically, such courts have reasoned that child labor statutes are intended to place the entire responsibility upon the employer so that he is liable for injury to the child even though he has acted in good faith. The plaintiff need only show a violation of the statute, which must be resolved by the jury in the first instance, and injury to the child. Legal or proximate causation is not in issue because the legislature has determined causation exists. In short, once a violation is established, these cases have construed child labor statutes to impose strict or absolute liability. W. Prosser, Contributory Negligence as Defense to Violation of Statute, 32 Minn.L.Rev. 105, 118-120 (1948); D.L. by Friederichs v. Huebner, 110 Wis.2d 581, 329 N.W.2d 890, 912-18 (1983)'(providing detailed discussion of the difference between negligence per se and absolute liability). The following cases hold contributory negligence is not a defense: Boyer v. Johnson, 360 So.2d 1164, 1169 (La.1978); Vincent v. Riggi & Sons, Inc., 30 N.Y.2d 406, 285 N.E.2d 689, 693, 334 N.Y.S.2d 380, 386, 56 A.L.R.3d 1157, 1163 (1972); Boyles v. Hamilton, 235 Cal.App.2d 492, 45 Cal.Rptr. 399, 403 (1965); Pitzer v. M.D. Tomkies & Sons, 136 W.Va. 268, 67 S.E.2d 437, 442 (1951) (overruling Norman v. Virginia-Pocahontas Coal Co., 68 W.Va. 405, 69 S.E. 857 (1919)); Langston v. Degelia, 186 S.W.2d 738, 739 (Tex.Civ.App.1945); Tampa Shipbuilding & Engineering v. Adams, 132 Fla. 419, 181 So. 403, 406-07 (1938) (reaffirmed in Baldridge v. Hatcher, 266 So.2d 112 (Fla.App.1972)); Dusha v. Virginia & Rainy Lake Co., 145 Minn. 171, 172, 176 N.W. 482, 482, 23 A.L.R. 632, 634 (1920); Karpeles v. Heine, 227 N.Y. 74, 124 N.E. 101, 104 (1919); Louisville, H. & St.L.Ry.Co. v. Lyons, 155 Ky. 396, 159 S.W. 971, 975-76 (1913) (a master is an insurer of the safety of child employees); Pinoza v. Northern Chair Co., 152 Wis. 473, 140 N.W. 84 (1913) (violation of child labor statute equivalent to gross negligence; contributory negligence is not a defense); Lenahan v. Pittston Coal Min.Co., 218 Pa. 311, 67 A. 642 (1907).
As stated in Dusha, “The purpose of the [child labor] statute is to protect children in life and limb by prohibiting their employment in dangerous occupations where[,] because of their immaturityQ] they are likely inappreciative of risks and prone to be careless and heedless.” Dusha 176 N.W. at 482, 23 A.L.R. at 634. Courts holding employers absolutely liable typically reason that “the evident purpose of the statute would be defeated if the employer were permitted to set up the contributory negligence of the child, and that the legislature must have intended that no such defense should be available.”8 Prosser, supra, at *789119-20 (citing Karpeles, 124 N.E. 101; Pinaza 140 N.W. 84; Lyons, 159 S.W. at 975-76). Accord Annot., supra, 10 A.L.R.2d at 855; W. Keeton, D. Dobbs, R. Keeton, D. Owen, Prosser and Keeton on the Law of Torts § 65, at 461-62 (1984) (hereinafter Prosser and Keeton).
Absolute liability has generally been limited to situations where the cause of action was based upon the violation of a particular type of statute — one enacted for the protection of a particular class of persons who are incapable of protecting themselves. Restatement (Second) of Torts § 483 comment c. See also Dusha, 176 N.W. 482; Sharpness v. Seattle, 52 Wash.2d 490, 326 P.2d 747, 749 (1958). The child labor statute is just such a statute. Restatement (Second) of Torts § 483 comment e.
The purpose of our child labor statute is to protect children from their own negligence. The statute is a declaration that children under the specified age do not possess the judgment, discretion, and caution essential to engagement in the prescribed occupation. 53 Am.Jur.2d Master and Servant § 226 (1970). To hold a child subject to the defense of contributory negligence would emasculate the child labor statute. Indeed, in most cases, it is the child’s negligence which is a substantial cause of the injury — he sticks his hands into an auger to clear it without shutting off the power, or he attempts to disconnect machinery without turning off the power. It is exactly this result that the legislature was attempting to prevent in outlawing the employment of youth to perform such activities. To subject a child to the contributory negligence defense would defeat this goal.
We hold, consonant with the foregoing, that a wrongful death action based on an alleged violation of SDCL 60-12-3 is not subject to the defense of contributory negligence on the part of the deceased. In doing so, we recognize the legislature’s goal in passing the child labor statute to protect children from employment in dangerous occupations where, because of their immaturity, they are likely inappreciative of risks and prone to carelessness.
III. CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE OR CONSENT OF THE PARENTS.
The trial court refused to admit evidence concerning the Strains’ consent to Tyler’s employment. Both of Tyler’s parents were aware of Tyler’s employment. They were aware Tyler had obtained a certificate permitting his employer to allow him to operate powerful tractors without violating F.L.S.A. They were aware Tyler’s duties would include operating Christians’ International Model 1066 tractor.
A wrongful death action is brought by a deceased’s beneficiaries to recover for losses sustained as a result of the victim’s death. Prosser & Keeton, supra, § 127. See also Flagtwet v. Smith, 367 N.W.2d 188 (S.D.1985). Whether the parents’ con*790sent to employment of their child in a dangerous occupation constitutes a bar to recovery under a wrongful death cause of action also presents an issue of first impression in this state. The general rule under statutes creating a cause of action for wrongful death states a beneficiary’s recovery is barred if the beneficiary himself is guilty of contributory negligence which proximately contributes to the death of the decedent. Annotation, Contributory Negligence of Beneficiary as Affecting Action under Death or Survival Statute, 2 A.L.R.2d 785, 788 (1948). Some courts have held where a parent procures or consents to a child’s employment in violation of a child labor statute, that parent may be barred from recovering for the wrongful death of the child, even though the wrongful death proximately results from employment in disobedience of the statute. Totten v. Parker, 428 S.W.2d 231, 237 (Ky.1968); Lucas E. Moore Stave Co. of Georgia v. Overbee’s Adm’r., 262 S.W.2d 828, 829-30 (Ky.1953); Besonen, 220 N.W. at 303; Armstrong’s Adm’r, 278 S.W. at 115; Swope v. Keystone Coal & Coke Co., 78 W.Va. 517, 89 S.E. 284, 285 (1916).
Other courts, however, have held where a child is employed in violation of a child labor statute, a parent’s consent to that employment does not bar recovery for the child’s wrongful death. Boyer, 360 So.2d at 1171; Tampa Shipbuilding, 181 So. at 407; Dusha, 176 N.W. at 483, 23 A.L.R. at 635. See also Pinoza, 140 N.W. at 86-87; Lyons, 159 S.W. at 975-76. The Dusha court recognized the policy behind child labor statutes is to penalize employers who employ children in violation of the statute, not to impose a penalty on the parents for permitting such employment. The Dusha court implied permitting a parent’s consent to bar recovery for the child’s wrongful death would contravene the legislature’s policy of protecting the life and limb of children by discouraging their employment in dangerous occupations. Dusha, 176 N.W. at 483, 23 A.L.R. at 635.9 We find this reasoning persuasive.
It is true the parents here knew of Tyler’s employment. Certainly that would be true in most any case where a child is employed in a dangerous occupation. The statute, however, is aimed at discouraging employers from hiring children to perform such tasks, not at discouraging parents from permitting such employment. Were we to hold the Strains’ consent to Tyler’s employment bars their recovery, the only parents who could recover for the death of their child would be those ignorant of their child’s occupation. In addition, such a holding would cause inequitable results. If a parent consented to his child’s employment and the child was injured, the child could recover regardless of the parent’s consent because he could have a guardian bring the cause of action on his behalf. On the other hand, if the child was killed, the parents, because they are the beneficiaries, would be barred from recovering because of their own negligence. Thus, the employer would be rewarded because the child was killed! These results were certainly not intended by the legislature when it enacted the child labor statute. Therefore, we hold a parent’s consent to employment of his or her child in a dangerous occupation does not bar the parent’s recovery in a wrongful death cause of action brought pursuant to the child labor statute.
IV. SUFFICIENCY OF THE JURY VERDICT.
Christians’ final contention concerns the jury’s verdict. First, he argues the verdict is against the law, restating the same arguments discussed previously. We need not discuss those issues any further. *791Second, Christians argues the $75,000 jury award is not supported by sufficient evidence.
SDCL 15-6-59(a) (1984) provides in part: A new trial may be granted to all or any of the parties and on all or part of the issues for any of the following causes: * * * * * *
(6) Insufficiency of the evidence to justify the verdict or other decision or that it is against law;
SDCL 15-26A-8 (1984) provides:
Such of the matters specified in subdivisions (6) and (7) of § 15-6-59(a) as may have been timely presented to the trial court by motion for directed verdict, request for findings, or other apt motion, offer, or objection may be reviewed on appeal from the judgment without necessity for an application for new trial.
It is well settled, “[¡Insufficiency of the evidence may not be reviewed unless it has been timely presented to the trial court by a proper motion for a directed verdict, request for findings, or other apt motion, offer, objection, or exception.” City of Mitchell v. Beauregard, 430 N.W.2d 704, 706-07 (S.D.1988) (citing SDCL 15-6-59(a); SDCL 15 — 6—59(f); SDCL 15-26A-8); Pearson v. Adams, 279 N.W.2d 674, 676-77 (S.D.1979); Schoenrock v. City of Sisseton, 78 S.D. 419, 425-26, 103 N.W.2d 649, 653 (1960) (defendants precluded from raising the question of excessiveness of the verdict on appeal where they failed to bring to the trial court’s attention the particulars in which the evidence was claimed to be insufficient); Lang v. Burns, 77 S.D. 626, 632-33, 97 N.W.2d 863, 867 (1959); Gednalski v. Dell Rapids Quarry Co., 70 S.D. 616, 20 N.W.2d 226 (1945).
Nowhere in his brief does Christians state he made any motion to the trial court to overturn the jury’s damage award because it was not supported by sufficient evidence. The record does not reflect any “motion for directed verdict ... or other apt motion, offer, or objection” that would preserve Christians’ right to appeal on this issue. We hold Christians did not preserve these matters on the record so as to enable this court to engage in appellate review of this issue.
The judgment is affirmed.
HENDERSON, J., concurs with a writing.
MILLER, C.J., concurs specially.
SABERS and AMUNDSON, JJ., dissent.
. Mr. Strain testified that Tyler had operated the Strains’ model 1066 tractor on at least one occasion. Strain testified he would stay with Tyler for an hour training him to drive the tractor and then tried to stay in the area to keep an eye on him.
. Generally, during the extension office’s course, instructors go over various materials with students relating to tractor safety. Next, the instructors show students the actual parts of the tractors. Each student is then required to pass a written exam. Finally, each student must complete a driving test where they pull a two-wheel implement on the back of a tractor and maneuver through a driving course.
.The program Tyler completed actually certified him to work with other machinery in addition to powerful tractors.
. SDCL 60-12-3 (amended 1991) provides:
No child under sixteen years of age shall be employed at any time in any occupation dangerous to life, health, or morals_ Viola-
tion of this section is a Class 2 misdemeanor. This section shall not apply to minors employed by their parents.
. F.L.S.A. § 12 states: “No employer shall employ any oppressive child labor in commerce or in the production of goods for commerce[.]" 29 U.S.C. § 212(c) (1988).
.F.L.S.A. § 3 defines "oppressive child labor” as:
[A] condition of employment under which (1) any employee under the age of sixteen years is employed by an employer (other than a parent or a person standing in place of a parent employing his own child or a child in his custody under the age of sixteen years in an occupation other than manufacturing or mining or an occupation found by the Secretary of Labor to be particularly hazardous for *786the employment of children between the ages of sixteen and eighteen years or detrimental to their health or well-being) in any occupation. ... The Chief of the Children’s Bureau [Secretary of Labor] shall provide by regulation or by order that the employment of employees between the ages of fourteen and sixteen years in occupations other than manufacturing and mining shall not be deemed to constitute oppressive child labor if and to the extent that the Chief of the Children’s Bureau [Secretary of Labor] determines that such employment is confined to periods which will not interfere with their schooling and to conditions which will not interfere with their health and well-being.
29 U.S.C. § 203(1) (1988).
. A violation of § 12 subjects an employer to a fine of not more than $10,000 or, if not a first offense, to a jail term of up to six months plus civil penalties. 29 U.S.C. §§ 215, 216 (1988).
. Restatement (Second) Torts § 483 (1965) provides:
§ 483. Defense to Violation of Statute The plaintiffs contributory negligence bars his recovery for the negligence of the defendant consisting of the violation of a statute, unless the effect of the statute is to place the entire responsibility for such harm as has occurred upon the defendant.
The comments to § 483 provide in pertinent part:
c. There are, however, exceptional statutes which are intended to place the entire responsibility for the harm which has occurred upon the defendant. A statute may be found to have that purpose particularly where it is enacted in order to protect a certain class of persons against their own inability to protect themselves. Thus a statute which prohibits *789the sale of firearms to minors may be clearly intended, among other purposes, to protect them against their own inexperience, lack of judgment, and tendency toward negligence, and to make the seller solely responsible for any harm to them resulting from the sale. In such a case the purpose of the statute would be defeated if the contributory negligence of the minor were permitted to bar his recovery.
e. Child labor statutes. Statutes forbidding the employment of children or their employment in dangerous occupations below a certain age are customarily construed as intended to protect them against carelessness and even recklessness incidental to their immaturity.
f. If a child labor statute is construed as enacted for the purpose stated in this Section, a child plaintiff who bases his action upon the violation of the statute is not barred from recovery by any form of contributory negligence. Thus, he is not barred from recovery by voluntarily exposing himself to a risk which an adult would recognize as unreasonable, nor by conduct which in other respects would be negligent or even reckless in an adult, as when his careless inattention brings him into contact with moving machinery. (Emphasis supplied.)
. While discussing whether contributory negligence was a defense to a cause of action based on a violation of its child labor statute, the Wisconsin Supreme Court stated:
[T]his court should incline to the side according the greatest dignity to legislative efforts to conserve the security of children, against even being employed by their consent and consent of their parents or guardians, where they will be subjected to serious dangers on account of inadvertently receiving bodily injuries, which evince such supreme care in respect to the matter as to make the employment, of itself, criminal.
Pinoza, 140 N.W. at 86-87.

=== CASE 9740680 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:17.599098+00 ===

HENDERSON, Justice
(concurring).
In totally joining the majority opinion, I do not believe that it holds that permitting a child to operate a farm tractor renders an employer strictly liable; rather, the employer’s liability attaches once the jury finds the statute has been violated, i.e., that the occupation was dangerous to the child.
As I review Dusha, cited in the majority opinion, expressing that children “are likely inappreciative of risks and prone to be careless and heedless,” it becomes obvious to me from whence this thought is born: Children should be prohibited from being labor lackeys in industry and commerce.
One by one the children died. Industrial Revolution. Social change. Laws changed. Enlightenment. Punish immaturity? No.
A simple child
That lightly draws its breath,
And feels its life in every limb,
What should it know of death?
William Wordsworth (1770-1850),
Poet laureate of England [We Are Seven]
And of Tyler Strain, what of him? And children of his age? Should they not be protected by the enlightment of an advanced society?

=== CASE 9740681 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:17.602214+00 ===

MILLER, Chief Justice
(concurring specially).
I generally agree with the majority holding, but write specially on Issue II concerning the contributory negligence defense.
As the majority states, whether a child is employed in a dangerous occupation is a question for the jury. If they so find, liability under the child labor statute is *792absolute. Thus, in this case, the fact that Tyler was certified under the F.L.S.A. to operate the tractor was admissible on the issue of whether the occupation was dangerous. And such evidence was so admitted here. But, to totally exclude such trained individuals from the protections of the child labor statute’s protection is a legislative function. It must be remembered that the child labor statute is designed to protect youth from their own careless acts. To subject these children to a contributory negligence defense would, in my opinion, defeat the statute’s purpose.
Additionally, I feel compelled to state that I respectfully disagree with Justice Sabers’ position that SDCL 32-12-12 and 32-12-22.1 conflict with the majority holding. The fact that Tyler could legally operate certain farm machinery on highways without a license, or without his parents’ supervision, could certainly be used to show that his occupation was not dangerous. However, to hold, as Justice Sabers seemingly would, that because a child could legally operate such machinery, all children employed in any such occupation (no matter how dangerous) are subject to the defense of contributory negligence, makes no sense to me. Applying that theory, an employer who permits a five year old to drive a tractor (and it is legal under SDCL 32-12-22.1) would not be guilty of violating the child labor statute. In addition, it is just as plausible to interpret these statutes as being the legislature’s recognition that most farm kids are driving machinery from field to field for their parents, not for some employer.
I am troubled that Justice Sabers’ dissent offers no authority for the assertion that Tyler’s safety training removed him from the class of persons the child labor statute was designed to protect. SDCL 60-12-3 exempts from its prohibitions employment of children over fourteen years of age to dispense gasoline, diesel fuel and oil at service stations. Thus, the legislature is aware of how to remove certain classes of persons from protection under the statute, if it so chooses. By clear implication, the legislature did not intend to remove safety-trained youth farm employees from the child labor statute’s protection. In the final analysis, it is eertainly within the legislature’s realm to exclude from the child labor statute’s provisions children who are certified to operate farm equipment pursuant to the F.L.S.A. However, were we to draft another exception into the statute by judicial fiat, we would be invading the legislature's prerogative.

=== CASE 9740682 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:17.605895+00 ===

SABERS, Justice
(dissenting).
In effect, the majority opinion imposes strict liability on a farmer for hiring a minor, with his parents’ consent, to do farm work. In so holding, the majority opinion states:
The plaintiff need only show a violation to the statute, which must be resolved by the jury in the first instance, and injury to the child. Legal or proximate causation is not in issue because the legislature has determined causation exists. In short, once a violation is established, these cases have construed child labor statutes to impose strict or absolute liability.
We hold ... that a wrongful death action based on an alleged violation of SDCL 60-12-3 is not subject to the defense of contributory negligence on the part of the deceased. In doing so, we recognize the legislature’s goal in passing the child labor statute to protect children from employment in dangerous occupations where, because of their immaturity, they are likely inappreciative of risks and prone to carelessness.
The majority opinion blindly follows the “majority” position in its conclusion that SDCL 60-12-3 was intended to place all liability upon the employer/farmer for any injury to a minor employee under the age of sixteen without regard to the cause. For the following reasons, the majority opinion incorrectly applies Restatement (Second) of Torts § 483,1 in that the “ef-*793feet” of SDCL 60-12-3 does not place “the entire responsibility” and the burden of strict liability upon this employer/farmer.
The majority opinion correctly concludes that the F.L.S.A. does not pre-empt SDCL 60-12-3. However, unlike the F.L.S.A., SDCL 60-12-3 does not define what constitutes an “occupation dangerous to life, health, or morals.” Therefore, the determination that operating a tractor of over 20 PTO horsepower is not “oppressive child labor” (a dangerous occupation) once the minor completes a training program is not pre-emptive of South Dakota law. Such a determination does, however, indicate that a properly certified minor, such as Tyler, is removed from the class of persons designed to be protected by SDCL 60-12-3.
The majority’s holding is also contrary to the legislative intent of SDCL 32-12-12.2 This statute not only recognizes the necessity of the operation of farm tractors and machinery by South Dakota minors (14-16 years of age), but authorizes such use and operation. This clearly implies that the South Dakota Legislature never intended “to place the entire responsibility ... upon the [farmer] defendant.”3
Finally, the trial court and the majority read and apply SDCL 60-12-3 in such a strained manner as to repeal by implication SDCL 32-12-12. The language of both statutes is clear and unambiguous, and therefore:
[I]t is the function of the court to give them effect and not to amend the statute to avoid or produce a particular result. ... The Court’s only function then is to declare the meaning of the statute as clearly expressed.
Parsons v. South Dakota Dept. of Soc. Serv., 314 N.W.2d 863, 865 (S.D.1982) (quoting Matter of Sales Tax Refund Applications, 298 N.W.2d 799, 802 (S.D. 1980)).
[RJepeals by implication are not favored and should be found only where there is a manifest and total repugnancy between the statutes and where both acts cannot be reconciled through a reasonable construction.
Parsons, 314 N.W.2d at 865; see also, Refund Applications, 298 N.W.2d at 802; State, Dept. of Public Safety v. Cronin, 250 N.W.2d 690, 694 (S.D.1977). There is no “repugnancy between the statutes.” Both statutes clearly express legislative intent to regulate and protect certain classes of people. However, SDCL 60-12-3 does not define operation of a tractor as a dangerous occupation and to do so as a matter of law, improperly precludes contributory negligence as a defense and impliedly repeals the express provisions of SDCL 32-12-12.
Although the trial court permitted the jury to determine whether Tyler’s employment was a proximate cause of his death, it prevented the jury from receiving evidence concerning the real cause of the death by excluding evidence on contributory negligence. This ruling foreclosed all such evidence, including negligent, reckless or intentional conduct. SDCL 60-12-3 was never intended to have that effect or to tie the hands of the jury. The jury could have properly decided this case if they had been instructed in accordance with the South *794Dakota Pattern Jury Instruction 10-05, which provides:
As applied to a minor, ordinary care or skill means that degree of care or skill which would fairly be anticipated in like circumstances from a reasonably prudent minor of the same age, maturity, experience, and capacity.
This instruction, along with standard companion instructions, would permit the jury to decide whether the real cause of injury was employment or conduct. The majority appears to have no faith in the jury system. In this respect, it is interesting to note that the two examples used by the majority involve cleaning augers and disconnecting machinery without shutting off the power — substantially different than the situation here — driving a tractor on a highway.
In this case, Tyler was trained in safely operating farm equipment at the request of his employer and with the consent of his parents. He was familiar with the model 1066 tractor — his own father taught him how to operate one. Tyler was sufficiently competent to comprehend the risks involved. Under the specific facts of this case, Tyler was trained and competent to operate a tractor on the highway and was not within the class of persons designed to be protected by SDCL 60-12-3. Clearly, a jury question is presented. Therefore, the majority has incorrectly applied § 483 because the effect of the statute was not to “place the entire responsibility for such harm as has occurred upon the defendant.” (emphasis added). Contributory negligence should have been allowed as a defense.
Evidence indicated the accident was not caused by mechanical problems: the tractor gradually drifted off the roadway; there were no zigzags in the tire tracks; Tyler informed the mechanic on the morning of the accident, that there were no problems with the tractor. The jury should have been instructed regarding the defense of contributory negligence on the part of Tyler, taking into consideration his age, maturity, experience and capacity. Therefore, we should hold, under these facts, that contributory negligence is a defense where the minor has by training removed himself from the class of people intended to be protected by SDCL 60-12-3, is authorized by law to operate farm machinery, and understands the dangers incident to his employment. We cannot determine from this evidence whether this death was caused by negligence, recklessness or even intentional actions. Therefore, the question should be decided by the jury on proper instructions.
I also dissent on Issue III for the reason that the contributory negligence or consent of the parents to Tyler’s employment may constitute a defense to a cause of action under SDCL 60-12-3.
Under wrongful death statutes, the majority rule is that recovery is barred if the survivor himself was guilty of contributory negligence which contributed to the death of the decedent. Annot., Contributory Negligence of Beneficiary as Affecting Action under Death or Survival Statute, 2 A.L.R.2d 785, 788 (1948); see also, Nichols v. United States Fidelity & Guaranty Co., 13 Wis.2d 491, 109 N.W.2d 131 (1961); Hondl v. Chicago Great Western Railway Company, 249 Minn. 306, 82 N.W.2d 245 (1957); Burkstrand v. Rasmussen, 77 N.D. 716, 45 N.W.2d 485 (1950). Further, courts have held where a parent consents to a child’s employment in violation of child labor statute, that parent may be barred from recovering for the wrongful death of the child, even though the wrongful death proximately results from the employment and disobedience of the statute. See, Totten v. Parker, 428 S.W.2d 231, 237 (Ky. 1968); Wieck v. Blessin, 165 Neb. 282, 85 N.W.2d 628 (1957); Lucas E. Moore Stave Co. of Georgia v. Overbee’s Adm’r., 262 S.W.2d 828, 829-30 (Ky.1953); Reber v. Hanson, 260 Wis. 632, 51 N.W.2d 505 (1952); Besonen, 220 N.W. at 303; Swope v. Keystone Coal & Coke Co., 78 W.Va. 517, 89 S.E. 284, 285 (1916); 22A Am.Jur. 2d, Death § 209 (1988); Annot., 2 A.L.R.2d 785. See also, Wheat’s Adm’r. v. Gray, 309 Ky. 593, 218 S.W.2d 400 (1949); 7 A.L.R.2d 1336 (1949).
Here, both Tyler’s parents were aware of Tyler’s employment. They were aware *795that Tyler obtained a certificate permitting him to operate powerful tractors without violating F.L.S.A., and that his duties would include operating Christians International Model 1066 tractor. Even if the steering on Christians’ tractor was loose, Mr. Strain testified that he was aware of that fact. No evidence was presented that the Strains ever objected to Tyler’s employment under these conditions. Therefore, the jury should have been instructed that the consent of Tyler’s parents could constitute contributory negligence and could bar their recovery under South Dakota’s wrongful death statute. SDCL 60-12-3; SDCL 21-5-1; see also, Tufty v. Sioux Transit Co., 70 S.D. 352, 17 N.W.2d 700 (1945).
I believe these issues of contributory negligence are for the fact finder or the jury, based on proper instructions. The denial of proper jury instructions on contributory negligence is tantamount to denial of a jury trial to Christians on the real issues in the case contrary to the South Dakota Constitution. S.D.Const. art. VI, § 6.
The effect of the majority holding is contrary to Restatement of Torts § 483, where plaintiff’s contributory negligence bars recovery “unless” the effect of the statute is to place the entire responsibility upon the employer. Our South Dakota statutes do not attempt to place the entire responsibility upon the farmer or employer. The majority opinion places the entire responsibility on the farmer simply because a minor is employed. I would reverse and remand for a fair trial on Issues II and III.
. § 483. Defense to Violation of Statute.
The plaintiffs contributory negligence bars his *793recovery for the negligence of the defendant consisting of the violation of a statute, unless the effect of the statute is to place the entire responsibility for such harm as has occurred upon the defendant.
(emphasis added).
. SDCL 32-12-12 provides in part:
A restricted minor’s permit may be issued, upon application and payment of the proper fee as provided for in § 32-12-16, and passage of all driver’s license examination tests, to any minor between the ages of fourteen and sixteen years.... The restrictions as to time of operation and operation under the direction of a parent or legal guardian do not apply to the holder of a valid restricted minor’s permit operating a self-propelled agricultural machine which is not subject to registration under chapter 32-5.
. The concerns raised by Chief Justice Miller’s writing would be resolved by the appropriate pattern jury instruction on the negligence of a minor because the primary focus is on the "age, . maturity, experience, and capacity” of a reasonably prudent minor in like circumstances. See, S.D.Civil Pattern Jury Instruction, 10-05. Therefore, his use of the example of a 5-year-old merits no reply.

=== CASE 9740683 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:17.609383+00 ===

AMUNDSON, Justice
(dissenting).
I cannot concur with the majority’s position that a violation of SDCL 60-12-3 imposes strict or absolute liability on a farmer/neighbor who employs a child of a neighbor as is the case in this appeal. This statute has been in effect since 1913 (1913 S.D.Sess.L. ch. 240, §§ 2 and 8), and was adopted for the purpose of regulating the employment of women, girls, and children, by fixing the hours and conditions under which they would labor. The statute further provided for a penalty for the violation of same. This penalty has always been in the nature of a Class 2 misdemeanor and not that of strict liability, as this holding would establish.
A violation of this statute in the civil forum should only constitute negligence per se. Lovell v. Oahe Elec. Co-op, 382 N.W.2d 396 (S.D.1986); Engel v. Stock, 88 S.D. 579, 225 N.W.2d 872 (1975). The defendant/neighbor should have been allowed to submit evidence on his claim of contributory negligence for the trial court to consider in a determination on whether or not to submit an instruction on such a defense to the jury. This court has acknowledged that South Dakota is a friendly and neighborly state. Brusseau v. McBride, 245 N.W.2d 488 (S.D.1976). This holding will allow such friendly and neighborly conduct on the part of this defendant to blossom into strict liability. I daresay that this was never the intention of the legislature.
In the present case, the defense proposed the contributory negligence instruction set forth in the South Dakota Pattern Jury Instructions (SDPJI 11-01). When considering whether a minor has been negligent, that determination is made by taking into account the degree of care of a minor, not a reasonably prudent adult, of like age, intelligence, experience, and capacity in a similar circumstance. Alley v. Siepman, 87 S.D. 670, 214 N.W.2d 7 (1974); Finch v. Christensen, 84 S.D. 420, 172 N.W.2d 571 (1969). Even though defendant proposed the wrong standard in this case, I would hold that the trial court erred in refusing to allow the defendant the opportunity to offer proof that Tyler failed to comply with the standard of care of a like minor in the operation of this farm tractor.
The legislature exempted parents from the provisions of SDCL 60-12-3. By doing so, a parent can employ, either voluntarily or involuntarily, their child in any dangerous occupation notwithstanding how detrimental such occupation or assigned task is to the life, health or morals of the minor. It seems totally illogical to hold that consent of exempt parents allowing their minor child to work for a neighbor, and oper*796ate the same type of farm tractor that the minor operated for the parents, would not be an appropriate fact for a jury to consider in this particular case. Whether the jury would find such a consent to be contributory negligence to the extent that it would preclude recovery, is a fact question that the jury should have been allowed to consider.

=== CASE 9740684 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:18.379738+00 ===

MESCHKE, Justice.
The Williston Public School District No. 1 appeals a judgment that all of its high school teachers who taught six classes during the 1990-1991 term are contractually entitled to additional compensation for teaching an “extra class.” We affirm.
Seeking to reduce the continued depletion of its reserves stemming from the depressed economy at Williston, the District asked a citizen’s committee to recommend ways. One way recommended was to reduce minutes per class in the high school from fifty-five to fifty, and to increase the standard number of classes per day for each high school teacher from five to six. Teachers opposed the change, warning that it would “increase the teachers] workload,” that it would sacrifice “quality teaching,” and that it would cause a “loss of over three weeks of classroom instruction time per year.” Despite this opposition, the District board, in February 1990, changed “the number of student contact periods at the Williston High School from five periods to six periods for the 1990-91 school year.”
Some teachers were already teaching six classes each day. Junior high school teachers all regularly taught six classes each day without additional compensation. However, each high school teacher that taught six, rather than five, classes per day was being paid an extra $2,400 per year.
Although the 1989-1990 Negotiated Agreement between the District and the Williston Education Association, representing the teachers, did not expressly list the number of classes to be taught per day by teacher, an “Extra Duty Schedule” was incorporated in it. This two page schedule, designating additional compensation for advising and supervising extra-curricular activities, also included, near the end, a line saying “Extra Class” with an additional amount of compensation stated. The individual contract for each high school teacher that taught six classes, instead of five, carried a notation at the top left hand corner, “extra class,” and showed the additional compensation in salary.
Soon after the District adopted the announced schedule of class periods for 1990-1991, the School Superintendent met with those high school teachers who were teaching an “extra class,” or six periods, during the 1989-1990 school year. The Superintendent explained that there would be no extra compensation for teaching six classes during the next school year. He advised that “continuing contract law says ... that if [teachers] are not either non-renewed, or [teachers] don’t resign that ... [teachers] *569automatically have the contract [they] had for the past year.” This group of teachers was given the choice of submitting a letter of conditional resignation, acknowledging that they would not receive extra pay for teaching six periods during the next school year, or going through a non-renewal hearing that would terminate their employment for the next year. Before March 5, 1990, each of this group submitted a letter of conditional resignation.
The Association and the District began contract negotiations for the 1990-1991 school year in April, 1990. There were no negotiations about the change in the standard number of daily classes to be taught during the ensuing school term. Unaccountably, the subject was not discussed. The final contract, “Williston Public School District No. 1 Negotiated Agreement 1990-1991,” was signed by a District officer on September 14, 1990, and by an Association officer on September 25, 1990. Nothing in the final contract stated that the standard teaching day in the high school would be six, rather than five, classes. The “Extra Class $2,400.00” phrase remained the same in the “Extra Duty Schedule” of the Negotiated Agreement.
The Negotiated Agreement, like preceding ones, also contained this clause:
All terms and conditions of employment not covered by this agreement shall continue to be subject to the School Board’s exclusive direction and control and shall not be subject to negotiations during the term of this agreement.
The parties refer to this as an “exclusive management” clause.
Eight teachers, who had taught an “extra class” in 1989-1990 and who had conditionally resigned in March 1990, signed individual 1990-1991 teaching contracts. The new individual contracts did not show any additional compensation for an “extra class”. When the 1990-1991 school term began, all Williston high school teachers taught six classes per day. After receiving their first paycheck under the new contract, the eight teachers filed a grievance with the District board, claiming that all high school teachers were entitled to an additional $2,400 annually for teaching six, rather than five, classes per day. The District denied the grievance.
In December 1990, the Association sued the District, alleging that the 1990-1991 Negotiated Agreement contracted additional compensation for a high school teacher teaching an extra class over five classes per day. The Association contended that the District breached the Negotiated Agreement with the teachers by unilaterally increasing the number of classes per day from five to six, without paying for the extra class.
After a trial, the trial court found:
4. Negotiated agreements dating back to 1975 have stipulated that teachers would be compensated for teaching an “extra class”. The 1975-76 agreement defines “extra class” by stating that “those teachers who teach an extra class (six periods rather than the standard five) will receive $1,000.00 in addition to their regular salary.”
5. None of the subsequent negotiated agreements include the 1975-76 statement, and only indicate, in the extra duty schedule, that an extra class will receive certain compensation.
6. Prior to the 1990-91 school year, five class periods had comprised the standard teaching day for the high school teachers, and those who taught six were teaching an “extra class” and compensated an additional $2400.00 above their regular salaries.
* * * * * *
10. For the 1989-90 school term, a majority of the teachers at the high school were teaching five periods and, approximately ten teachers were receiving additional compensation of $2,400.00 for teaching an extra (sixth) class.
* * * * * *
12. Representatives of the [Association] and [the District] met seven times between April 26, 1990 and July 6, 1990 to discuss the 1990-91 negotiated agreement. During the negotiations, the parties did not negotiate nor present any proposals relating to the issue of the *570standard teaching day, an increase from five to six periods at the high school, or the issue of additional compensation for an “extra class”.
13. The 1990-91 negotiated agreement did not contain any specific language defining the standard teaching day. The Court finds that the standard teaching day for teachers at the high school is five periods, which was established through previous practice and the 1975-76 negotiated agreement.
The court reasoned that the phrase in the Negotiated Agreement, “extra class”, was ambiguous and had “different meanings for the Junior and Senior High School” but that, for high school teachers, the phrase meant a sixth class.
The trial court concluded that the District did not have authority to unilaterally change the meaning of the contracted teaching day. The judgment ordered that high school teachers who taught a sixth class during the 1990-91 school year be compensated an additional $2,400 “in accordance with the agreement.”
The District appeals, arguing that the trial court erred in finding an ambiguity and in ruling that the District lacked authority to increase the standard teaching day to six periods. Even if the agreement was ambiguous, the District argues further, the court could not use extrinsic evidence to negate the District’s authority to change the standard teaching day because the subject was “not covered by the agreement.”
Teacher contracts are subject to the same statutory rules of interpretation as other contracts of employment. NDCC 9-07-01; Campbell v. Wishek Public School District, 150 N.W.2d 840 (N.D.1967). Cf. NDCC 9-07-19 (Contract with public party interpreted against the private party if an uncertainty is not resolved by the other rules of interpretation); see generally Walle Mutual Insurance Company v. Sweeney, 419 N.W.2d 176 (N.D.1988). (NDCC 9-07-19 is a rule of last resort; it cannot apply to frustrate the intentions of the parties ascertained by other rules of contract interpretation).
The purpose of contract interpretation is to find the “mutual intention of the parties as it existed at the time of contracting.” NDCC 9-07-03. If those intentions may be determined from the writing alone, the contract is not ambiguous. NDCC 9-07-04; National Bank of Harvey v. International Harvester Company, 421 N.W.2d 799 (N.D.1988). According to NDCC 9-07-02, if the contract is unambiguous, the language of the contract governs any dispute.
A contract is ambiguous when rational arguments can be made for different positions about its meaning. National Bank of Harvey, 421 N.W.2d at 801. Whether or not a contract is ambiguous is a question of law that we independently review on appeal. Vanderhoof v. Gravel Products, Inc., 404 N.W.2d 485, 491 (N.D.1987). If a contract is ambiguous, extrinsic evidence may be considered to determine its meaning.
We conclude that rational arguments are made for different interpretations of the contract phrase, “extra class.” Therefore, the trial court properly determined from extrinsic evidence that the phrase was ambiguous.
When a contract is ambiguous, circumstances at the time of contracting may be used as evidence to construe it. NDCC 9-07-12; Heitkamp v. Milbank Mutual Insurance Company, 383 N.W.2d 834, 836 (N.D.1986). An ambiguity resolved by the use of extrinsic evidence is a question of fact for the trial court to decide. National Bank of Harvey, 421 N.W.2d at 803. On review, we will not set aside a finding of fact unless it is clearly erroneous. NDRCivP 52(a). A finding of fact is clearly erroneous only when, upon all the evidence, we are left with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made.
The trial court’s finding, that from 1975 to 1990 the contract phrase “extra class” for a high school teacher meant teaching a sixth class, is supported by the evidence. After the 1975 agreement with that meaning expressed, the contracting parties continued to use that definition in performing subsequent Negotiated Agree*571ments. A course of dealing and usage should be given effect in interpreting a contract ambiguity. NDCC 9-07-20; Hager v. Devils Lake Public School District, 301 N.W.2d 630, 634 (N.D.1981). Because the District and the Association both used “extra class” to mean teaching a sixth class for fifteen years, the trial court properly gave that meaning to the ambiguous phrase. The court should apply the same meaning placed upon the words of a contract as the parties themselves have given to those words. NDCC 9-07-09. The trial court’s finding about the meaning of “extra class” is not clearly erroneous.
The District challenges the trial court’s finding that the 1975-1976 document was, in fact, part of the Negotiated Agreement for that year. Although the document was signed by him, the business manager of the District for 27 years testified that it had not been intended as a part of that Negotiated Agreement. Instead, he said, it was only an “explanation” of the number of classes for a high school teacher to draw extra pay that year. The trial court believed that this expressed difference in effect was undiscernible. So do we. “Findings of fact shall not be set aside unless clearly erroneous, and due regard shall be given to the opportunity of the trial court to judge the credibility of the witnesses.” NDRCivP 52(a). We conclude that the trial court’s finding about the effect of the 1975-1976 document is not clearly erroneous.
Still, the District argues that the term “extra class” is a “term and condition[s] of employment not covered” by the 1990-1991 Negotiated Agreement, and is therefore “subject to the [District’s] exclusive direction and control” under the “exclusive management” clause. Because the number of daily classes was not specifically negotiated for the 1990-1991 Agreement, the District argues that the “exclusive management” clause authorizes the District to increase the number to six classes without negotiations. Therefore, the District contends, the term “extra class” in the 1990-1991 Agreement must mean the teaching of a seventh class each day in the high school.
In making this argument, the District relies on the result reached in Mandan Education Association v. Mandan Public School District No. 1, 425 N.W.2d 917 (N.D.1988). In Mandan, the school district unilaterally changed the standard teaching day from five classes to six. In Mandan, the district’s agreement with the organization representing the teachers did not spell out the number of classes in a standard teaching day, nor did it schedule additional compensation for teaching an extra class, while it did contain a similar exclusive management clause. We concluded in Mandan that the district was entitled to change the standard number of classes, absent any contract clause about the number of classes in the teaching day, or about additional compensation for teaching an extra class. Since the Mandan contract between the district and the teachers’ organization did not cover the subject, we said that it was subject to the district’s exclusive direction and control. Mandan, 425 N.W.2d at 918. Even so, we conclude that the Williston Agreement is different because it agreed to compensate teachers for an “extra class.”
The District does not really dispute that for fifteen years the standard teaching day was five classes, and that the contract phrase “extra class” meant teaching a sixth class. Rather, the District asserts that the change in the standard school day was recommended- by the citizens’ committee to deal with the District’s financial problems. The change occurred in good faith, and the teachers were notified of the plan well before negotiations began for the 1990-91 contract. That is true, but the trial court believed that these facts had little relevance to the meaning of the bilateral contract between the District and the teachers’ organization.
An agreement cannot be altered unilaterally by one party to the contract. “Any question arising out of interpretation of an existent agreement” is to be negotiated in good faith between the district and the organization representing the teachers. *572NDCC 15-38.1-12. See also Fargo Education Association v. Fargo Public School District No. 1, 291 N.W.2d 267 (N.D.1980). Only terms and conditions “not covered by this agreement” are subject to the District’s exclusive control without negotiations. Here, the Negotiated Agreement “covered” teaching an extra class and the compensation for it.
Because the District unilaterally changed the contracted compensation for teaching an “extra class,” we agree with the trial court that the District breached the 1990-91 Negotiated Agreement. We affirm the trial court’s judgment that the District must pay the contracted compensation of $2,400 to each Williston high school teacher who taught an “extra,” sixth class during the 1990-1991 school term.
We affirm.
ERICKSTAD, C.J., LEVINE and VANDE WALLE, JJ., and ALLAN L. SCHMALENBERGER, D.J., concur.
The Honorable ALLAN L. SCHMALEN-BERGER, D.J., sitting as a member of the Court to fill the vacancy created by the resignation of Justice H.F. GIERKE III. Justice JOHNSON not being a member of this Court at the time this case was heard did not participate in this decision.

=== CASE 9740685 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:18.38498+00 ===

VANDE WALLE, Justice,
concurring specially.
I agree with the opinion authored for the Court by Justice Meschke. I write separately to note my dismay with the fact that the judicial system was required to decide this matter prior to negotiations between the parties to resolve the controversy.
There is no doubt that the matter of the number of class periods to be taught by each teacher is a matter for negotiations between the parties. “The scope of representation shall include matters relating to terms and conditions of employment and employer-employee relations, including, but not limited to, salary, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment.” Section 15-38.1-09, NDCC. See Fargo Ed. Ass’n v. Fargo Public Sch. Dist., 291 N.W.2d 267 (N.D.1980).
This controversy began prior to negotiations for the 1990-1991 school year were started in April 1990. Yet, as the majority opinion observes, “There were no negotiations about the change in the standard number of daily classes to be taught during the ensuing school term. Unaccountably, the subject was not discussed.”
Section 15-38.1-12, NDCC, requires the parties to:
“negotiate in good faith with respect to: a. Terms and conditions of employment and employer-employee relations.
b. * * *
c. Any question arising out of interpretation of an existent agreement.
* * * * * *
The term “good faith” is defined by section 1-01-21, NDCC, to “consist in an honest intention to abstain from taking any unconscientious advantage of another even through the forms or technicalities of law, together with an absence of all information or belief of facts which would render the transaction unconscientious.” [emphasis supplied]. That definition is applicable to the term “good faith” as used in Chapter 15-38.1, governing negotiations between school boards and teachers. Fargo Ed. Ass’n v. Paulsen, 239 N.W.2d 842 (N.D.1976). In that decision this court noted that the term “ ‘negotiate’ simply means to present proposals and offer counterpro-posals, to discuss proposals, to carry on a dialogue, to exchange ideas, all for the purpose of persuading or being persuaded by logic and reasoning.” 239 N.W.2d at 847. We further observed that “it is the art of friendly persuasion. The persuasion can result in an agreement and understanding of or a settlement of issues. It does not mean that an agreement must be reached.” Id. Finally, the court commented that it is apparent that the term “ ‘negotiate in good faith’ does not have any mysterious connotations or hidden meanings and as such it should not be too difficult to understand or to work within its framework.” Id.
Despite this long standing elucidation of the purpose of Chapter 15-38.1, neither *573party brought the subject to the bargaining table. Although both parties express various reasons for not doing so, it is apparent each party was aware of the other party’s position on the matter. This is not the good faith negotiations to which the statutes refer. Rather, it appears both parties intended to rely on the “forms or technicalities of law” to the disadvantage of the other party, i.e., the school district intended to rely on the omission of any reference to the number of daily classes in the current contract and the exclusive management clause in the current contract, and the Education Association intended to rely on its contention that the term “extra class” was ambiguous and resort could be had to the 1975-76 agreement to resolve the ambiguity. Both positions present a “question arising out of interpretation of an existent agreement” which is specifically made a subject of negotiation pursuant to section 15-38.1-12(1)(c).
The negotiations statutes do not require that an agreement must be reached. Fargo Ed. Ass’n v. Paulsen, supra. Here the timing of the District’s proposal made to increase the number of classes for the 1990-91 school year shortly before the start of negotiations for the 1990-91 contract, presented a unique opportunity to discuss the issue during those negotiations. Had the parties attempted to negotiate the matter and failed that would be the appropriate time to ask the courts to resolve the controversy. To ask the courts to resolve the issue prior to negotiations discredits the concept of negotiations. Were we empowered to do so, I would decline to decide the issue and require the parties to negotiate. But we do not pick and choose the disputes we are to resolve and I therefore concur in the majority opinion.

=== CASE 2224523 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:23.959113+00 ===

639 N.E.2d 1048 (1994)
SEATON-SSK ENGINEERING, INC., and Cmi-International, Inc., et al., Appellants-Defendants below,
v.
Russell FORBES, Appellee-Plaintiff below.
No. 20A03-9308-CV-254.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, Third District.
September 8, 1994.
Robert J. Eleveld, Richard R. Symons, Varnum, Riddering, Schmidt & Howlett, Grand Rapids, MI, Bryan B. Davenport, Buschmann, Carr & Shanks, P.C., Indianapolis, for appellants.
Kevin L. Likes, Auburn, for Russell Forbes.
Donald C. Mark, Jr., Meagher & Greer, Minneapolis, MN, for Parker-Hannifin Corp.
STATON, Judge.
CMI-International, Inc. ("CMI") is the parent company of wholly-owned subsidiaries CMI-Permanent Mold ("Permanent Mold") and Seaton-SSK Engineering, Inc. ("Seaton"). CMI and Seaton were denied summary judgment in an action brought by Russell Forbes ("Forbes") seeking recovery for injuries received in the course of his employment at Permanent Mold.
The trial court certified its order pursuant to Ind.Appellate Rule 4(B)(6). A single issue is presented for this court's review: whether the exclusive remedy provision of IND. CODE 22-3-2-6 applies to CMI and Seaton because Forbes received worker's compensation benefits from Permanent Mold.
We conclude that the applicability of I.C. 22-3-2-6 to CMI and Seaton is dependent upon the resolution of a disputed issue of material fact. Therefore, the denial of summary judgment is affirmed.
On November 21, 1988, Forbes was operating a tilt molding machine manufactured by Seaton when Forbes' right arm was amputated. He subsequently collected worker's compensation benefits through Permanent Mold.[1]
On November 16, 1990, Forbes brought suit against S.B.C. Industries, Parker Hannifin Corporation, Atlas Cylinder Corporation, CMI and Seaton. CMI and Seaton moved for summary judgment, claiming that Forbes' personal injury claim was precluded by the exclusivity provision of the Indiana Worker's Compensation Act. Summary judgment was denied.
*1049 I.C. 22-3-2-6, the exclusivity provision of the Indiana Worker's Compensation Act, provides:
"The rights and remedies granted to an employee subject to IC 22-3-2 through IC 22-3-6 on account of personal injury or death by accident shall exclude all other rights and remedies of such employee, the employee's personal representatives, dependents, or next of kin, at common law or otherwise, on account of such injury or death, except for remedies available under IC 5-2-6.1."
The exclusive remedy provision does not bar the right of an employee to assert actions against third parties. Stump v. Commercial Union (1992), Ind., 601 N.E.2d 327, 330. Thus, whether Forbes may maintain a separate cause of action against CMI and Seaton is dependent upon whether he is simultaneously the employee of Permanent Mold, its parent corporation and its sister subsidiary.
Although CMI, Permanent Mold and Seaton are formally organized as separate corporations, CMI and Seaton contend that the entire "family" of CMI companies comprise an "employing unit." Treatment as an "employing unit" is appropriate because all CMI subsidiaries exist for the satisfaction of a common profit objective and all subsidiaries directly or indirectly bear the cost of providing worker's compensation benefits. CMI and Seaton raise two public policy arguments: "double payment" by one "employing unit" is inequitable and worker's compensation statutes should be liberally construed when asserted as a defense because they are liberally construed to allow benefit collection. Isom v. Limitorque Corp. (1992), 193 Mich. App. 518, 484 N.W.2d 716, app. denied.
To support the premise that a parent corporation and all its subsidiaries may be considered a single "employing unit," CMI and Seaton rely upon Cook v. Peter Kiewit Sons Co. (1963), 15 Utah 2d 20, 386 P.2d 616. "Being so united for a common purpose for mutual profit, these companies became partners in the venture ... and whatever one company and its employees did in furthering the project would inure to the benefit of the other." Id. 386 P.2d at 618. See also Wells v. Firestone Tire and Rubber Co. (1984), 421 Mich. 641, 364 N.W.2d 670 (the direct employer was a wholly-owned subsidiary; the parent was entitled to the protection of the exclusivity provision of the worker's compensation scheme).
CMI further argues that, just as a parent corporation reaps the benefits of a profitable venture by a subsidiary, the parent directly or indirectly pays each subsidiary's cost of worker's compensation coverage. See Aragon v. Clover Club Foods Co. (1993), Utah, 857 P.2d 250; Isom, supra.
Presuming their entitlement to treatment as an employing unit, CMI and Seaton argue that Forbes is actually trying to predicate his claim upon a "dual capacity doctrine," an exception to the exclusive remedy of the worker's compensation scheme recognized in several other jurisdictions. Under the doctrine, an employee is allowed to maintain a separate cause of action against his employer where the employer occupies, in addition to his capacity as an employer, a second capacity that confers upon him obligations independent of those imposed upon him as an employer. See Kimzey v. Interpace Corp., Inc. (1985), 694 P.2d 907, 910, 10 Kan. App. 2d 165, review denied; Taynton v. Dersham (1986), 516 A.2d 1241, 1245, 358 Pa.Super. 178, app. denied; Salswedel v. Enerpharm, Ltd. (1988), 764 P.2d 499, 501, 107 N.M. 728; Pavlek v. Forbes Steel and Wire Corp. (1986), 517 A.2d 564, 565, 358 Pa.Super. 316; Schmid v. U.S. (1987), 826 F.2d 227, 229; Kosowan v. MDC Industries, Inc. (1983), 465 A.2d 1069, 1071, 319 Pa.Super. 91 Kohr v. Raybestos-Manhattan, Inc. (1981), 522 F. Supp. 1070, 1075; Shields v. San Diego County (1984), 202 Cal. Rptr. 30, 34, 155 Cal. App. 3d 103; Darville v. Texaco, Inc. (1982), 674 F.2d 443, 446; DeFigueiredo v. U.S. Metals Refining Co. (1988), 563 A.2d 76, 235 N.J. Super. 458; Handley v. Wyandotte Chemicals Corp. (1982), 325 N.W.2d 447, 450, 118 Mich. App. 423; Simpkins v. Delco Moraine Div. (1981), 444 N.E.2d 1064, 1065, 3 Ohio App. 3d 275; Hendy v. Losse (1991), 1 Cal. Rptr. 2d 543, 547, 819 P.2d 1, 5, 54 Cal. 3d 723, reh. denied; Hillman v. McCaughtrey (1989), 564 N.E.2d 1123, 1125, 56 Ohio App. 3d 100.
*1050 The justification for the imposition of liability under the dual capacity doctrine notwithstanding the receipt of worker's compensation benefits is that an employer may breach a duty which does not arise out of the employer-employee relationship. White v. E.I. du Pont de Nemours and Co. (1981), 523 F. Supp. 302, 303. In other words, an employer may cause an injury in a role other than the role of employer. Kelly v. Johns-Manville Corp. (1984), 590 F. Supp. 1089, 1102. An example is where the defendant employer is engaged in the manufacture and sale of an allegedly defective product to the public. Horney v. Guy F. Atkinson Co. (1983), 190 Cal. Rptr. 18, 21, 140 Cal. App. 3d 923. "If an employer acts in a second capacity such as the manufacturer of injury-causing equipment, then worker's compensation may not be employee's exclusive remedy against employer." Watters Associates v. Superior Court (1991), 1 Dist., 278 Cal. Rptr. 417, 419, 227 Cal. App. 3d 1341, review denied.
Here, Seaton manufactured the tip molding machine which was the instrumentality involved in the amputation of Forbes' arm. If the machine was designed or altered by the manufacturer so as to render it unsafe, there arguably occurred a breach of duty not directly related to the employer-employee relationship between Forbes and Permanent Mold.
However, in 1977, this court rejected a "dual-capacity" claim where an employee was injured while cleaning a pressure cooker manufactured by his employer; the employee collected worker's compensation benefits yet attempted to pursue a products liability claim. This court stated that the "dual-capacity" doctrine was inconsistent with the statutory abrogation of "all other rights and remedies" as to the employer when worker's compensation benefits were obtained. Needham v. Fred's Frozen Foods, Inc. (1977), 171 Ind. App. 671, 672, 359 N.E.2d 544, 545.
The rejection of the "dual capacity" doctrine has been reaffirmed by this court. Ind. State Highway Dept. v. Robertson (1985), Ind. App., 482 N.E.2d 495, 499. Moreover, in Rodgers v. Hembd (1988), Ind. App., 518 N.E.2d 1120, trans. denied, a fellow employee (an architect who allegedly designed an unsafe work environment) was afforded protection under the Indiana Worker's Compensation Act, because he was "under the control" of the joint employer and could have rendered the joint employer vicariously liable for a design defect.
However, Forbes need not rely upon the "dual capacity" doctrine to support his claim if CMI, Seaton and Permanent Mold are separate corporate entities.
Forbes contends that CMI and Seaton are entitled to a "reverse-piercing" of the corporate veil only upon a showing of the necessity to prevent fraud or injustice. "To prevent fraud or injustice, the fiction of corporate entity may be disregarded where one corporation is so organized and controlled and its affairs are so conducted that it is a mere instrumentality or conduit of another corporation... . A careful review of the entire relationship between the corporate entities and their officers and directors is required to determine if justification exists for piercing the corporate veil." Detrick v. Midwest Pipe & Steel, Inc. (1992), Ind. App., 598 N.E.2d 1074, 1080.
Forbes urges the use of an "economic reality" test in determining whether CMI and Seaton are, along with Permanent Mold, his "employer." He relies upon Derigiotis v. J.M. Feighery Co. (1990), 185 Mich. App. 90, 460 N.W.2d 235 and Wodogaza v. H. & R. Terminals, Inc. (1987), 161 Mich. App. 746, 411 N.W.2d 848, app. denied. The "economic reality" test involves a consideration of the "totality of the circumstances surrounding the work performed." Derigiotis, supra, 460 N.W.2d at 235. Relevant factors include: control of the worker's duties, payment of wages or benefits, the right to hire, fire and discipline, and performance of duties as an integral part of the employer's business. Id.
This test is consistent with the public policy embodied in our worker's compensation scheme. Inasmuch as employers are insulated from full responsibility for employment-related injury, it is equitable to confer such insulation only where an employment relationship has actually existed between the parties. See Perry v. Stitzer Buick GMC, Inc., et al., (1994), Ind., 637 N.E.2d 1282 *1051 (Dickson, J., concurring) ("the worker's compensation law insulates employers from full responsibility for personal injuries to their employees").
Forbes has designated to the trial court material issues of fact as to the "level of integration" of the corporate structure here at issue.[2] In his appellate argument, he recognizes that the parent and subsidiary are more closely integrated than the sister subsidiaries. He characterizes the sister subsidiaries as merely "horizontally" integrated, having a "tenuous" connection.
The record discloses the relevant factual circumstances concerning the operation of CMI and its subsidiaries: Seaton and Permanent Mold have 2 of 3 Directors in common; Ray Witt owns 85% of the shares of CMI (which wholly owns Seaton and Permanent Mold); CMI has about 20 subsidiaries, located in various states; Witt visits manufacturing subsidiaries only (to conduct operational meetings); in the entire corporation, Witt approves capital expenditures over $25,000; a consolidated tax return is filed; day-to-day operations are handled by individual plant supervisors; each subsidiary has a payroll account, funded by CMI; Seaton makes equipment for foundries and Permanent Mold makes aluminum castings for the automotive industry; some subsidiaries are unionized and some are not; subsidiaries are "self-insured" for worker's compensation; a joint profit-sharing plan exists.
In sum, the basic details of the operations are not disputed (e.g. whether separate tax returns or bank accounts exist). However, the factfinder must determine whether the employees of one subsidiary are subject to the degree of control by the parent or a sister subsidiary characteristic of an "employment" relationship.
The factual determination concerning the level of integration between CMI and its subsidiaries is a necessary prerequisite to the application of I.C. 22-3-2-6. Thereafter, any necessary construction of the worker's compensation statute terms must be made in a light favorable to the employee. Recently, in Stump, supra, our supreme court examined the public policy underlying the Indiana Worker's Compensation Act when considering the issue of whether the exclusivity provision of I.C. 22-3-2-6 should offer immunity to a worker's compensation insurance carrier:
"We find no adequate justification to absolve worker's compensation insurance carriers and other such third parties of their responsibilities in the event of additional injuries or harm proximately caused by their actionable conduct.
This view is consistent with the ideals expressed in Art. 1, § 12, of the Constitution of Indiana:
All courts shall be open; and every person, for injury done to him and his person, property or reputation, shall have remedy by due course of law. Justice shall be administered freely and without purchase; completely, and without denial; speedily and without delay.
By limiting the application of the exclusive remedy provision to employee claims against the employer and declining to extend its protection to the worker's compensation insurance carrier, we are likewise construing the statute in a manner consistent with the purposes of the Act. The long-standing rule of this jurisdiction is that the Worker's Compensation Act should be liberally construed to effectuate the humane purposes of the Act, and that doubts in the application of terms are to be resolved in favor of the employee. Talas v. Correct Piping Co., Inc. (1982), Ind., 435 N.E.2d 22, 28."
Stump, supra, at 331-2 (emphasis added).
Summary judgment was properly denied. The factfinder must determine whether the "totality of the circumstances surrounding the work performed" is such that CMI or *1052 Seaton exercises "control" over Permanent Mold employees.
HOFFMAN and BARTEAU, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  All CMI subsidiaries are self-insured for worker's compensation. Creative Risk Management Corporation administers the benefits for all CMI subsidiaries.
[2]  In his designation of material issues of fact, Forbes contended: "There exists a legitimate dispute regarding the degree of control and integration of business operations existing between CMI and Permanent Mold." and "There exists a legitimate dispute regarding the degree of control and integration of business operations existing between Seaton and Permanent Mold." Record, pp. 107-8.

=== CASE 9740686 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:40:21.033865+00 ===

MOSER, P.J.
Deloitte & Touche (Deloitte), a Delaware partnership, appeals from a judgment granting Chevron Chemical Company (Chevron) the sum of $1,646,106 in damages, plus double costs1 and disbursements of the action. The judgment from which Deloitte. appeals is based upon an order entered January 18, 1991, (1) granting judgment notwithstanding the verdict on a claim of negligent misrepresentation, (2) changing the jury's answer to a special verdict question on a claim of intentional misrepresentation to favor Chevron rather than Deloitte, and (3) setting the dollar amount of damages to Chevron in the absence of a determination by the jury. We hold that because the trial court was incorrect in its initial refusal to grant summary judgment on negligent misrepresentation to Chevron, the subsequent judgment notwithstanding the verdict was correct. Further, we hold that because the amount of damages was contested at trial, the trial court may not determine the amount of damages. Therefore, the judgment of the trial court is affirmed in part and reversed in part, and remanded to the trial court with instructions for trial on the issue of damages.
The American Fuel & Supply Co., Inc. (AFSCo), a company that distributed motor oil, automotive supplies, *328hardware, and lawn and garden merchandise, hired Deloitte (then Touche Ross & Co.) in the capacity of independent auditor. Deloitte prepared an audit report, dated February 28, 1986, on the December 31, 1985, financial statements (the 1985 financials) of AFSCo. The 1985 financials contained and compared information based upon AFSCo's December 31, 1984 and 1985 balance statements, income statements, statements of changes in financial position and various other materials. One hundred printed copies of the 1985 financials were delivered to AFSCo, which in turn distributed them to its creditors. Chevron was the second largest trade creditor (unsecured) of AFSCo.
In early 1986, Deloitte discovered that, as a result of AFSCo's "rebilling" policy, the 1985 audit was in error. " Rebilling" was a procedure by which AFSCo allowed unsold products to remain in the possession of its distributors, although AFSCo records showed the products had been returned to AFSCo. Subsequently, AFSCo would send new (second) payment statements to those distributors for the previously distributed products already in their possession. As a result of the rebilling practice, Deloitte's printed financial statement contained an error of approximately $900,000. Because of this error, AFSCo was shown as making a profit for the year 1985, although in fact it was in deficit. Chevron relied upon the 1985 financials in its subsequent decisions to extend credit to AFSCo for the purchase of various products.
When Deloitte determined that AFSCo's rebilling practice had resulted in the generation of an incorrect audit report, it urged AFSCo to recall the report. When AFSCo refused, Deloitte indicated its intent to withdraw the 1985 audit and to so advise any entity known to be relying upon them. However, following a meeting at *329which AFSCo's counsel characterized Deloitte's contemplated notification as a breach of confidence and threatened legal action, Deloitte did not notify AFSCo's vendors of the error in the 1985 financials. Deloitte notified only one creditor, a secured lender who is not a party to this action, that its report on the 1985 financials had been withdrawn and should not be relied upon.
AFSCo filed for bankruptcy on April 23, 1987. On January 30, 1989, Chevron began this action alleging both negligence in the Deloitte audit of the 1985 financials and misrepresentation based upon Deloitte's failure to notify Chevron of Deloitte's withdrawal of its report. Larry Plotkin, AFSCo's president, sole shareholder and director, and guarantor of AFSCo's obligations to Chevron, filed for bankruptcy on October 14, 1989. On September 25, 1990, Chevron was granted partial summary judgment on the misrepresentation claims.2 However, on October 1, 1990, Chevron's motion for summary judgment on its claim of negligent misrepresentation was again denied. After a five-week trial, the jury found that (1) Deloitte was not negligent in the audit of the 1985 financials,3 (2) Deloitte did not act with intent to deceive Chevron or induce its reliance on the 1985 financials,4 (3) Deloitte was not negligent in failing to notify plaintiffs of the withdrawal of the audit *330report,5 and (4) Chevron's damages were $715,000.6
On motions after verdict, the trial court granted Chevron judgment notwithstanding the jury's verdict on negligent misrepresentation. The trial court also changed the jury's answer to the question on intentional misrepresentation, on the grounds that there was no credible evidence to support the jury's findings. In addition, the trial court held in the alternative that judgment would be granted as a sanction for the misconduct of Deloitte's counsel, pursuant to sections 805.03 and 804.12(2)(a), Stats. The trial court also found Chevron's damages to be over $1.6 million, disregarding the jury's finding of $715,000 for damages based upon "its reliance on AFSCo's 1985 financial statements" audited by Deloitte.7
We first address the issue of negligent misrepresentation. Because we determine that the trial court's refusal to grant summary judgment for Chevron on the issue of negligent misrepresentation was an error corrected by its subsequent judgment, we need not address the issues of intentional misrepresentation or sanction for attorney misconduct.8
*331A trial court may grant judgment notwithstanding the jury's verdict when "the verdict is proper but, for reasons evident in the record which bear upon matters not included in the verdict, the movant should have judgment."9 A motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict does not challenge whether there is sufficient evidence to support fact-finding, but whether the facts that have been found, as a matter of law, permit recovery.10 We agree with the trial court's characterization of its post-verdict decision as a question of law when it stated:
The defendant has failed to identify any element of the negligent misrepresentation claim that remained for determination by the jury. ... On the undisputed facts in this case as set forth in the Court's decision on September 25, 1990, Touche was negligent as a matter of law in failing to notify plaintiff of the withdrawal of their opinion.
This court reviews a question of law de novo, without deference to the decisions of the trial court.11 However, we are free to acknowledge a correct statement and application of the law by a trial court. At the summary judgment hearing prior to trial, the trial court correctly stated that under Wisconsin law, negligent misrepresentation has four elements:
*332(1) a representation of fact made by the defendant,
(2) the representation of fact is untrue,
(3) the defendant was negligent in making the representation of fact, and
(4) plaintiffs belief that the representation was true and reliance thereupon to plaintiffs damage.12
We examine the materials submitted13 to the trial court, as the trial court did,14 and agree that sufficient facts were undisputed to establish that three of the above elements of negligent misrepresentation had occurred. *333At this point, the trial court characterized Deloitte's failure to notify plaintiffs of the withdrawal of the 1985 opinion as a "representation which was untrue and on which plaintiffs relied to their damage." However, the trial court held that the third element (that Deloitte was negligent in making the representation) remained a genuine issue of material fact,15 stating "a genuine dispute of fact exists only with respect to defendant's failure of due care .16 At this point we disagree with the trial court.
*334In general, "accountants' liability to third parties should be determined under the accepted principles of Wisconsin negligence law."17 In the context of negligent misrepresentation, Wisconsin law defines a failure to exercise ordinary care as either (1) "mak[ing] misrepresentation under circumstances in which a person of ordinary intelligence and prudence ought reasonably to foresee that such misrepresentation will subject the interests of another person to an unreasonable risk of damage,"18 or (2) failing to use "the care that is usually exercised by persons of ordinary intelligence and prudence engaged in a like kind of business or profession," a standard that is applied to a "person in a particular business or profession."19
*335Under either standard, Deloitte's conduct falls short. At the summary judgment hearing, the trial court had in fact already held, using the foreseeability standard applied to "a person of ordinary intelligence and prudence," that:
Statements made by [Deloitte's] own employees indicate that [Deloitte] was aware that creditors were relying on these statements. On the undisputed facts in this case, plaintiffs, as major trade creditors, were persons whose reliance on the 1985 opinion and 1985 financial statements was reasonably foreseeable at the time the error was discovered by [Deloitte].
Again, we agree. Clearly, if Deloitte's employees were already "aware that creditors were relying on [Deloitte's] statements" they could also "foresee" such reliance.20 Alternatively, but equally clearly, "the care that is usually exercised by persons of ordinary intelligence and prudence engaged in a like kind of business or profession" encompasses knowledge of and obedience to the Wisconsin Administrative Code. The Wisconsin Administrative Code states that the confidentiality normally required of professionals does not prohibit disclosure of subsequently discovered facts:
*336The prohibition against disclosure of confidential information obtained in the course of a professional engagement does not apply to disclosure of such information when required to properly discharge the certified public accountant's or public accountant's responsibility according to the profession's standards. The prohibition would not apply, for example, to disclosure, as required by section 561 of Statement on Auditing Standards No. 1, of subsequent discovery of facts existing at the date of the auditor's report which would have affected the auditor's report had he been aware of such facts.21
On appeal, the parties' and amicus curiae briefs have presented extensive argument on the duty of accountants following a subsequent discovery of facts that would have altered an earlier audit report. Much of this argument has focused upon a professional standard22 promulgated for the guidance of auditors throughout the nation, which purportedly differentiates duties of accountants when clients cooperate in, or resist, disclosure of previously unreported facts. This professional standard provides the following directions to auditors.
When the auditor has concluded, after considering [that his report would have been affected if the undisclosed information had been known to him and that there are "persons currently relying or likely to rely on the financial statements"23], that action should be taken to prevent future reliance on his *337report, he should advise his client to make appropriate disclosure of the newly discovered facts and their impact on the financial statements to persons who are known to be currently relying or who are likely to rely on the financial statements and the related auditor's report. When the client undertakes to make appropriate disclosure, the method used and the disclosure made will depend on the circumstances.
... [W]hen it appears that [revision of the statements will cause delay] appropriate disclosure would consist of notification by the client to persons who are known to be relying or who are likely to rely on the financial statements and the related report that they should not be relied upon, and that revised financial statements and auditor's report will be issued upon completion of an investigation.24
Significantly, AU § 561 also directs the auditor with a cooperating client to "satisfy himself that the client has made the disclosures specified."25 However, when the client is not cooperative, AU § 561 provides the following directions:
If the client refuses to make the disclosures specified in paragraph .06, the auditor should notify each member of the board of directors of such refusal and of the fact that, in the absence of disclosure by the client, the auditor will take -steps as outlined below to prevent future reliance upon his report. The steps that can appropriately be taken will depend upon the degree of certainty of the auditor's knowledge that there are persons who are currently relying or who will rely on the financial statements and the auditor's report, and who would attach importance to the information, and the auditor's ability as a practical *338matter to communicate with them. Unless the auditor's attorney recommends a different course of action, the auditor should take the following steps to the extent applicable:
c. Notification to each person known to the auditor to be relying on the financial statements that his report should no longer be relied upon.26
The Wisconsin legislature has considered the possibility of adoption of "standards established by technical societies and organizations of recognized national standing"27 and provided procedural safeguards when such an adoption occurs.28 We note that sec. Accy 1.301 (4) (a)29 *339makes specific reference to AU § 561, but does not differentiate between situations of client cooperation or non-cooperation, and thus substantially and intentionally departs from the provisions of AU § 561. This court holds that Accy 1.301(4)(a) is dispositive: regardless of the attitudes or actions of their clients, Wisconsin accountants may not use "disclosure of confidential information" as an excuse for their own failure to correct audit reports generated prior to discovery of facts existing at the date of the subject report.
Thus, based upon the correct law and the undisputed facts as presented at the time of the summary judgment hearing, it would have been correct for the trial court to have granted summary judgment at the time requested. We are reluctant to categorize this decision as clear error on the part of the trial court. We note that at this hearing, the trial court had excluded certain of defendant's materials, i.e., those which had not been submitted in a timely matter, and also that at the post-verdict motion hearing, the trial court observed that ”[t]he defendant has failed to identify any element of the negligent misrepresentation claim that remained for determination by the jury." Thus, we view the decision to go forward with trial, rather than dispose of the mat*340ter at summary judgment, pursuant to sec. 802.08, Stats., "in light of the underlying aims and philosophy of Wisconsin's liberal civil procedure rules,"30 which require our courts to balance the need for a just determination against the need for a speedy and inexpensive determination in legal proceedings.31 However, the decision to proceed with trial does not preclude the trial court's subsequent decision that the defense had, in fact, failed to introduce evidence at trial that contradicted Chevron's assertions and proof.
We now turn to the damage award. Question 17 of the special verdict reads as follows: "If your answer to Question No. 16 [determination of Deloitte's negligent misrepresentation] is yes, then answer this question: What sum of money will fairly and reasonably compensate Chevron for damages sustained as a result of [Deloitte's] failure to notify it of the withdrawal of their opinion on AFSCo's 1985 financial statements?" Chevron moved the trial court to change the answer of question number 17 from the jury's "N/A" to $1,646,106, pursuant to sec. 805.14, Stats.,32 and to enter judgment accordingly. This the trial court did. We reverse this part of the trial court's order because the original motion was improper, and the trial court's subsequent response was incorrect.
A party may move the court to change an answer in the verdict, pursuant to sec. 805.14(5)(c), Stats., but only on the grounds that there was insufficient evidence to sustain the original answer. In this case, the jury's answer to the negligent misrepresentation damages ques*341tion indicated that they had not considered the evidence, based upon the jury's correct interpretation of the written instructions in the preface to the question. Having found that Deloitte was not "negligent in failing to notify Chevron of the withdrawal of its opinion,"33 the jury did not determine the potential amount of damages and therefore entered "N/A" on the special verdict form. The decision by the jury not to provide any answer to the question precludes a subsequent determination by the court that there was an "insufficiency of the evidence to sustain the answer."34
The final issue is the total amount of money owed to Chevron by AFSCo, which was disputed at trial. Chevron presented evidence that over $1,646,000 was owed to them by AFSCo. This amount included "invoice for carry-over inventory" ($188,932) and "interest" ($676,106) and excluded credits for amounts paid by AFSCo in bankruptcy ($170,630) and "net unapplied credits" ($31,577). The jury heard testimony that placed various sums of money at issue. First, there was the application of $240,000 paid to Chevron by AFSCo, which was characterized by Deloitte as payments on account and by Chevron as cash on delivery sales, occurring after Chevron ceased credit shipments. Next, there was a dispute over the shipment of a single truckload of material. Finally, there was conflicting evidence on AFSCo's agreement to pay an annual eighteen percent interest on the unpaid balance. Where issues of material fact are heard by a jury acting in the capacity of fact-finder, the trial court may not substitute its own determination for that of the jury on post-verdict motions.35 *342Furthermore, in view of the conflicting evidence presented at trial, the damages in this tort action may not be said to be "reasonably certain" prior to judgment.36 Where there is a genuine dispute throughout the trial over the amount of damages, as here, an award of prejudgment interest is not appropriate.37 The damages in this case will not be liquidated until verdict approval or judicial decision.38 We reverse the order of the trial court changing the jury's answer to special verdict question number 17 from "N/A" to $1,646,106 and remand the cause for determination of the amount of damages owed to Chevron by AFSCo.
Because the trial court was correct in finding for Chevron on the issue of negligent misrepresentation, and because this cause must now be remanded to the trial court for the determination of damages we need not address the issues of intentional misrepresentation or sanction for attorney misconduct.39
By the Court. — Judgment affirmed in part, reversed in part and cause remanded with directions.
Chevron was granted double taxable costs because the amount of judgment exceeded a statutory settlement offer made by Chevron. See sec. 807.01(3), Stats.
We note that both parties had moved for summary judgment on the "claims concerning [Deloitte's] decision not to notify [them] of the withdrawal of [Deloitte's] audit report or [Deloitte's] discovery of the error in the 1985 financial statements." The parties thus "conceded], at least as to some issues, that there are no genuine disputes of material fact."
This answer by the jury resolves the common-law negligence claim.
This answer by the jury resolves the intentional misrepresentation claim.
This answer by the jury resolves the negligent misrepresentation claim.
This is the jury's damage answer to Chevron's common-law negligence claim.
This special verdict question was placed in the section of the verdict subtitled "AUDIT NEGLIGENCE CLAIMS"; the jury was instructed to answer it regardless of its answer to the other questions in that subsection, i.e., questions concerning negligence and cause on the part of Chevron and/or Deloitte.
See Michalik v. Michalik, 164 Wis. 2d 544, 593 n.8, 476 N.W.2d 586, 593 n.8 (Ct. App. 1991) (citing with approval Gross v. Hoffman, 227 Wis. 296, 300, 277 N.W. 663, 665 (1938)).
Section 805.14(5)(b), Stats.
Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner, & Smith, Inc. v. Boeck, 127 Wis. 2d 127, 137-38, 377 N.W.2d 605, 610 (1985) (citing Herro v. DNR, 67 Wis. 2d 407, 413, 227 N.W.2d 456, 461-62 (1975) and Wozniak v. Local 1111, 57 Wis. 2d 725, 733, 205 N.W.2d 369, 373-74 (1973)).
In re E.C., 130 Wis. 2d 376, 381, 387 N.W.2d 72, 74 (1986).
Wis J I—Civil 2403. The tort of negligent misrepresentation in Wisconsin is a specific development of the common law of negligence; the interrelationship between the elements of the theory of negligent misrepresentation and those of a cause of action in negligence is illustrated in the following statement:
[The] theory of negligent misrepresentation! ] requires a showing that defendant made a misrepresentation of fact upon which the plaintiffs relied to their detriment. The specific elements of a cause of action in negligence are: (1) a duty of care or a voluntary assumption of a duty on the part of the defendant; (2) a breach of the duty (which involves a failure to exercise ordinary care in making a representation or in ascertaining the facts); (3) a causal connection between the conduct and the injury; and (4) an actual loss or damage as a result of the injury.
Green Spring Farms v. Kersten, 136 Wis. 2d 304, 319, 401 N.W.2d 816, 822 (1987). See also D'Huyvetter v. A.O. Smith Harvestore Products, 164 Wis. 2d 306, 331, 475 N.W.2d 587, 596 (Ct. App. 1991), review dismissed, 475 N.W.2d 585 (1991), which restates the "elements of a cause of action in negligence" from Green Spring Farms as "the elements of a claim for negligent misrepresentation" with only a minimal reference to the specific details of misrepresentation.
See sec. 802.08(2), Stats.
Dobratz v. Thomson, 161 Wis. 2d 502, 512-13, 468 N.W.2d 654, 657-58 (1991).
The trial court stated that whether Touche's decision not to notify plaintiffs was a "failure of due care or an intentional misrepresentation or neither presents a genuine issue of material fact."
However, the trial court enumerated the following, inter alia, as undisputed facts:
1. On August 20, 1986, James Wagner, the Deloitte manager on the AFSCo account stated that "there is a set of financial statements out being used by [AFSCo's] vendors and lenders that has an error in it."
2. During a September 5, 1986 conference call between Deloitte personnel and Wagner, William Pennow (a Deloitte partner and Wagner's superior) and Robert Mannix (assistant general counsel for Deloitte), Deloitte "stated that unless AFSCo notified its creditors and vendors of the existence of the error in the financial statements, Touche would withdraw their opinion and give notice to its creditors and vendors whom they knew were relying upon the financial statements that their opinion had been withdrawn."
3. On September 10, 1986, AFSCo agreed to notify the secured creditor (a lender) but refused to notify vendors. Wagner and Jay Lieberman, the Deloitte partner having responsibility for AFSCo as a client stated that "they did not believe it would be acceptable to leave the vendors without notification."
4. In a written confidential memo, Wagner stated that Deloitte "must withdraw their opinion, . . . and 'send a letter to the *334vendors or creditors that we know have received the financial statements telling them that... the opinion should no longer be relied upon.' "
5. Wagner and Pennow told Mannix that they could determine the major creditors, but not specifically who had received copies of the financial statements.
6. The address of Chevron was contained in the work papers of Deloitte.
Citizens State Bank v. Timm, Schmidt & Co., S.C., 113 Wis. 2d 376, 386, 335 N.W.2d 361, 366 (1983), cited with approval in Brooks v. Bank of Wisconsin Dells, 161 Wis. 2d 39, 48, 467 N.W.2d 187, 190-91 (Ct. App. 1991) (Rationale that parties injured by negligent provision of professional services may sue the professional regardless of privity applies equally to accountants, attorneys, and trustees.).
Wis J I—Civil 2403. This language follows Osborne v. Montgomery, 203 Wis. 223, 242, 234 N.W. 372, 379 (1931), cited with approval in Schuldies v. Service Machine Co., Inc., 448 F. Supp. 1196, 1199 (E.D. Wis. 1978). See also Wis J I—Civil 1005.
Wis J I—Civil 2403. See Marolla v. American Family Mut. *335Ins. Co., 38 Wis. 2d 539, 546, 157 N.W.2d 674, 678 (1968) ("The test in the case at bar was not what the ordinary prudent man would do if he were driving a track car but what the ordinary prudent man would do if he were an average or ordinary track car driver.").
During the early phases of the interaction between Deloitte and AFSCo, Deloitte's employees made statements to the effect that "vendors whom they knew" were relying on the statements should be notified or that "they could determine the major creditors." See supra note 16 (excerpt from enumeration of undisputed facts by trial court), points 2-5.
Wis. Adm. Code sec. Accy 1.301(4)(a) (effective January 1, 1975).
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, Statement on Auditing Procedure No. 1, AU § 561, Subsequent Discovery of Facts Existing at the Date of the Auditor's Report, (1972) (hereinafter AU § 561).
AU § 561.05(a) & (b) (emphasis added).
AU § 561.06 (emphasis added).
AU § 561.07.
AU § 561.08 (emphasis added).
Section 227.21 (2) (a), Stats.
For example, the following are generally required for an incorporation by reference of a professional standard into the Wisconsin Administrative Code as an administrative rule: (1) there must be a reference to a specific issue or issues of the publication containing the standard, sec. 227.21(2)(a), Stats.; (2) both the revisor of statutes and the attorney general must consent, sec. 227.21(2)(b), Stats.; (3) the rule must state how the incorporated material may be obtained, id.; (4) the rule must state that the standard is on file at the offices of the agency, the secretary of state, and the revisor, id. See, e.g., Wis. Adm. Code secs. Ag. 17.04(5) (c) (incorporation of The Merk Index, 10th Ed., 1983; Ag. 20.01 (incorporation of Rules for Testing Seed, October 1988); HSS 145.20 (incorporation of Sexually Transmitted Disease Treatment Guidelines, 1982); ILHR 51.25 (incorporation of numerous standards pertaining to construction materials). There is no specification of a specific publication issue for AU § 561, neither the revisor of statutes nor the attorney general has given consent to the adoption of AU § 561, there is no information on how the public may obtain the document, and no copies are on file in the required offices.
*339The Accounting Examining Board is specifically prohibited from adopting a "standard or rule relating to professional conduct or unethical practice" until a public hearing on the standard (i.e., AU § 561) or rule (i.e., sec. Accy 1.301(4)(a)) has been held. Section 442.01(2), Stats. While the records of the Accounting Examining Board show that public hearings were held during the promulgation of sections Accy 1.201 through 1.301, there is no record of a public hearing on the adoption (by incorporation by reference or by any non-statutory procedure) on the adoption of AU § 561.
The full text of this section was quoted supra at note 21.
Korkow v. General Cas. Co. of Wisconsin, 117 Wis. 2d 187, 192, 344 N.W.2d 108, 111 (1984).
See sec. 801.01(2), Stats.
No subsection specified in the motion.
Special verdict question 16.
Section 805.14(5)(c), Stats.
See Chart v. General Motors Corp., 80 Wis. 2d 91, 110-14, *342258 N.W.2d 680, 688-89 (1977) (After trial court entered judgment for two defendants notwithstanding the verdict, it was improper speculation for trial court to re-assign to other parties the percentage of negligence attributed by jury to those defendants.).
D'Huyvetter v. A.O. Smith Harvestore Products, 164 Wis. 2d 306, 324, 475 N.W.2d 587, 593-94 (Ct. App. 1991), review dismissed, 475 N.W.2d 585 (1991).
Id. at 325, 475 N.W.2d at 594.
Allstate Ins. Co. v. Truck Ins. Exchange, 63 Wis. 2d 148, 164, 216 N.W.2d 205, 213 (1974) overruled on other grounds by Lawver v. Boling, 71 Wis. 2d 408, 238 N.W.2d 514 (1976).
See Michalik v. Michalik, 164 Wis. 2d 544, 558 n.8, 476 N.W.2d 586, 593 n.8 (Ct. App. 1991) (citing with approval Gross v. Hoffman, 221 Wis. 296, 300, 277 N.W. 663, 665 (1938)).