=== CASE 2208476 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:30.339223+00 ===

28 Mass. App. Ct. 213 (1990)
548 N.E.2d 888
WILLIAM McCARTHY'S (dependent's) CASE.
No. 89-P-253.
Appeals Court of Massachusetts, Middlesex.
December 13, 1989.
January 11, 1990.
Present: KASS, CUTTER, & FINE, JJ.
William C. Geary for the claimant.
FINE, J.
This is an appeal by the deceased employee's widow from a judgment of the Superior Court denying compensation to her under G.L.c. 152, the workers' compensation act. The judgment affirmed the decision of the reviewing board, which had affirmed and adopted the findings and decision of the single member. We affirm the judgment of the Superior Court.
According to the single member's subsidiary findings of fact, the employee, on the evening of September 27, 1979, committed suicide by hanging. The incident occurred in his home. During the course of the evening, the employee conducted himself in a routine manner. He had been working in his basement on projects such as rebuilding motors and small appliances. He left behind a note addressed to his daughter which included the following postscript: "Jen, sue Marshall's *214 & Mr. [Stone].[1] Mr. [Stone] put your dad through hell on earth. He harassed me since 1975. Four long years of hell." Marshall's is the employer in this case. The employee was a district manager, and Stone was his supervisor during the four years prior to his death. The employee had had a number of differences with Stone at work. The employee had also experienced some serious health and personal problems during the same period. He continued to be employed at Marshall's until the date of his death.
In order to recover under the workers' compensation act for her husband's suicide, the claimant was required to show three things. First, she had to show that her husband suffered "a personal injury arising out of and in the course of his employment." G.L.c. 152, § 26. See Kelley's Case, 394 Mass. 684 (1985). Next, the claimant had to demonstrate a causal connection between the injury and her husband's suicide. Fitzgibbons's Case, 374 Mass. 633, 635-637 (1978). Finally, the claimant had to prove "that, due to the injury, the employee was of such unsoundness of mind as to make him irresponsible for his act of suicide." G.L.c. 152, § 26A, inserted by St. 1937, c. 370, § 2. See Lambert's Case, 364 Mass. 832 (1973).
The single member, the reviewing board, and the judge in the Superior Court, all based denial of compensation on the absence of expert testimony to establish a causal connection between the employee's injury and his suicide, a matter viewed as one not within the common knowledge or experience of a layperson. See Oberlander's Case, 348 Mass. 1, 5 (1964); Fitzgibbons's Case, 374 Mass. at 635. We need not reach either the issue whether expert testimony was required to prove causation or the issue whether the employee suffered a personal injury arising out of and in the course of his employment. This is because of the claimant's failure to meet her burden under G.L.c. 152, § 26A, to show the employee's unsoundness of mind at the time of his suicide.
*215 The claimant, a nurse with a "professional awareness" of psychological problems, relied exclusively upon the suicide and the suicide note to prove that her husband was of an unsound mind. She testified, however, that, prior to the suicide, her husband had exhibited no signs of any psychological problems.
General Laws c. 152, § 26A, was intended to make it easier for a dependent to recover compensation in the event of an employee's suicide than it had been under the prior law. See Oberlander's Case, 348 Mass. at 5 n. 1; Locke, Workmen's Compensation § 225 (2d ed. 1981). See generally, 1A Larson, Workmen's Compensation Law § 36 (1985). Before the effective date of the statute, the Supreme Judicial Court required a claimant, in order to recover compensation for an employee's suicide, to prove that a work-related personal injury caused "an insanity of such violence as to cause the victim to take his own life through an uncontrollable impulse or in a delirium of frenzy `without conscious volition to produce death....'" Sponatski's Case, 220 Mass. 526, 530 (1915). See Tetrault's Case, 278 Mass. 447, 448 (1932); Ruschetti's Case, 299 Mass. 426, 428 (1938).
Although it may no longer be necessary for a claimant to prove that the employee's suicide was the result of a "violent" insanity and an uncontrollable impulse, and also that it was without conscious volition to produce death, there still must be a basis for a finding of "such unsoundness of mind as to make him irresponsible for his act of suicide." G.L.c. 152, § 26A. It may be that, depending on the facts, expert testimony relating to the employee's mental condition will not be required in every case. Here, however, there was an absence of any indication of unsoundness of mind apart from the suicide itself. The content of the suicide note does not seem to us to be indicative of irrational thinking. If the fact of suicide alone were sufficient proof of an unsound mind, the requirement in the statute that the employee be of an unsound mind would be meaningless. On the contrary, the reference to the employee's mental condition is a significant part of the statute. The Legislature, while ameliorating the *216 harshness of the old rule, adopted the altogether reasonable principle that an act of suicide ought to preclude compensation if the decision to commit suicide is made voluntarily by a person not suffering from work-related mental illness or unsoundness of mind.
Judgment affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  We use a pseudonym.

=== CASE 9737031 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:13:30.102139+00 ===

COUGHLIN, J.
Defendant and a codefendant Marguerite Anderson were charged with possession of marijuana for sale, viz., a violation of Health and Safety Code section 11530.5; were convicted by verdict of a jury; moved for a new trial, which was denied; and defendant alone appeals, contending the judgment should be reversed because (1) the evidence is insufficient to sustain the verdict; (2) statements by the district attorney constituted prejudicial misconduct; and (3) the court erred in refusing an instruction requested by him.
The sufficiency of the evidence to sustain a verdict is determinable on appeal under the well-settled rule stated in People v. Newland, 15 Cal.2d 678, 681 [104 P.2d 778], as follows: “The court on appeal ‘will not attempt to determine the weight of the evidence, but will decide only whether upon *1062the face of the evidence it can be held that sufficient facts could not have been found by the jury to warrant the inference of guilt. For it is the function of the jury in the first instance, and of the trial court after verdict, to determine what facts are established by the evidence, and before the verdict of the jury which has been approved by the trial court, can be set aside on appeal upon the ground’ of insufficiency of the evidence, 'it must be made clearly to appear that upon no hypothesis whatever is there sufficient substantial evidence to support the conclusion reached in the court below. . . .’If the circumstances reasonably justify the verdict of the jury, the opinion of the reviewing court that those circumstances might also reasonably be reconciled with the innocence of the defendant will not warrant interference with the determination of the jury.” In this regard the court said in People v. Redrick, 55 Cal.2d 282, 290 [10 Cal.Rptr. 823, 359 P.2d 255], a narcotics possession case: “The existence of possible exculpatory explanations, whether they are simply suggestions not excluded by the evidence or even where they could be reasonably deduced from the evidence, could not justify this court’s rejecting the determination of the trier of fact that defendant is guilty unless on appeal it ‘be made clearly to appear that upon no hypothesis whatever is there sufficient substantial evidence to support the conclusion reached in the court below. ’ ’ ’
On May 22, 1966, at 8 p.m., narcotics agents and police officers, with a warrant authorizing the search of a residence identified as 4364 “G” Street., in San Diego, and of the person of defendant, took a reconnaissance position near the residence; remained there for approximately two and one-half hours; shortly after 10 p.m. saw Marguerite Anderson leave the residence and walk in a westerly direction toward Market Street; within 5 or 10 minutes saw an automobile come west on “G” Street and park in front of the residence; saw a male and a female person get out of the automobile, the female appearing to be the same person who previously had left the residence and the male being a person of the same general description as the defendant; saw both of them enter the residence from which, shortly thereafter, the male person left, went to the car in which a third person was acting as driver, leaned inside, turned and walked back to the residence, opened the door and hollered “Lock the door,” then returned to the car and left. At about 10 :30 p.m. the officers left the area; returned at 1:15 a.m. on the following morning, i.e., *1063May 23d; and proceeded to execute the search warrant. One of the officers knocked on the door of the residence and “hollered very loudly, ‘Police Officers. Open up. We have a search warrant. ’ ”; received no response; about 30 seconds later again “beat rather heavily on the side of the door,” announced the presence of the officers and their possession of a search warrant; then heard sounds inside of “rapid movement”; and thereupon, together with the other officers, forced his way into the house. Defendant and Marguerite Anderson were in a “TV room.” The former, standing by a chair, was clothed but did not have on shoes. The latter was lying on a couch, awake, and was wearing a robe and covered by a blanket. Also in the house were her five children.
Upon searching the house, the officers found in the ‘ ‘ TV room” a single marijuana seed on the floor near the place where defendant had been standing; a waxed sandwich bag containing marijuana, in the pocket of a woman’s sweater in a closet adjoining the bedroom; a purse containing 'marijuana debris; a pair of man’s shoes, and a man’s suit with a cleaning tag attached bearing the notation: “J. Haynes, 5/16/66, 4364 ‘G’ Street,” in the same closet; on top of a dresser in the bedroom an empty package of Zig-Zag papers; and in the kitchen, unused waxed sandwich bags similar to the one found in the woman’s sweater.
In searching under the house the officers found 37 waxed paper bags containing marijuana; two kilo bricks of marijuana worth approximately $1,100; brown paper bags, one of which contained a Safeway shopping receipt dated May 19, 1966; blue cellophane paper; and green wrapping paper upon which was a sticky substance. The waxed paper bags of marijuana were found near the crawl hole used as an entryway under the house. The bags were similar to the waxed sandwich bags found in the kitchen. Marijuana is packaged in this manner for sale. The kilo bricks were found at a place more distant from the entryway. Near them was the green wrapping paper containing a sticky substance. When marijuana is wrapped for sale, a substance, ordinarily of a sticky nature, is rubbed on the paper to “kill” the marijuana odor.
Defendant had $109 in his possession; was wearing a new pair of pants, which he had purchased about a week before for $19; and said he was unemployed. Traces of marijuana were found in the two pockets of his shirt; in the two front pockets of his pants; and also in the two rear pockets of his pants. A *1064package of Zig-Zag papers was found in the left rear pocket of his pants.
To establish possession of narcotics it must be shown the defendant exercised dominion and control over the drug with knowledge of its presence and narcotic character. (People v. Redrick, supra, 55 Cal.2d 282, 285.) Substantial proof of these elements may be supplied by circumstantial evidence alone; does not require a showing of exclusive or physical possession; and may be established by an inferential showing of joint and constructive possession. (People v. White, 50 Cal. 2d 428, 431 [325 P.2d 985]; People v. Roberts, 228 Cal.App.2d 722, 726-727 [39 Cal.Rptr. 843].) Factors supporting an inference of joint and constructive possession are joint occupancy of premises where the narcotic is located (People v. Poe, 164 Cal.App.2d 514, 516 [330 P.2d 681]; People v. MacArthur, 126 Cal.App.2d 232, 236 [271 P.2d 914]; People v. Williams, 121 Cal.App.2d 679, 681 [263 P.2d 853]); recent association with the narcotic by use or otherwise, which may be inferred from the presence of narcotic debris in the clothing of the accused (People v. Redrick, supra, 55 Cal.2d 282, 287; People v. Rogers, 207 Cal.App.2d 261, 268 [24 Cal.Rptr. 341]; People v. Allen, 196 Cal.App.2d. 655, 660 [16 Cal.Rptr. 869]; People v. Anders, 167 Cal.App.2d 65. 67. 68 [333 P.2d 854]; People v. Robarge, 151 Cal.App.2d 660, 668 [312 P.2d 70]); knowledge of the presence of the narcotic on the premises, which likewise may be inferred from the presence of narcotic debris in the clothing of an accused who jointly occupied the premises where the narcotic was located (People v. Anders, supra, 167 Cal.App.2d 65. 67. 68; gen. see People v. Cahill, 163 Cal.App.2d 15, 18. 20-21 [328 P.2d 995]); circumstances indicating the accused may have been engaged in the sale of narcotics, such as the unexplained possession of a substantial amount of money by an unemployed person (People v. Magdaleno, 158 Cal.App.2d 48, 52 [322 P.2d 89]); and conduct evidencing a guilty conscience. (People v. Redrick, supra, 55 Cal.2d 282, 287, 288; People v. Roberts, supra, 228 Cal.App.2d 722, 729; People v. Magdaleno, supra, 158 Cal. App.2d 48, 52; see also People v. Ortiz, 185 Cal.App.2d 622, 624 [8 Cal.Rptr. 494].)
The evidence in the case at bench supports reasonably dedueible inferences that the defendant, with his codefendant Marguerite Anderson, jointly occupied the premises where the marijuana was found; had knowledge of the presence of that *1065marijuana and its narcotic character; had access thereto; and had joint control thereof.
It may be inferred the name and address appearing on the cleaning slip attached to the suit in the closet was given the cleaning establishment by defendant; that this address identified the place where he resided; that he was present on the night in question as a joint occupant of the premises with his codefendant; and that he was not a mere visitor. Corroborating this conclusion is the fact, inferentially supported by the evidence that he had removed his shoes and placed them in the closet. Although the defense successfully blocked the introduction in evidence of statements made by the defendant t<s the officers respecting the ownership of the shoes and the suit in the closet, it may be inferred they belonged to him. The tag on the suit bore his name; there was no evidence of any other man’s shoes in the house; and and the defendant was not wearing shoes.
The fact Zig-Zag papers, which are used to make marijuana cigarettes, and marijuana debris were found in defendant’s pockets, supports the conclusion he was a marijuana user. It is significant the debris was found not just in one pocket but in all of the pockets of his shirt and pants. This fact, together with the fact he was unemployed but had in his possession $109 and recently had purchased a pair of pants costing $19, together with the fact inferentially supported by the evidence that on the night in question he was contacted by Marguerite Anderson, accompanied her to the residence and then left in an automobile driven by a third person, after which he returned to the residence, support the conclusion he was trafficking in marijuana; and was using the residence at 4364 “G” Street as a base of operations. Reasonably deducible from the evidence is the inference the marijuana debris in defendant’s pockets came from packages of marijuana he had delivered, or from the handling of bulk marijuana in the process of packaging.
The evidence also supports the inference defendant heard the announcement of the officers before entry; refused to open the door as requested; and engaged in some movement indicative of an effort to hide or destroy evidence. This incident supports an inference of a consciousness of guilt. (Cf. People v. Hood, 150 Cal.App.2d 197, 201 [309 P.2d 856].)
In People v. Redrick, supra, 55 Cal.2d 282, 287, the court said: “As might be expected, no sharp line can be drawn to distinguish the congeries of facts which will and that which *1066. will not constitute sufficient evidence of a defendant’s knowledge of the presence of a narcotic in a place to which he had access, but not exclusive access, and over which he had some control, but not exclusive control. ’ ’
Cases involving a consideration of factors present in the ease at bench, although not parallel in all details, which furnish precedent for the conclusion the evidence under review supports the verdict, in addition to those heretofore cited, are People v. Hamilton, 223 Cal.App.2d 542, 544 [85 Cal.Rptr. 812]—where the accused claimed he was only a visitor at the premises where the narcotic was found, People v. Dominguez, 191 Cal.App.2d 704, 705-707 [12 Cal.Rptr. 910], People v. Hurst, 183 Cal.App.2d 379, 387 [6 Cal.Rptr. 483]—where the narcotics were found under a house occupied by defendant, and People v. Bretado, 178 Cal.App.2d 465, 468-469 [3 Cal.Rptr. 216], People v. Bassett, 68 Cal.App.2d 241, 247 [156 P.2d 457]—where the narcotics were found in an adjoining light well.
Defendant relies upon the rule that mere presence in or mere opportunity of access to the place where marijuana is found is not sufficient to prove possession. (See People v. Redrick, supra, 55 Cal.2d 282, 285; People v. Roberts, supra, 228 Cal.App.2d 722, 727-729.) However, the ease at bench is not one of “mere presence” or “mere opportunity of access”; additional factors exist.
Considering the evidence in the light most favorable to the verdict, as we are required to do, it adequately supports the verdict.
In the course of an opening statement preliminary to the introduction of evidence, the district attorney said: “At some point during the course of the trial the testimony will show that Mr. Haynes and Miss Anderson have had several children together, just to show their relationship between the two defendants. ’ ’ The prosecution rested its case without any offer of proof respecting this matter. The defendants rested without introducing any evidence. Defendants did not object to the statement of the district attorney at the time it was made, but through their counsel did refer to it in their arguments to the jury, asserting. lack of any proof upon the subject showed the purpose of the district attorney in making the statement was to prejudice the jury against them. This was an effort to capitalize upon the failure of the prosecution to prove its assertion. No request was made for an instruction to the .jury to disregard the remark of the district attorney in *1067considering the case. The fact, if it were a fact, defendant and Anderson “had several children together” would have been relevant to the issue of the relationship between them, the occupancy of the premises, and defendant’s participation in the offense with which he was charged. Absent proof of bad faith, the failure to introduce evidence in support of a relevant fact asserted to be such by the district attorney in his opening statement is not misconduct. (People v. Cooley, 211 Cal.App.2d 173, 215-216 [27 Cal.Rptr. 543].) On their motion for new trial the defendant and codefendant asserted the action of the district attorney in the premises constituted prejudicial misconduct.. The trial court found there was no prejudice or bad faith, and denied the motions. These findings are supported by the record. It would appear to have been the hope of the district attorney to solicit “the testimony” to which he referred through cross-examination of the defendants. Any error in assuming they would testify was one of judgment and not bad faith.
When the defendants rested without offering any evidence, the district attorney indicated his surprise, and at his request a recess was taken to permit a discussion with the court regarding instructions. Upon resumption of the trial the district attorney proceeded with his opening argument in this manner: “Well, this is the time when the prosecution has the opportunity whether they are, shall we say, prepared for it or not, in summing up as to what we think the evidence in this case has shown. In this matter of preparation let me say that, of course, the case has been somewhat shorter than perhaps I anticipated because we had no testimonial evidence as far as the defendant is concerned. But remember, of course, the defendants do not have to take the stand in their own behalf. It is up to the prosecution to prove their case to you.” Thé defendant contends the aforesaid statement constituted a comment upon failure of the defendants to testify in their own behalf, violative of the rule stated in Griffin v. California, 380 U.S. 609 [14 L.Ed.2d 106, 85 S.Ct. 1229],  The reference of the district attorney to the fact the defendants did not testify must be considered in relation to his offered excuse for lack of preparation and readiness to proceed with the argument. No misconduct occurred.
Defendant requested, and the court refused to give, an instruction to the effect a conviction could not be based upon possession of marijuana debris alone, based on the principles stated in People v. Leal, 64 Cal.2d 504 [50 Cal.Rptr. *1068777, 413 P.2d 665], and People v. McCarthy, 64 Cal.2d 513 [50 Cal.Rptr. 783, 413 P.2d 671], The court adequately covered the subject in other instructions. No error occurred in the refusal.
The judgment is affirmed.
Brown (Gerald), P. J., concurred.

=== CASE 9737032 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:13:30.108529+00 ===

LAZAR, J., pro tem.*
I dissent from the opinion of the court insofar as it undertakes to justify inferences of knowledge, dominion and control necessary to a finding of possession of the marijuana found under the house and would reverse the judgment of conviction.
Preliminarily, I agree with the holding of the majority opinion that there was no error in refusal of the instruction requested by the defendant. I also agree that the defendant did not make out a case of prejudicial misconduct in the technical sense with respect to the remarks of the district attorney in his opening statement to the jury. On the other hand, under the close circumstances of this case I consider the statement unjustified and prejudicial and deserving of some comment.
The remark of the district attorney upon opening statement was: “At some point during the course of the trial the testimony will show that Mr. Haynes and Miss Anderson have had several children together, just to show their relationship between the two defendants. ’ ’
In the framework of the minimum evidence produced against defendant Haynes, the statement was highly damaging in suggesting a meretricious relationship between the parties and a willingness upon the part of Haynes to ignore prevailing social standards. The statement and anticipatory evidence would have relevance only to establish that defendant was in a husband-like relationship to his codefendant which would help in providing the inferences to prove possession. If this purpose were not served the relationship between the parties was immaterial. The statement as made focused the attention of the jury upon implied immoral conduct of the parties, not the inferences to be drawn from it in support of the People’s case.
It is correct that defendant argued to the jury the People’s failure to offer evidence in support of the statement and made no assignment of error until the argument on motion for new trial. With no evidence before it on the question of good or *1069bad faith (the trial district attorney was not present on the new trial argument), the trial court found no intentional bad faith and said of the district attorney: “It was his hope that that could be proved, or would be proved, and he didn't know how the case would develop.” [Italics supplied.] I agree with defendant that this particular area was one in which the district attorney should be held to know whether he would be able to provide evidence in support of his statement. It does not appear why evidence was not produced in support of the statement made to the jury.
As stated in People v. Carr, 163 Cal.App.2d 568, 575 [329 P.2d 746]: “The purpose of the opening statement of the prosecuting attorney is to outline the state’s evidence against the one accused of crime and to inform the jury what the People intend to prove. Generally the failure to make such proof during the trial does not indicate prejudice, particularly in the absence of showing of bad faith. However it is the substance and implication of a statement or the effect of an act which really define what the law recognizes as prejudicial misconduct. [Citation.] Whereas in the case at bar the unwarranted statement might not alone have prejudiced the defendants, the cumulative effect on the jury of this and other unjustified comments of the deputy district attorney justifies a contrary conclusion particularly in view of the state of the evidence. ’’ [Italics supplied.]
The crucial question, however, is whether the jury’s implied findings of the elements essential to proof of possession of marijuana for purposes of sale are supported by sufficient evidence. In the instant ease substantial evidence must be found in inferences reasonably drawn from the limited direct facts present in the record.
The facts recited in the majority opinion are more lengthy than significant. In particular the facts up to the entry of the police officers would appear of no incriminatory value whatsoever. The haste with which the entry was effected precludes a valid inference of refusal, even of opportunity, to open the door; the testimony of “rapid movement” is worthless. Rapid movement of what? A door? Of air? A tricycle? A child? There is no such thing as “rapid movement” in the abstract, yet “the sound of movement” is the sole evidentiary description given to the jury. From whence, then, a valid inference that defendant “engaged in some movement indicative of an effort to hide or destroy evidence?” By the same token the evidence provides no support for an inference *1070of a consciousness of guilt. The factual situation and principles involved in People v. Hood, 150 Cal.App.2d 197 [309 P.2d 856], cited in the opinion of the court, bear no relation to the question of valid or invalid inferences in the framework of testimony relating to the forcible entry into the house.
The existence of joint and constructive possession of the commercial quantities of marijuana found beneath the house is a key requirement to finding defendant guilty. Essential to this factor is a showing of joint occupancy of the house. People v. Poe, 164 Cal.App.2d 514 [330 P.2d 681], involved two people in a hotel room, with capsules of heroin on a dresser, the defendant standing nearby under the influence of narcotics and having “in effect admitted to the officers that she was in possession of the narcotics.” (P. 516) People v. MacArthur, 126 Cal.App.2d 232 [271 P.2d 914], was concerned with a situation of a man and woman living together in an apartment “for some time” and the narcotic upon which the prosecution was based was found in the apartment with a number of highly incriminatory circumstances, all of which was held sufficient to warrant an inference of joint possession of the heroin in the codefendant’s vanity box. People v. Williams, 121 Cal.App.2d 679 [263 P.2d 853], involved joint occupancy of a small hotel room for several days with the narcotic in plain sight on a table.1
A succinct statement of the rules to be taken into account in relation to a charge of unlawful possession of narcotics is set forth in People v. Roberts, 228 Cal.App.2d 722, at pages 726-727 [39 Cal.Rptr. 843]: “It is a well settled proposition of law that in a prosecution for unlawful possession of narcotics the People must prove that the accused exercised dominion and control over the drug with knowledge both of its presence and of its narcotic character. [Citations.] These elements may be established by circumstantial evidence and any reasonable inferences drawn from such evidence. [Citations.] Though proof of opportunity of access to a place where narcotics are found, without more, will not support a finding of unlawful possession, the fact that other persons had access to the premises in which the narcotic was found does not negative a finding of joint possession and control. [Citations.] Exclusive possession of the premises is not required, nor is physical possession of the drug. [Citation.] Constructive possession is *1071sufficient and possession by any person when the defendant has an immediate right to exercise dominion and control over the narcotic will support a conviction. [Citations.] However, ‘Mere presence at the scene of the crime standing alone is not sufficient to justify a finding of guilt. ’ [Citation.] ’ ’
In People v. Redrick, 55 Cal.2d 282 [10 Cal.Rptr. 823, 359 P.2d 255], the court made summary reference to a number of eases in the courts of appeal in which possession or non-possession had been ruled, commenting, as between the two lists of cases: “As might be expected, no sharp line can be drawn to distinguish the congeries of facts which will and that which will not constitute sufficient evidence of a defendant’s knowledge of the presence of a narcotic in a place to which he had access, but not exclusive access, and over which he had some control, but not exclusive control.” [P. 287.]
People v. Stanford, 176 Cal.App.2d 388, in a situation bearing some factual relation to this case, sets forth the rule, at page 390 [1 Cal.Rptr. 425], in these words: “To justify a conviction of unlawful possession of narcotics, the prosecution must prove actual or constructive possession of the contraband by the accused and knowledge of its presence and narcotic character. [Citations.] These essential facts may, of course, be established by circumstantial evidence. [Citation.] ”
The same case correlates the requisite possession with the necessity of proving dominion and control. “. . . Coleman’s presence in the bathroom neither establishes his possession of the contraband nor justifies an inference to that effect. It does not show that the narcotics in question were under his dominion and control.” [P. 391.]
People v. Tabizon, 166 Cal.App.2d 271 [332 P.2d 697], and People v. Hancock, 156 Cal.App.2d 305 [319 P.2d 731], are referred to in Stanford, supra, as instances in which mere presence where narcotics were present was insufficient to establish possession. Bach of those eases was stronger for the People than Stanford or the case at bench.
The majority opinion cites People v. Anders, 167 Cal.App. 2d 65 [333 P.2d 854], in support of the proposition that knowledge of the presence of narcotics on the premises may be inferred from the presence of narcotics debris in the clothing of a joint occupant. The statement in Anders, supra, at page 68, is that: “It is also the rule that the actual finding of the narcotics in Anders’ clothing and in the automobile owned by him was sufficient to warrant an inference of knowledge *1072thereof, on his part.” That is not the equivalent of saying that narcotics debris found in the clothes of a man who on the occasion of arrest is present in a “TV room” in a home in which the evidence is only of transient presence justifies an inference of knowledge of a commercial quantity of marijuana under the house and accessible only by an outside “crawl hole.” People v. Cahill, 163 Cal.App.2d 15 [328 P.2d 995], is equally inapplicable factually as it involved a manila sack of marijuana found under the bed occupied by the defendant. People v. Magdaleno, 158 Cal.App.2d 48 [322 P.2d 89], cited to the validity of an inference of selling narcotics because of money in the possession of an unemployed accused likewise involved facts unhelpful as a guide to the present ease.
Challenging the sufficiency of the evidence places one in the always difficult position of establishing a negative. It is important to keep in mind, however, that the prosecution of the defendant is based upon the commercial quantity of marijuana found beneath the house, as recognized by the district attorney’s statement to the court that “obviously the officers wouldn’t have arrested them until they found this stuff underneath the house.” No fact is present which would justify an inference of defendant’s knowledge of the marijuana beneath the house or of his right of dominion and control over it. “ [S]uspieion is not evidence; it merely raises a possibility and that is not sufficient basis for an inference of fact. [Citing cases.]” (People v. Tatge, 219 Cal.App.2d 430, 435 [33 Cal.Rptr. 323].) See People v. Tidmore, 218 Cal.App.2d 716, 720 [32 Cal.Rptr. 444].
- The evidence supports inferences that the defendant and codefendant were friends, even close friends; that defendant felt free to use the address of the house as a reference point (the address on the cleaning tag); that defendant had handled marijuana; that defendant felt concern for persons or property, or both, in the house; nothing more.
The comparative insufficiency of the evidence may be tested by matters on which it was silent: defendant’s physical and nervous state at the time of entry; who owned or rented the house; how frequently defendant was about the premises; where defendant kept his extra clothing and other personal belongings; where defendant maintained residence; parentage of the children; whether defendant was, within an appropriate period, the only visitor or one of many. None of these matters, which might have supported the inferences to incriminate defendant, was touched upon.
*1073One may concede the basic propriety and general application of the principles stated in People v. Newland, 15 Cal.2d 678 [104 P.2d 778], cited in the majority opinion; nevertheless : “ ‘ Implicit in our duty to determine the legal sufficiency of evidence to sustain a verdict is our obligation, in a proper ease, to appraise the sufficiency and effect of admitted or otherwise indubitably established facts as precluding or overcoming, as a matter of law, inconsistent inferences sought to be derived from weak and inconclusive sources.” [Citing cases.]” (People v. Hall, 62 Cal.2d 104, 110 [41 Cal.Rptr. 284 396 P.2d 700].)
In my opinion the following language from People v. Alkow, 97 CalApp.2d 797, 802-803 [218 P.2d 607], is keenly apposite to the circumstances of the instant case: “Evidence which merely creates a strong suspicion of the guilt of the accused does not shift the burden of proof and impose upon him the duty of overcoming the suspicion. . . . Too much was left to speculation and conjecture on the part of the jury when satisfactory proof was available. As a consequence we are not only faced with a difficult problem concerning a particular case but also a grave question as to our duty as a reviewing court in the establishment of a precedent. The review of a judgment in a criminal case is a heavy responsibility at best, and we are unwilling to overlook trial practices which create serious problems on appeal which could easily have been avoided.
“It is the right of every reviewing court to insist that in the trial of a criminal case the evidence of the People should be the best that is obtainable. The limitation of jurisdiction on appeal to questions of law implies that the facts which are determinative of the question of guilt will be as firmly established as possible in the trial court and that reliance will not be placed upon the ability of jurors to choose between conflicting inferences when evidence is available to prove material facts. Therefore, as far as possible, uncertainty should be removed from the case. When presentation of the evidence is unnecessarily incomplete, and the crucial facts of the ease are left to inference, the tendency will be to relax the requirement that guilt must be established beyond a reasonable doubt and place emphasis upon mere suspicion. We have such a record in the present case. The deficiencies of the evidence of the People would have required the jurors to determine upon the basis of probabilities whether a disclosure of further facts would have tended to prove guilt or innocence. We do not believe the *1074evidence was legally sufficient to establish guilt or to warrant the jury in determining beyond a reasonable doubt, by inference from the evidence, that the essential facts which the People did not undertake to put in evidence would have cured the insufficiency. ’ ’
I would reverse the judgment.
Appellant’s petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied October 25, 1967. Peters, J., was of the opinion that the petition should be granted.
Assigned by the Chairman of the Judicial Council.
No case has been disclosed in which constructive possession based on joint occupancy has been approved under conditions as physically remote as those in this case.

=== CASE 9737033 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:13:35.769051+00 ===

PER CURIAM.
On November 20 and 24, 1987 and January 14, 1988 three different panels of the Lawyers Professional Responsibility Board (Board) summarily dismissed complaints which had been filed by petitioner, William Kennedy, against attorneys employed by the Office of Lawyers Professional Responsibility (Director’s Office). Kennedy thereafter petitioned this court for review of the summary dismissals.1 In his petition, Kennedy asked that this court reverse the dismissals, declare the Board policy invalid and establish a different policy for handling complaints against members of the Board and staff of the Director’s Office. We find that the existing policy of the Board does not create an inherent conflict of interest and we affirm the summary dismissals made by panels of board members pursuant to the policy.
Rule 23 of the Rules of Lawyers Professional Responsibility gives the Board authority to “adopt rules and regulations * * * governing the conduct of business and performance of their duties.” The policy challenged by petitioner in this case is one which was adopted by the Board on April 26, 1985 and provides in pertinent part:
Complaints against the Director or his Assistants
Upon receipt of such complaint, the Director will forward the complaint to the Chairman of the Board. The Chairman will submit the complaint to a Lawyers Board Panel appointed in rotation, which will determine whether the matter can be summarily dismissed. If the complaint cannot be dismissed, the Panel will submit the complaint to the Supreme Court for assignment to special counsel for investigation. If special counsel determines the matter should be presented to a panel, it will be presented to a special panel as provided below.
Complaints against Board Members
The initial handling of complaints against Board Members will be handled within the normal channels of the discipline system. The Director will receive the complaint and determine whether it can be summarily dismissed. If it cannot, and it is of a routine nature and normally assigned to a District Ethics Committee for investigation, the Director will do so. If the District Ethics Committee recommends a dismissal and the Director agrees, he will do so. If the District Ethics Committee recommends further investigation or the District Ethics Committee recommends dismissal but the Director determines further investigation is necessary, the matter will be assigned to a special counsel for investigation, and if necessary, presentation of charges to a special panel.
Kennedy’s argument is that the Board and the Director’s Office are not separate entities and therefore, allowing Board members to initially review complaints against attorneys in the Director’s Office creates an impermissible conflict of interest. The United States Supreme Court has held in a due process context that to successfully claim bias in an administrative adjudication one must “overcome a presumption of honesty and integrity in those serving as adjudicators” and show that the combination of investigative and adjudicative powers in the same individuals poses “a risk of actual bias or prejudgment.” Withrow v. Larkin, 421 U.S. 35, 47, 95 S.Ct. 1456, 1464, 43 L.Ed.2d 712 (1975). Thus, analysis of Kennedy’s argument requires examination of the structure and the operation of the lawyer disciplinary enforcement system in Minnesota and of possible bias on the part of individual Board *836members who served on the reviewing panels.
The structure and operational policies of Minnesota’s system for lawyer discipline are similar to those in other jurisdictions and comply with the ABA Standards for Lawyers Discipline and Disability Proceedings (Standards) adopted in 1979. According to those standards, the state’s highest court has ultimate responsibility for the administration of the lawyers disciplinary system. Standards 2.1; In Re Integration of Nebraska State Bar Association, 133 Neb. 283, 275 N.W. 265 (1937). The ABA recommends that courts establish a single statewide disciplinary agency with clearly differentiated components for prosecution and adjudication. Standard 3.1. The agency should employ full-time disciplinary counsel to perform the prosecutorial functions and a Board made up of practicing attorneys and public members of the agency should handle adjudicative functions. Standard 3.2.
In Minnesota, the prosecutorial and adjudicative functions are separated even more clearly than is suggested by the ABA standards. The Board is divided into an Executive Committee, which has responsibility for the general supervision of the Director’s Office, and panels, which conduct hearings to determine whether probable cause exists to petition the Court for disciplinary action. Minn.R.Law.Prof. Resp. 4(c), (d), (e) & 9(i)(l). To ensure that Board members do not have responsibility for both supervision of the Director’s Office and adjudication of charges brought by the Director’s Office, members of the Executive Committee are not allowed to sit on panels during their tenure as executive committee members. Furthermore, the Director is appointed by the court, not the Board. The Board does not have ultimate authority over the Director. Minn.R.Law. Prof.Resp. 5(a). With these provisions, the structure of the system for lawyer disciplinary enforcement in Minnesota exceeds the structural standards set out by the ABA and avoids creating any personal, professional or pecuniary conflicts of interest.
The operational policy adopted by the Board for handling complaints against Board members and Director’s Office staff also complies with ABA standards. In fact, the Minnesota policy is nearly identical to Rule 17 .J of the ABA Model Rules for Lawyers Disciplinary Enforcement which provides that complaints against members of the board should be submitted directly to the court and complaints against disciplinary counsel should be submitted directly to the board.
Kennedy proposed that all complaints against staff of the Director’s Office or Board members be referred directly to this court or the court of appeals or a panel of district court judges. He represented to the court that such a policy “would be in accord with the policies established in other jurisdictions” and in support of such representation quoted portions of court rules from Pennsylvania, Rhode Island and Tennessee. However, the cited rules, when read in their entirety, are exactly the same as the existing policy which he challenged. Rule 209(b), Pennsylvania Rules on Disciplinary Enforcement provides:
Complaints against members of the Board involving alleged violations of the Disciplinary Rules shall be submitted directly to the Supreme Court. Complaints against Disciplinary Counsel involving alleged violations of the Disciplinary Rules shall be submitted directly to the Board and assigned to a reviewing member for disposition.
The Rhode Island Court Rules Annotated contain an almost identical provision except that they refer to the Code of Professional Responsibility rather than Disciplinary Rules and to “counsel” rather than “disciplinary counsel”. See Rule 42-7, Rhode Island Court Rules Annotated. Similarly, Rule 9, Section 9 Tennessee Supreme Court Rules on Disciplinary Enforcement provides:
Complaints against members of the Board involving violations of the Attorney’s Oath of Office, the Code of Professional Responsibility or TCA § 23-3-201 shall be submitted directly to the Supreme Court. Complaints against hearing committee members or Disciplinary *837Counsel alleging violations of the attorney’s oath or the code of professional responsibility shall be submitted directly to the Board.
Kennedy also cited the South Carolina Rules on Disciplinary Procedure as being the same as the policy he recommended. He neglected to mention that because South Carolina has only a statewide board and no office of disciplinary counsel, there is no need for a rule dealing with complaints against disciplinary counsel. We were unable to find any state which has a policy similar to the one Mr. Kennedy recommends.2
We are not persuaded by Mr. Kennedy’s arguments that the Board and the Director’s Office are not the “separate and independent entities they claim to be” and that the policy allows the Board and the Director’s Office to judge their own actions. The policy simply shifts the initial investigative responsibility from the Director’s Office to a hearing panel when the complaint is about an attorney who works for the Director’s Office. If the panel determines that investigation is warranted, special counsel is appointed to conduct the investigation and a specially appointed panel makes the probable cause determination. Thus, the investigative and adjudicative functions remain clearly separated. Accordingly, we find that the separation of the two components of the disciplinary system provided for in both the Minn.R.Law. Prof.Resp. and the Board policy for handling complaints against Director’s Office staff sufficiently prevents any risk of inherent bias.
Having determined that there is no inherent bias in the structure of the disciplinary enforcement system or the policy in question, we must decide whether there is evidence of any bias on the part of the individual members of the panels which reviewed the complaints. The Michigan Supreme Court, following the Withrow reasoning in an attorney discipline case held:
Absent a contrary showing, the hearing panel, the Grievance Board and the Grievance Administrator, in addition to being functionally separate, are assumed to be fair and honest — composed of “men of conscience of intellectual discipline, capable of judging a particular controver-sey fairly on the basis of its own circumstances.”
In Re Baun, 395 Mich. 28, 232 N.W.2d 621, 623-624 (1975) (quoting Withrow).
Bias on the part of an adjudicator has been found to be constitutionally intolerable in only a few cases — where the decisionmaker has a pecuniary interest in the outcome of the decision. Gibson v. Berryhill, 411 U.S. 564, 579, 93 S.Ct. 1689, 1698, 36 L.Ed.2d 488 (1973), or where the decisionmaker has become embroiled in a personal dispute with the party appearing before him or her, Taylor v. Hayes, 418 U.S. 488, 501-503, 94 S.Ct. 2697, 2704-2705, 41 L.Ed.2d 897 (1974). Other standards for examining conflict of interest or bias are also useful in reviewing the claims of bias presented here. For example, judges may be removed from a case where there is an “affirmative showing of prejudice.” Minn. R.Civ.P. 63.03. It is improper for prosecutors to participate in cases which involve personal friends or relatives, State v. Bell, 84 Idaho 153, 370 P.2d 508, 511 (1962); where the defendant is a current or former employee of the prosecutor’s office, In Re Davis, 471 N.E.2d 280, 281 (Ind.1984); or where the prosecutor has a personal interest adverse to the prosecution, State v. Melerine, 236 La. 881, 109 So.2d 454, 458 (1959).
Kennedy has presented no basis for disqualification. He simply alleges that there may be a conflict. Absent a showing of actual bias on the part of a panel member, we must presume that the panel members acted honestly and with integrity in their roles as decisionmakers. Withrow, 421 U.S. at 47, 95 S.Ct. at 1464.
Summary dismissals are not ordinarily reviewable by this court. Minn.R. Law.Prof.Resp. 8(c) sets forth the options available to the Director for disposition of *838complaints. Rule 8(d) provides that when a complainant is not satisfied with the Director’s disposition, s/he may appeal the decision by writing to the Director within 14 days. A Board member appointed by the Chair then reviews the Director’s disposition and may affirm it, direct that the matter be submitted to a panel or direct further investigation. In the three cases under consideration here, the only difference is that a panel rather than the Director made the the initial disposition decision. Before the Board decided and informed Kennedy that he could appeal the decision under Rule 8(d), Kennedy petitioned this court for review of the decision under Rule 9(1), which provides for review of panel dispositions after a hearing has been conducted. We accepted review of these cases because at the time he petitioned, Kennedy was apparently not aware of the appropriate means for appealing the decision. We note, however, that because no hearing is conducted before a summary dismissal decision is made, Rule 9(1) is not the appropriate provision for obtaining review and this court in the future will decline to review summary dismissals.
We have reviewed all of the information which the three panels had available to them and see no purpose in prolonging any further the final disposition of the three complaints involved. Based upon our review, we are convinced that the panels' decisions to summarily dismiss these cases were proper in all respects.
A complaint should be investigated if there is “a reasonable belief that professional misconduct may have occurred.” Minn.R.Law.Prof.Resp. 8(a). The Board has adopted and published guidelines which the Director’s Office follows when making summary dismissal determinations. See Wernz, “Summary Dismissal Guidelines,” 44 Bench and Bar of Minnesota, No. 5 (1987). The guidelines provide that “[i]f a complaint makes allegations which if true, would not state a violation of the Minnesota Rules of Professional Conduct, the complaint will ordinarily be summarily dismissed.” The guidelines also specifically identify the types of commonly received complaints which the Director’s Office does not ordinarily investigate: fee disputes, malpractice complaints, non-payment of professionally incurred indebtedness, complaints about advertising and written solicitation which do not involve false or misleading statements, misconduct in non-attorney situations and allegations that a prosecutor improperly charged or failed to charge.
Kennedy’s complaint against B.D. stemmed from B.D.’s involvement in the investigation of a complaint filed against Kennedy in August 1986. The complaint against Kennedy was one of several complaints against attorneys all arising from three parental kidnapping cases in Henne-pin County. The Director’s Office investigation of the complaint was delayed for approximately 10 months due to another investigation of the same matters. Once the other investigation was completed, the Director’s Office resumed its investigation and B.D. sent Kennedy a letter requesting that he answer three questions regarding the allegations in the complaint. Kennedy objected to the questions. Rather than filing a motion to challenge the reasonableness of the request for information in Ramsey County District Court pursuant to Minn.R.Law.Prof.Resp. 25(a), Kennedy filed an ethical complaint against B.D. and did not respond to the questions.
B.D. responded to the complaint by explaining the reasons for the delay in the investigation and the need for answers to the questions he sent to Kennedy. The Director’s Office had originally told Kennedy no written response would be required because it had already received volumes of information about the matter with Kennedy's complaint against several other attorneys. After the Director’s Office had resumed its investigation, it was determined that some additional information was needed. We find that explanation and all three questions to be reasonable.
The second case involves Kennedy’s allegation that L.D. used improper language in a memorandum accompanying a discipline-not-warranted notice which L.D. sent to one of Kennedy’s assistants after a *839District Ethics Committee (DEC) investigation. The sentence to which Kennedy objected indicated that the DEC investigator did not agree with the committee’s conclusion that no discipline was warranted. In a response to the complaint, L.D. explained that the primary purpose of such a memorandum is to explain the basis for the committee’s decision. Accordingly, the memorandum must provide enough detail to help complainants and reviewing board members understand the decision. The sentence in the memorandum to which Kennedy objects simply informs the respondent attorney that the investigator did not agree with the Committee’s decision. The inclusion of that sentence by L.D. does not constitute a violation of the Minn.R.Prof. Cond. Furthermore, it should be noted that neither the notice nor the memorandum are public documents and the respondent attorney maintains complete control over who will ever see that sentence.
The third case involves a complaint received by the Director’s Office in December 1987 in which Kennedy alleged that A.D. referred a complaint against an assistant public defender to a District Ethics Committee without justification. In October 1987, the Director’s Office had received the complaint about the assistant public defender from a judge and A.D. assigned the complaint to a district ethics committee for investigation. A.D. responded to Kennedy’s complaint by citing the rules of professional conduct which A.D. believed may have been violated by the assistant public defender. The panel which reviewed the Kennedy complaint against A.D. specifically stated in its decision to dismiss that A.D.’s referral of the complaint to a District Ethics Committee was the proper exercise of prosecutorial discretion. We agree and note that the panel’s decision follows the summary dismissal guidelines adopted by the Board which provide that complaints alleging that a prosecutor improperly charged or failed to charge are routinely dismissed.
We agree with all three of the panels that even if the allegations in Mr. Kennedy’s complaints were true, no rules would have been violated. We therefore affirm the decisions of the three panels and dismiss all three of Mr. Kennedy’s complaints.
. This court does not ordinarily review summary dismissals of ethical complaints. Minn.R. Law.Prof.Resp. 8(d) provides that summary dismissals are to he reviewed by a Board member appointed by the Chair. We accepted review in this case only to resolve the questions raised about the policy and to clarify the procedure for review of dismissals of complaints against staff of the Director's Office.
. It should be noted that procedures and policies of a disciplinary enforcement agency are sometimes not published because they are internal rules of the agency.

=== CASE 9737034 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:13:35.773802+00 ===

POPOVICH, Judge
(concurring in part, dissenting in part).
I concur in that portion of the opinion that disposes of the conflict of interest policy issue, but dissent from that portion (p. 837, et seq.) that disposes of the complaints against B.D., L.D. and A.D. on the merits.
Kennedy filed petitions for review of dismissals under Rule 9(1), Rules on Lawyers Professional Responsibility (RLPR). This was premature, for his right to review was to proceed pursuant to Rule 8(d), RLPR. Kennedy did not argue the merits of the complaints in his brief or at oral argument. His reply brief specifically stated he was not seeking review of the dismissal nor waiving his right to it. It appears Kennedy petitioned for review of these three cases primarily to draw the court’s attention to the policy regarding conflicts with which he disagrees.
I would remand these three dismissals to the Board for further proceedings under Rule 8(d) if Kennedy is not satisfied with the disposition of each. This rule specifically provides that further investigation could be directed to be undertaken, and Kennedy on remand should have the opportunity provided by the rule if he chooses.
I recognize that the court has the authority to decide these three dismissals on the merits, but I would prefer a remand as the better practice since the resort to this court was premature and for a limited purpose.

=== CASE 9737035 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:13:37.718686+00 ===

JUSTICE RYAN delivered the opinion of the court: The defendant, Patrick 0. Hicks, was charged with burglary in an information filed April 28, 1987, in the circuit court of Fayette County. Before trial, Hicks moved to suppress certain statements. The trial judge granted his motion, finding that Hicks had invoked his right to have counsel present during interrogation and that law enforcement authorities had violated his fifth amendment right. The State appealed from the order suppressing evidence. (107 Ill. 2d R. 604(a)(1).) On appeal, the appellate court, with one justice dissenting, reversed, holding that defendant had waived his right to counsel and, therefore, the trial court should not have suppressed his statements. (179 Ill. App. 3d 468.) We granted defendant’s petition for leave to appeal (107 Ill. 2d R. 315). We affirm. Defendant was arrested and taken to the Fayette County jail on February 9, 1987. A safe had been taken from the Fayette Service Co-op building and defendant’s fingerprints were found on the safe when it was recovered. Upon arriving at the sheriff’s department, Deputy Daniel Taylor took defendant Hicks to a visitation room. There, Taylor informed Hicks that he would be questioned concerning the Fayette Service Co-op burglary. Taylor then read to Hicks his rights pursuant to Miranda v. Arizona (1966), 384 U.S. 436, 16 L. Ed. 2d 694, 86 S. Ct. 1602, and explained each of them. Defendant indicated that he understood his rights and signed a written waiver form. Deputy Taylor told defendant that he knew that Hicks had not entered the Fayette Service building itself, but that he knew that Hicks was in some way involved because his fingerprints were found on the safe that had been recovered. At this point, defendant refused to comment further. Deputy Taylor then discontinued questioning. The next morning at his arraignment, defendant requested counsel, which the court appointed. Because defendant Hicks was on parole, on the day following his arraignment he was returned to Graham Correctional Center in Hillsboro as a parole violator. Deputy Taylor alone transported him there. What transpired during the journey provided the basis for the trial court’s suppression. Deputy Taylor testified that soon after the vehicle left the driveway of the Fayette County jail, defendant voluntarily stated, “Dan, I was not in that Fayette Service building *** I did not go into the building at all.” Taylor responded, “Pat, I told you the day that I placed you, I told you that I knew you were not in the building. However, I cannot talk to you about the case because you have an attorney.” Hicks went on to explain that he did not participate in the burglary. He stated that two acquaintances brought the safe to his home, looking for a cutting torch and, at that point, he touched the safe. Deputy Taylor further testified that shortly after defendant Hicks finished this statement, they drove past the Fayco Enterprises, Inc., building, the site of a different recent burglary. Deputy Taylor testified that he “jokingly” turned to Hicks and asked whether he had any knowledge concerning that burglary. Defendant then said “the talk is that Terry Richards went into the Fayco building,” to which Taylor said he responded, “the talk is that Pat Hicks and Terry Richards went into [the] Fayco building.” Defendant then, according to Taylor, “kind of hung his head a little bit and he said, ‘yes, that’s right. Terry Richards and I carried the safe out of the Fayco building.’ ” The trial court suppressed defendant’s confession, finding that it was “[c]ertainly a violation of rights.” The majority of the appellate court disagreed, finding that defendant voluntarily waived his right not to be interrogated in the absence of his attorney. (179 Ill. App. 3d at 471.) The dissenting justice contended that the State had the burden of establishing that the defendant specifically waived his right to have counsel present regarding the inquiry about the second burglary. 179 Ill. App. 3d at 471 (Harrison, J., dissenting). We are concerned here only with defendant's fifth amendment right to counsel. No question has been raised under the sixth amendment. Our review of the facts in this case reveals that defendant, by voluntarily discussing and inculpating himself in the Fayette Service Co-op burglary, waived his fifth amendment right to have counsel present during further interrogation. The constitutional principles applicable to this case indicate that the trial court erred. The Supreme Court, in Edwards v. Arizona (1981), 451 U.S. 477, 68 L. Ed. 2d 378, 101 S. Ct. 1880, articulated the general rule that once a defendant invokes his right to have counsel present during interrogation, all questioning must cease until counsel actually is present. In our case, defendant Hicks asserted his right to counsel at his arraignment. Law enforcement officials appropriately did not renew questioning. Edwards acknowledged that one may waive this fifth amendment right, however, after it is invoked. To show waiver the State must establish that it was “knowing and intelligent and found to be so under the totality of the circumstances, including the necessary fact that the accused, not the police, reopened the dialogue with the authorities.” Edwards v. Arizona, 451 U.S. at 486 n.9, 68 L. Ed. 2d at 387 n.9,109 S. Ct. at 1885 n.9. The Supreme Court sought to clarify the holding of Edwards by defining the approach courts should take when addressing the question of whether a defendant has waived his right to have counsel present during custodial interrogation. (Oregon v. Bradshaw (1983), 462 U.S. 1039, 77 L. Ed. 2d 405, 103 S. Ct. 2830.) The preliminary inquiry is whether defendant initiated the conversation in a manner evincing a “willingness and a desire for a generalized discussion about the investigation.” (Bradshaw, 462 U.S. at 1045-46, 77 L. Ed. 2d at 412, 103 S. Ct. at 2835.) Hicks did this by gratuitously offering exculpatory statements. These comments were not merely necessary inquiries “arising out of the incidents of the custodial relationship.” Defendant offered these statements, moreover, after Deputy Taylor again admonished him not to speak in the absence of his attorney. The second inquiry, as noted in Bradshaw, is whether, by defendant’s initiation of a conversation, coupled with the totality of the other circumstances, he knowingly and intelligently waived his right to counsel’s presence during questioning. We conclude that defendant knowingly and intelligently chose to speak with Deputy Taylor without counsel’s presence. The police had warned defendant of his rights on several occasions. These warnings came in both oral and written form. Moreover, defendant was not a stranger to the criminal justice system. He cannot, therefore, persuasively contend that he did not understand that he had the right to keep quiet until his attorney was present. Furthermore, after defendant initiated the conversation, Deputy Taylor told defendant that he could not talk about defendant’s involvement because Taylor had an attorney. Nevertheless, defendant continued to discuss his connection with the crime. We find that the trial court misapplied the law as announced by the Supreme Court. Clearly, under Edwards and Bradshaw, defendant waived his right to counsel as to the burglary with which he was charged. The question before us is whether this waiver also extended to defendant’s fifth amendment right to counsel as to the Fayco Enterprises burglary, about which Deputy Taylor inquired after defendant made the voluntary statements concerning the Fayette Service Co-op burglary. In Arizona v. Roberson (1988), 486 U.S. 675, 100 L. Ed. 2d 704, 108 S. Ct. 2093, the Supreme Court emphasized the virtues of a bright line rule to assist law enforcement personnel and courts in applying the Miranda requirements. The Court held, in Roberson, that when an accused asserts his right to counsel, he has indicated that he considers himself unable to deal with the pressures of custodial investigation without legal assistance. Thus, the Court held that a suspect’s request for counsel should apply to any questions the police may pose, not only those relating to a specific investigation. Roberson, while adopting the bright line rule of Edwards that all interrogation must cease when a suspect requests an attorney, also acknowledged the holding of Edwards that the accused may waive his right to counsel by himself initiating further communications, exchanges or conversations with the police. (Roberson, 486 U.S. at 682, 100 L. Ed. 2d at 714, 108 S. Ct. at 2098.) The Court, in Roberson, did not address the breadth of the waiver or whether the waiver is as broad as the right to counsel, which attaches upon request. As noted above, the question presented in ornease is, when the defendant, Hicks, waived his right to counsel by initiating the conversation with the deputy and freely discussing his involvement in the crime with which he was charged, were the police thereby authorized to interrogate him concerning other crimes? Roberson did not answer this question. Logic would suggest that if the virtue of a bright line rule — the ease of application — supports cutting off all interrogation when an accused requests counsel, then the virtue of a bright line rule would permit interrogation as to any offense after a waiver. When counsel is requested, the right to counsel, which attaches, is not investigation specific. So also, when the right to counsel is waived, the waiver should not be investigation specific. The rationale supporting the requirement that all questions cease once an accused has requested counsel, as noted above, is that the accused considers himself unable to deal with custodial interrogation without counsel. If an accused waives the right to counsel, it would appear that he no longer considers himself incapable of dealing with the pressures of custodial interrogation. Therefore, following a waiver of the right to counsel, the defendant may be interrogated as to any offense, unless he has indicated his waiver is a limited waiver. See Shriner v. Wainwright (11th Cir. 1983), 715 F.2d 1452. Defendant’s contention that he was tricked into making a confession is not persuasive. In Colorado v. Spring (1987), 479 U.S. 564, 93 L. Ed. 2d 954, 107 S. Ct. 851, the Supreme Court held that police need not inform a defendant of all the crimes about which he may be questioned. What is important is that defendant understands that he may refrain from answering any questions until his attorney is present. Here, defendant was repeatedly informed of his rights; he invoked his rights, and then clearly waived his rights. The fact that the topic of conversation shifted to another crime after defendant’s waiver of his rights does not render his confession involuntary. The proper inquiry focuses on the custodial atmosphere, not the specific line of questioning. (Butler v. Aiken (4th Cir. 1988), 846 F.2d 255, 259; United States v. Poole (D.C. Cir. 1974), 495 F.2d 115, 119.) Defendant knew at all times that he could end the conversation. He chose, instead, to speak. In the words of the Supreme Court, “it seems self-evident that one who is told he is free to refuse to answer questions is in a curious posture to later complain that his answers were compelled.” United States v. Washington (1977), 431 U.S. 181, 188, 52 L. Ed. 2d 238, 245-46, 97 S. Ct. 1814,1819. For these reasons, the judgment of the appellate court, reversing the trial court’s order suppressing defendant’s statement, is affirmed. Appellate court affirmed.

=== CASE 9737036 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:13:37.723083+00 ===

JUSTICE CLARK, dissenting: I do not agree with the majority’s conclusion that the trial court misapplied the law in suppressing the statements at issue here (132 Ill. 2d at 494). Accordingly, I must dissent. The majority decides that by initiating conversation with the police officer about the Fayette Service Co-op burglary, defendant completely waived his previously invoked right to counsel, including his right to have counsel present during police interrogation pertaining to crimes unrelated to the Fayette Service Co-op burglary. (132 Ill. 2d at 495.) The majority concludes: “Logic would suggest that if the virtue of a bright line rule — the ease of application — supports cutting off all interrogation when an accused requests counsel, then the virtue of a bright line rule would permit interrogation as to any offense after a waiver. *** The rationale supporting the requirement that all questions cease once an accused has requested counsel, as noted above, is that the accused considers himself unable to deal with custodial interrogation without counsel. If an accused waives the right to counsel, it would appear that he no longer considers himself incapable of dealing with the pressures of custodial interrogation. Therefore, following a waiver of the right to counsel, the defendant may be interrogated as to any offense, unless he has indicated his waiver is a limited one.” (132 Ill. 2d at 495.) The problem with this “logic” is that it ignores the United States Supreme Court’s long-standing recognition that an individual’s invocation of his or her right to counsel is to be viewed in an entirely different light than an individual’s relinquishment of this right. (See Connecticut v. Barrett (1987), 479 U.S. 523, 93 L. Ed. 2d 920, 107 S. Ct. 828; Miranda v. Arizona (1966), 384 U.S. 436, 16 L. Ed. 2d 694, 86 S. Ct. 1602.) By failing to recognize this crucial distinction, the majority is comparing apples to oranges. In Miranda, 384 U.S. at 444-45, 16 L. Ed. 2d at 707, 86 S. Ct. at 1612, the Supreme Court explained that if there is any indication by an individual that he or she wishes to consult with an attorney before speaking, the individual cannot be questioned further. The Court has further stated that any request for counsel must be given “ ‘a broad, rather than a narrow, interpretation.’ ” (Barrett, 479 U.S. at 529, 93 L. Ed. 2d at 928, 107 S. Ct. at 832, quoting Michigan v. Jackson (1986), 475 U.S. 625, 633, 89 L. Ed. 2d 631, 640, 106 S. Ct. 1404, 1409.) Accordingly, “a court must presume that an individual has invoked the full extent of his or her constitutional right to counsel.” United States ex rel. Espinoza v. Fairman (7th Cir. 1987), 813 F.2d 117, 123. In contrast to the presumption which favors construing invocations of the right of counsel broadly, the Supreme Court has long recognized that courts must “ ‘indulge every reasonable presumption against waiver’ ” of the right to counsel. (Emphasis added.) (Jackson, 475 U.S. at 633, 89 L. Ed. 2d at 640, 106 S. Ct. at 1409, quoting Johnson v. Zerbst (1938), 304 U.S. 458, 464, 82 L. Ed. 1461, 1466, 58 S. Ct. 1019, 1023; see also Brewer v. Williams (1977), 430 U.S. 387, 404, 51 L. Ed. 2d 424, 439, 97 S. Ct. 1232, 1242.) Under this approach, “[djoubts must be resolved in favor of protecting the constitutional claim.” (Jackson, 475 U.S. at 633, 89 L. Ed. 2d at 640, 106 S. Ct. at 1409.) Although Jackson, Brewer and Johnson involve the sixth amendment right to counsel, the Supreme Court has indicated that the principles set forth in those cases are also applicable in assessing questions pertaining to waiver of the fifth amendment right to counsel. See Barrett, 479 U.S. at 529, 93 L. Ed. 2d at 928, 107 S. Ct. at 832; Espinoza, 813 F.2d at 123. As is apparent from the language of these decisions, the waiver of the right to counsel.should be viewed in a fundamentally different manner than the invocation of the right to counsel. Where it is not clear whether an individual has invoked his or her right to counsel, it must be presumed that the right was invoked to its fullest extent. (Espinoza, 813 F.2d at 123.) However, where a waiver has allegedly occurred, the alleged waiver must be narrowly construed and every reasonable presumption against waiver must be indulged. (Jackson, 475 U.S. at 633, 89 L. Ed. 2d at 640, 106 S. Ct. at 1409.) A review of the Supreme Court’s opinion in Miranda demonstrates why the two are treated differently. The decision in Miranda was a response to the Court’s recognition that, frequently, the purpose of custodial interrogation is “to subjugate the individual to the will of his examiner.” (Miranda, 384 U.S. at 457, 16 L. Ed. 2d at 714, 86 S. Ct. at 1619.) The Court explained in great detail the types of practices which had been used to accomplish this purpose. (See Miranda, 384 U.S. at 445-57, 16 L. Ed. 2d at 707-13, 86 S. Ct. at 1612-19.) The use of such practices placed the individual being interrogated in a helpless position vis-a-vis the interrogator. (Miranda, 384 U.S. at 455-58, 16 L. Ed. 2d at 712-14, 86 S. Ct. at 1617-19.) To rectify this inequity, the Court fashioned the now well-established Miranda rule. It follows from the Court’s recognition of the special vulnerability of individuals in custody (individuals who may not understand the implications of statements they might make), that any statement made by the individual evincing a desire for counsel should be viewed as an invocation of the individual’s full right to counsel. It similarly follows that any waiver by the same vulnerable individual should be construed narrowly. In both instances, the presumptions act to protect the vulnerable individual from the coercive power of custodial interrogation, precisely what the Court intended to accomplish in fashioning its Miranda rule. In light of the differences between an invocation and a waiver of the right to counsel enunciated by the Supreme Court, it is incorrect to simply assume, as the majority does, that, even where there has been a full invocation of the right to counsel, any knowing and intelligent waiver of the right to counsel (unless the waiver is specifically limited by the individual) opens the door to unfettered custodial interrogation. Instead, I believe that a different approach is called for where the State seeks to use statements made by an individual in a situation such as the one in this case. Under such an approach, once an individual has invoked his or her right to counsel, the State would be required to prove that the individual knowingly and intelligently relinquished his or her right to counsel for all future interrogation, including the right to counsel during interrogation pertaining to unrelated crimes. (See Miranda, 384 U.S. at 475, 16 L. Ed. 2d at 724, 86 S. Ct. at 1628.) In deciding whether the State has met its burden, a court must “ ‘indulge every reasonable presumption against waiver’ ” (Jackson, 475 U.S. at 633, 89 L. Ed. 2d at 640, 106 S. Ct. at 1409, quoting Johnson v. Zerbst (1938), 304 U.S. 458, 464, 82 L. Ed. 1461, 1466, 58 S. Ct. 1019, 1023), and “[d]oubts must be resolved in favor of protecting” the defendant’s right to counsel (Jackson, 475 U.S. at 633, 89 L. Ed. 2d at 640, 106 S. Ct. at 1409). Such an approach, unlike the one set forth in the majority opinion, gives full play to the differences that the Supreme Court has recognized exist between an invocation and a waiver of the right to counsel. Under the approach outlined above, I would find that defendant did not waive his right to have counsel present during the police officer’s interrogation regarding the Fayco Enterprises burglary. Nothing in the record supports any inference that defendant intended to waive this right. All that the record shows is that defendant volunteered statements denying his involvement in the Fayette Service Co-op burglary. (132 Ill. 2d at 491-92.) While this fact certainly supports the inference that defendant knowingly and intelligently waived his right pertaining to the Fayette Service Co-op burglary, it does not support an inference that defendant intended to totally waive his right to counsel during interrogation about other crimes. Viewing the evidence in this case in light of the presumption that favors the preservation of the right of counsel where at all possible, I would find that defendant only waived his right to counsel for interrogation regarding the Fayette Service Co-op burglary and that he did not waive his previously invoked right to counsel for interrogation regarding the Fayco Enterprises burglary. Absent such a waiver, it was improper for the police to interrogate defendant about the Fayco Enterprises burglary. (See Edwards v. Arizona (1981), 451 U.S. 477, 484-85, 68 L. Ed. 2d 378, 386-87, 101 S. Ct. 1880, 1884-85.) Accordingly, I would affirm the trial court’s order suppressing defendant’s statements. JUSTICE STAMOS joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 9737037 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:13:37.727211+00 ===

JUSTICE STAMOS, also dissenting: I concur in Justice Clark’s dissent but write separately to emphasize the significance of (1) the State’s own express limitation on the interrogation’s intended scope when questioning defendant about one crime and (2) the State’s failure, prior to a separate interrogation about another crime, to give defendant any new warning pursuant to Miranda v. Arizona (1966), 384 U.S. 436,16 L. Ed. 2d 694, 86 S. Ct. 1602. This case involves two crimes: the Fayette Service Co-op burglary and the Fayco Enterprises burglary. When the deputy sheriff first interviewed defendant and gave him a Miranda warning, the deputy said that he intended to question defendant about the first crime. Even if defendant’s eventual voluntary statements about the first crime, which were made during a conversation two days after the initial interrogation and one day after defendant’s arraignment, could be considered a waiver of defendant’s previously invoked fifth or sixth amendment right to counsel regarding that crime, they could not logically constitute a waiver of either of those rights as to the second crime. The reason is that defendant had never been given the required Miranda warning of his fifth amendment right as to the second crime. Defendant was never questioned about the second crime until a conversation took place that was completely separate from and subsequent to his interrogation and arraignment for the first crime. The deputy told defendant during the later conversation that he could not talk to defendant “about the case,” meaning the first crime, because defendant had an attorney, who was representing him after arraignment for the first crime. The deputy obviously gave defendant no admonition concerning the second crime. Defendant cannot be deemed to have waived a fifth amendment right of which he was never apprised as to that separately investigated second crime. And, of course, neither had defendant yet accrued a waivable sixth amendment right to counsel or, much less, obtained counsel as to the second crime, because adversary judicial proceedings regarding that crime had not yet begun. See Michigan v. Jackson (1986), 475 U.S. 625, 629-30, 89 L. Ed. 2d 631, 638, 106 S. Ct. 1404, 1407-08; Moran v. Burbine (1986), 475 U.S. 412, 428, 89 L. Ed. 2d 410, 425, 106 S. Ct. 1135,1144. Thus, any waiver regarding the first crime could not fairly be extended to the second; to do so would strip defendant of his rights as to the second before he had ever been given a chance to claim them. As Justice Clark’s dissent notes (132 Ill. 2d at 498-99) in citing Miranda, the purpose of requiring admonitions to defendants is to redress in some degree the imbalance of free wills between interrogator and arrestee in a custodial setting. As Justice Clark also points out (132 Ill. 2d at 499-500), the mere fact that defendant arguably waived a right to counsel about which he had been admonished regarding the first crime hardly compels a conclusion that he was simultaneously waiving a right about which he had not been admonished regarding the second crime. This is particularly true because the police-initiated questioning regarding the second crime was temporally separate, came unexpectedly and after two days of continuing incarceration, and ran contrary to the deputy’s earlier strong implication that questioning would be limited to the first crime. Furthermore, defendant’s confession to the second crime resulted from a direct question by the deputy rather than being volunteered. (The majority’s opinion states that no issue has been raised under the sixth amendment and merely treats defendant’s request for counsel at his arraignment as having constituted invocation of his fifth amendment right. (132 Ill. 2d at 492; cf. 179 Ill. App. 3d 468, 469, 471 (Harrison, J., dissenting).) Despite defendant’s failure to raise a question under the sixth amendment, case law teaches that providing counsel at defendant’s arraignment represented recognition of a right under the sixth amendment, not merely the fifth. (See, e.g., Michigan v. Jackson, 475 U.S. at 629-35, 89 L. Ed. 2d at 638-41, 106 S. Ct. at 1407-10; United States ex rel. Espinoza v. Fairman (7th Cir. 1987), 813 F.2d 117, 123; see also Brewer v. Williams (1977), 430 U.S. 387, 51 L. Ed. 2d 424, 97 S. Ct. 1232 (sixth amendment right operated after arraignment to bar continued custodial interrogation as to a second, related crime).) In any event, whether it was defendant’s fifth or sixth amendment right, or both, that he invoked at arraignment and then arguably waived as to the first crime, he was never given an opportunity to invoke or waive either right in relation to the second crime.) The cases cited by the majority do not weaken these conclusions. Shriner v. Wainwright (11th Cir. 1983), 715 F.2d 1452, involved a defendant who was found not to have requested counsel and was found to have exercised his fifth amendment Miranda right, of which he had been fully admonished three times, to end an interrogation session in relation to a robbery but not as to a murder. He was being questioned from the start of the session about both the murder and the robbery. (See Shriner, 715 F.2d at 1454; Shriner v. State (Fla. 1980), 386 So. 2d 525, 528.) The defendant offered no testimony to rebut the prosecution’s contention that his request to discontinue questioning had applied only to the robbery. Accordingly, the State was held to have scrupulously honored the only right he exercised: the right to discontinue questioning about the robbery. Shriner differs markedly from the present cause. In Shriner, a confession to the second crime (murder) came during a prearraignment interrogation session that involved both crimes and at the inception of which the defendant’s third Miranda warning had been given. (Shriner, 715 F.2d at 1454-55.) Here, the second-crime confession came (1) in a separate session from the one in which a Miranda warning had been given, (2) after arraignment and appointment of counsel for the first crime had occurred (thus implicating the sixth, not merely the fifth, amendment), and (3) even though defendant had been given no separate Miranda warning at all as to the second crime. Despite Shriner’s observations (715 F.2d at 1455) that a limited invocation of Miranda allows continued interrogation except as limited, and that a single invocation of Miranda will not forever bar questioning by all police officers about all subjects, both observations must presuppose that a proper Miranda warning has been given in the first place. Such a warning was decidedly absent as far as questioning the present defendant about his second crime is concerned. Likewise, Colorado v. Spring (1987), 479 U.S. 564, 93 L. Ed. 2d 954, 107 S. Ct. 851, does not control the present cause. In Spring, the defendant had been arrested on weapons charges and was given a Miranda warning before an interrogation session, during which he was asked unexpectedly about a second crime (murder) and made an inculpatory statement. He was then given a second Miranda warning before a subsequent interrogation session pertaining to the murder; at the second session, he confessed to aiding the murder. On appeal, he argued that he had been tricked, in violation of Miranda (Miranda, 384 U.S. at 476, 16 L. Ed. 2d at 725, 86 S. Ct. at 1629), by the State’s failure at the initial interrogation session to inform him of the potential subjects of interrogation before he waived his Miranda right to refuse questions. The Supreme Court held that “mere silence” about the interrogation’s scope did not constitute trickery and that “a valid waiver does not require that an individual be informed of all information ‘useful’ in making his decision or all information that ‘might *** affec[t] his decision to confess.’ [Citation.]” (Spring, 479 U.S. at 576, 93 L. Ed. 2d at 967, 107 S. Ct. at 859, quoting Moran v. Burbine (1986), 475 U.S. 412, 422, 89 L. Ed. 2d 410, 421, 106 S. Ct. 1135, 1141.) Accordingly, in Spring, “the additional information could affect only the wisdom of a Miranda waiver, not its essentially voluntary and knowing nature.” Spring, 479 U.S. at 577, 93 L. Ed. 2d at 967,107 S. Ct. at 859. Unlike the Spring defendant, the present defendant never received a Miranda warning to waive when being questioned about the second crime. Such Miranda warning as he did receive, in a session pertaining to the first crime only, had come two days earlier. It is true that Spring has been interpreted by one court as meaning that police need not give a new Miranda warning each time they question a suspect in continuous custody about a different crime. (United States ex rel. Espinoza v. Fairman (7th Cir. 1987), 813 F.2d 117, 125-26.) However, that statement in Espinoza (which involved a waiver question, not a warning question) appears to be dictum. In any case, the defendants in both Espinoza and Spring received new Miranda warnings at the inceptions of the interrogation sessions during which they confessed to their second crimes. The present defendant did not. The mere fact that, under Espinoza, the present defendant’s initial Miranda invocation as to his first crime might be considered to have carried over to his second interrogation session and to have made another Miranda warning at that session unnecessary could not mean that his presumed Miranda waiver at that session as to the first crime also applied to a Miranda right that had not yet been either extended or invoked as to the second crime. Otherwise, one would have to contend simultaneously that the single presumed waiver was immediately effective to cut off the initial Miranda invocation as to the first crime, but that it was temporarily ineffective to cut off that same “invocation” as to the second. Such temporary ineffectiveness would allow an Espinoza-inspired carryover of the initial Miranda warning and invocation to occur with respect to the second crime, followed instantly by the supposed waiver’s Springing into effect so as to shield from challenge the deputy’s direct inquiry in that same instant regarding the second crime. The fallacy of such tortured reasoning-obvious in its very statement — helps to refute any contention that Spring or the dictum in Espinoza governs the present cause. Besides, as Justice Clark cogently argues, an act that appears to invoke a right to counsel should be construed much more broadly than an act that seems to waive it. Indeed, Spring supports rather than undermines the present defendant’s case: The Spring Court specified that it was “not confronted with an affirmative misrepresentation by law enforcement officials as to the scope of the interrogation” and therefore did not reach “the question whether a waiver of Miranda rights would be valid in such a circumstance.” (Spring, 479 U.S. at 576 n.8, 93 L. Ed. 2d at 967 n.8, 107 S. Ct. at 858 n.8.) In the present cause, when giving his only Miranda warning, the deputy did affirmatively tell defendant that the interrogation would involve the first crime. This may not have been an actual misrepresentation, but, especially given the Supreme Court’s limiting language in Spring, it is asking far too much to read into the present defendant’s presumed Miranda waiver regarding the first crime a similar waiver regarding the second. The fact is that defendant was never apprised of his Miranda rights at the time he was separately questioned about the second crime. Neither Shriner nor Spring warrants a holding that he waived or even could have waived those rights as to that crime freely and knowingly. For the foregoing reasons and those ably set forth by Justice Clark, I respectfully dissent. JUSTICE CLARK joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 2208536 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:30.93208+00 ===

430 N.W.2d 168 (1988)
Warren H. LENZ, Jr., petitioner, Appellant,
v.
Connie P. LENZ, Respondent.
No. C7-87-827.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
October 14, 1988.
Daniel M. Mohs, Albert Lea, for appellant.
Bob A. Goldman, Albert Lea, for respondent.
Considered and decided by the court en banc without oral argument.
OPINION
AMDAHL, Chief Justice.
The petitioner Warren H. Lenz, Jr. obtained further review of a court of appeals' decision reversing a custody award of the minor male child of the parties to the father. We reverse and reinstate the trial court's decision.
Warren and Connie Lenz' short-lived and discordant marriage ended with their separation in December 1984. Their only child, Steven, was approximately 15 months old at that time. Following a bifurcated hearing on the issue of Steven's custody, the trial court concluded that neither parent had been involved with the child enough to be found the primary caretaker. In the absence of a primary caretaker, the trial court awarded custody to the father based on the best interests of the child as recommended in a study prepared by court services. Upon Connie Lenz' appeal, the court of appeals, in a split decision, reversed. Lenz v. Lenz, 415 N.W.2d 355 (Minn.App. 1987).
The scope of review of an appellate court is narrowly defined. Unless clearly erroneous, a trial court's findings must be sustained. Sefkow v. Sefkow, 427 N.W.2d 203 (Minn.1988); Pikula v. Pikula, 374 N.W.2d 705, 710 (Minn.1985); Minn.R.Civ. *169 P. 52.01. In custody determinations, review is limited to whether the trial court abused its discretion by making findings unsupported by the evidence or improperly applying the law. Sefkow, 427 N.W.2d at 210 (citing Pikula, 374 N.W.2d at 710).
Our review of the record leads to the conclusion that the trial court's finding that neither parent was the primary caretaker was adequately supported by the evidence of record. While we would prefer more extensive findings on the child's best interests, the trial court's determination that neither parent was the primary caretaker closely parallels the extensive court services study and therefore was inappropriately overturned on appeal.
We conclude that the court of appeals erred in substituting its judgment for that of the trial court, identifying the mother as the primary caretaker of the parties' minor child and awarding custody to her. We therefore reverse the court of appeals and reinstate the trial court's decision.
REVERSED.

=== CASE 9737042 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:13:51.036695+00 ===

Gillis, P.J.
Plaintiff appeals as of right from the trial court’s order granting defendant’s motion for partial summary disposition. We affirm.
Defendant moved for summary disposition pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(8), failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted, and MCR 2.116(C)(10), no genuine issue of material fact. Although the trial court’s order and the hearing transcript are silent as to which provision was utilized in granting defendant’s motion, the trial court considered portions of certain depositions in granting defendant’s motion. Consequently, we will treat the trial court’s ruling as though it was made pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(10).
A motion for summary disposition under MCR 2.116(C)(10) tests the factual support for a claim. Morganroth v Whitall, 161 Mich App 785, 788; 411 NW2d 859 (1987). In ruling on this motion, the trial court must consider not only the pleadings, but also depositions, affidavits, admissions, and other documentary evidence. Id. The trial court should be liberal in finding a genuine issue of material fact and must give the benefit of any *774reasonable doubt to the nonmoving party. Id. Summary disposition is appropriate only if the court is satisfied that it is impossible for the nonmoving party’s claim to be supported at trial because of a deficiency which cannot be overcome. Id. We note that a party opposing a motion brought under subrule 10 may not rest upon the allegations or denials of his pleadings, but must come forward with evidence to establish the existence of a material factual dispute. Id. See also MCR 2.116(G)(4). If the nonmoving party fails to establish that a material fact is at issue, the motion is properly granted. Morganroth, supra, p 789.
Plaintiff was seriously injured in 1975 when an automobile struck her as she was crossing a street at an intersection. One of plaintiff’s most serious injuries was a nonunion fracture of the tibia in her right leg. Plaintiff has been hospitalized numerous times, has worn several casts, and has been fighting a constant infection in that area since 1979. Defendant, the insurer of the vehicle which struck plaintiff, has paid benefits to plaintiff in an amount over $100,000.
In the relevant portion of her complaint, plaintiff alleged that she called defendant to complain about its failure to pay certain benefits and was connected with Mr. Cooper, defendant’s employee. Mr. Cooper told plaintiff that she "should consider having her leg amputated” and acquiring an artificial leg "so that she could get on with her life.” Plaintiff also alleged that when she told Cooper that she would not consider having her leg amputated because "that would be giving up,” Cooper told her that she would not be giving up and defendant would be there to help her. Plaintiff further alleged that in order to induce her to amputate her leg, Cooper told her that an artificial leg was not that bad and that he knew so because *775his nephew and another female insured had had their legs amputated. Plaintiff alleged that Cooper intentionally made these statements for the purpose of coercing her to have her leg amputated so that defendant would no longer be required to expend large sums on plaintiff’s medical treatments for her right leg. Plaintiff further claimed that Cooper’s statements were outrageous, went beyond all possible bounds of decency, and were made for the express purpose of causing her severe emotional distress.
In Roberts v Auto-Owners Ins Co, 422 Mich 594; 374 NW2d 905 (1985), our Supreme Court declined to decide whether this state should recognize the tort known as intentional infliction of emotional distress, holding that the plaintiffs in that case had failed to present a prima facie case of such a claim. Nonetheless, this Court has recognized such a tort, as has the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals. Coogan v City of Wixom, 820 F2d 170 (CA 6, 1987); Bhama v Bhama, 169 Mich App 73; 425 NW2d 733 (1988); Dickerson v Nichols, 161 Mich App 103; 409 NW2d 741 (1987); Margita v Diamond Mortgage Corp, 159 Mich App 181; 406 NW2d 268 (1987); Rosenberg v Rosenberg Bros Special Account, 134 Mich App 342; 351 NW2d 563 (1984); Ledsinger v Burmeister, 114 Mich App 12; 318 NW2d 558 (1982); Frishett v State Farm Mutual Automobile Ins Co, 3 Mich App 688; 143 NW2d 612 (1966), lv den 378 Mich 733 (1966). All of these cases, including Roberts, define the tort of intentional infliction of emotional distress by referring to 1 Restatement Torts, 2d, § 46, pp 71-72. Its elements are: (1) extreme or outrageous conduct, (2) which intentionally or recklessly, (3) causes (4) extreme emotional distress. Id. Extreme or outrageous conduct has further been defined as conduct so outrageous in character and so extreme in degree that it goes *776beyond all possible bounds of decency and is regarded as atrocious and utterly intolerable in a civilized community. 1 Restatement Torts, 2d, § 46, Comment d, pp 72-73. Moreover, liability will not be found for mere insults, indignities, threats, annoyances, petty oppressions, or other trivialities. Id. The rough edges of our society still need a good deal of filing down and, in the meantime, plaintiffs must necessarily be expected and required to be hardened to a certain amount of rough language and to occasional acts that are definitely inconsiderate and unkind. Id. The law will not intervene in every case where a plaintiff’s feelings are hurt. Id.
In her deposition, plaintiff testified that on December 20, 1983, she attempted to contact Ted Woltjer, the claims agent assigned to her, to determine why an aide she had hired was not being reimbursed by defendant and why certain bills were not being paid. Plaintiff was upset because she had just told her twenty-year-old and nineteen-year-old sons as well as her fourteen-year-old daughter that she was unable to provide anything for Christmas because she had used her money to pay her aide for her services. Plaintiff was recently divorced and received social security benefits in the amount of $338.60 per month. Plaintiff also received aid for dependent children in the amount of $280 per month. Plaintiff had also recently had a bone graft from her hip onto her right tibia to help heal the nonunion fracture. Because Woltjer was unavailable, plaintiff was connected with Cooper, Woltjer’s supervisor. Plaintiff asked Cooper why Woltjer was not paying some of her bills or paying her aide, when the doctor required that she have one. Cooper told plaintiff that Woltjer would have to review the claims again and then pay them if necessary.
Thereafter, plaintiff stated that Cooper began *777talking about his nephew, who had been in an accident and had had his leg amputated. Cooper stated that his nephew was "well-adjusted” and that he could do things for himself. Cooper then asked plaintiff if she had "ever thought of having it [her leg] off’ or if she had ever "considered having it off.” Plaintiff told Cooper that she had not thought of having her leg removed because she had been fighting for some period of time to save it. Plaintiff hung up the telephone after Cooper told her that he would have Woltjer return her call. Nonetheless, plaintiff confirmed the remaining allegations in her complaint concerning the conversation.
Cooper’s remark made plaintiff realize that she could in fact lose her leg. Plaintiff began pacing up and down on her crutches trying to "figure out what to do.” Plaintiff was also upset because her children had heard her side of the conversation and her daughter had accused plaintiff of being a liar because she was not informed that plaintiff’s condition might require amputation. Plaintiff was irritated that Cooper told her that he could sympathize with her efforts to save her leg because he had not been through her experiences. Plaintiff claimed that she "tore her house apart.” Plaintiff calmed down her daughter and told her sons that she had to leave. Plaintiff borrowed a friend’s new car and drove around some back roads drinking. Plaintiff was tired of fighting to get her bills paid and decided to take her pills with the alcohol she was drinking and drive her friend’s car off the road. Plaintiff drank a bottle of rum and one-half bottle of whiskey. Plaintiff ended up at another friend’s house after doing three 360-degree turns in the car. When that friend attempted to take plaintiff’s keys, plaintiff got mad, told him to leave her alone because he could hot understand her *778problems, and drove to a third friend’s home. There, plaintiff talked for three hours and left. Plaintiff could not remember going to the last friend’s home or the conversation she had. Plaintiff woke up in her bed, but could not remember how she got there. Plaintiff’s children told her that she came home at 4 a.m. Plaintiff had not had an episode like this before or since Cooper’s statements.
In his deposition, Cooper claimed that he only spoke to plaintiff during the telephone call. Cooper made notes during the conversation which stated that plaintiff was going to have a total knee replacement. Cooper asked plaintiff why she was going to the Detroit area for treatment when she lived in the Grand Rapids area. Plaintiff responded that she was going to do everything she could to save her leg. Cooper told her that he could understand her desire to save her leg. Cooper then described a situation where a young man had had a nonunion fracture and had done everything that plaintiff had done, but that he had had to have his leg amputated. This man was not Cooper’s relative and had later reported that he felt well because he was not having continuous infections. Cooper denied suggesting that plaintiff have her leg amputated.
Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to plaintiff, the trial court held that Cooper’s comments regarding the possibility of amputation were not outrageous and, in any event, were not made intentionally or recklessly for the purpose of causing plaintiff severe emotional distress. We agree. During a conversation with plaintiff concerning her injuries, Cooper related stories about similar situations where the individuals had opted for amputation. He then asked plaintiff whether she had ever considered this procedure. Plaintiff *779indicated that she had not and to do so would be giving up. Cooper indicated that plaintiff would not be giving up and that defendant would pay for such procedures. While Cooper’s remarks as described by plaintiff were insensitive, we believe that as a matter of law they did not go beyond all possible bounds of decency and should not be regarded as atrocious and utterly intolerable in a civilized community.
Affirmed.
H. R. Gage, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9737043 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:13:51.042067+00 ===

Murphy, J.
(dissenting). I respectfully dissent because I believe that Cooper’s comments asking plaintiff whether she considered having her leg amputated go well beyond being characterized merely as "insensitive.” Rather, in the context in which the comments were made, I believe they can be found by reasonable minds to be outrageous and recklessly made. Therefore, summary disposition of plaintiff’s claim is not only unjustified by the record developed by plaintiff below, but it improperly denies plaintiff her day in court where a jury should be allowed to assess the validity of her tort claim.
Indeed, in ruling on defendant’s motion for summary disposition, the lower court was required to give plaintiff the benefit of any reasonable doubt and then determine if the record which might be developed would leave open an issue upon which reasonable minds might differ. Moreover, the court had to be satisfied that it would be impossible for the claim to be supported at trial because of some deficiency which could not be overcome. See Tidwell v Dasher, 152 Mich App 379; 393 NW2d 644 (1986). In addition, appellate courts in this state have been liberal in finding that a "genuine issue” *780does indeed exist. Rizzo v Kretschmer, 389 Mich 363, 372; 207 NW2d 316 (1973); Linebaugh v Berdish, 144 Mich App 750, 754; 376 NW2d 400 (1985).
With these standards in mind, I simply cannot agree with the majority that, as a matter of law, no reasonable minds could differ that plaintiff had not yet or would not be able to develop facts to support her claim of intentional infliction of emotional distress.
Although our Supreme Court in Roberts v Auto-Owners Ins Co, 422 Mich 594; 374 NW2d 905 (1985), did not formally adopt the tort of intentional infliction of emotional distress into this state’s jurisprudence, the Court acknowledged that the tort had gained widespread acceptance, in a variety of factual contexts, in the courts of our sister states.1 The Court in Roberts held that the plaintiff in that case had failed to make out a prima facie claim for relief under the theory of intentional infliction of emotional distress. However, the Court proceeded to identify the four elements comprising a prima facie claim: (1) extreme and outrageous conduct; (2) intent or recklessness; (3) causation; and (4) severe emotional distress. The Court derived these elements from 1 Restatement Torts, 2d, § 46, pp 71-72, which states:
(1) One who by extreme and outrageous conduct intentionally or recklessly causes severe emotional distress to another is subject to liability for such *781emotional distress, and if bodily harm to the other results from it, for such bodily harm.
In discussing the first element, extreme and outrageous conduct, the Roberts Court quoted with agreement the following comment from 1 Restatement Torts, 2d, § 46, Comment d, pp 72-73:
Liability has been found only where the conduct has been so outrageous in character, and so extreme in degree, as to go beyond all possible bounds of decency, and to be regarded as atrocious, and utterly intolerable in a civilized community. Generally, the case is one in which the recitation of the facts to an average member of the community would arouse his resentment against the actor, and lead him to exclaim, "Outrageous!” [Roberts, supra, p 603.]
See also Deitz v WOMETCO West Michigan TV, Inc, 160 Mich App 367, 381; 407 NW2d 649 (1987); Margita v Diamond Mortgage Corp, 159 Mich App 181; 406 NW2d 268 (1987), and Early Detection Center, PC v New York Life Ins Co, 157 Mich App 618, 625-626; 403 NW2d 830 (1986).
The Restatement also discusses the second element of intent or recklessness:
The rule stated in this Section applies where the actor desires to inflict severe emotional distress, and also where he knows that such distress is certain, or substantially certain, to result from his conduct. It applies also where he acts recklessly ... in deliberate disregard of a high degree of probability that the emotional distress will follow. [1 Restatement Torts, 2d, §46, Comment i, p 77. Emphasis added.]
It is unquestioned that the extreme and outrageous character of the challenged conduct may *782arise from the abuse of a relationship which puts the defendant in a position of actual or apparent authority over the plaintiff or gives a defendant power to affect a plaintiffs interest. Margita, supra; Warren v June’s Mobile Home Village & Sales Inc, 66 Mich App 386; 239 NW2d 380 (1976). In fact, a claims adjustor or supervisor who makes decisions regarding insurance benefits to which a claimant may be entitled, including medical care benefits, is in such an authoritative relationship with a claimant.
The record below sufficiently establishes that defendant’s agent was in some position of authority over plaintiff. Clearly, defendant’s decisions whether to pay plaintiff certain benefits had a strong impact on her day-to-day ability to deal with her leg injury. In addition, Wendall Cooper, as a claims supervisor, is presumably knowledgeable about claim procedures in general and aware of the expenses associated with various types of medical treatments. Moreover, he is most likely cognizant of the emotional and psychological concerns of seriously injured claimants and was apparently familiar with plaintiff’s claim file, including her long-term history of costly medical treatment. It is certainly conceivable that defendant would be responsible for fewer and less costly future medical expenses and related benefit expenses had plaintiffs leg been amputated.
The record also clearly shows that plaintiff has endured years of extreme pain and suffering from the numerous operations and the various forms of rehabilitation she has had to undergo in order to save her leg. She has been required to wear casts and braces on her leg and has found it necessary to use both crutches and a wheelchair. She has continuously fought infection at the site of the nonunion fracture and has been required to take a *783considerable amount of pain medication. Furthermore, at the time of the telephone conversation with Cooper, defendant had again been dilatory in the payment of benefits due plaintiff and she had been preparing herself both physically and mentally for yet another painful operation to save her leg.
In light of these facts, I believe that reasonable minds might agree that Cooper’s comments were, not only outrageous, but that they were made in deliberate disregard of the high degree of probability that emotional distress would follow. Therefore, in my opinion, summary disposition should not have been granted and plaintiff should be allowed her day in court. Accordingly, I would reverse and remand for further proceedings.
In fact, the Michigan Court of Appeals has recognized the tort of intentional infliction of emotional distress and the Sixth Circuit, following Michigan law, has accepted the definition found in 1 Restatement Torts, 2d, § 46, pp 71-72. Coogan v City of Wixom, 820 F2d 170 (CA 6, 1987); see Bhama v Bhama, 169 Mich App 73; 425 NW2d 733 (1988); Dickerson v Nichols, 161 Mich App 103; 409 NW2d 741 (1987); Margita, supra; Rosenberg v Rosenberg Bros Special Account, 134 Mich App 342; 351 NW2d 563 (1984); Ledsinger v Burmeister, 114 Mich App 12; 318 NW2d 558 (1982); Frishett v State Farm Mutual Automobile Ins Co, 3 Mich App 688; 143 NW2d 612 (1966), lv den 378 Mich 733 (1966).

=== CASE 9737044 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:13:52.780594+00 ===

The opinion of the Court was delivered by
COLEMAN, J.
This appeal involves a conviction for second-degree vehicular homicide, N.J.S.A. 2C:ll-5b, based on defendant’s reckless operation of her motor vehicle. The State relied on intoxication and other evidence such as speed to establish that defendant recklessly operated her motor vehicle. The jury was not asked to state the basis for its finding of recklessness. The sentencing provision for vehicular homicide mandates a minimum term of imprisonment for defendants who were intoxicated at the time of the offense and such “minimum term shall be fixed at, or between, one-third and *79one-half of the sentence imposed by the court or three years, whichever is greater, during which the defendant shall be ineligible for parole.” N.J.S.A. 2C:ll-5b(l). The trial court found that defendant should be sentenced as if the offense were third-degree, found that defendant was intoxicated, and sentenced defendant to imprisonment for three years subject to parole ineligibility of three years. The issue before us is whether the jury should have been required to determine the sentence enhancement factor — the intoxication. We hold that the jury was not required to make that determination.
I.
In February 1997, defendant Traci Stanton invited her boyfriend, her brother, and her sister-in-law, Nancy Smith, to her house to play cards and drink beer. Defendant admitted drinking approximately one and one-half bottles of beer, although her brother recalled defendant drinking between three and five beers. At approximately 11:30 p.m., defendant drove her Porsche to purchase more beer while Smith rode in the front passenger seat. After purchasing the beer, defendant and Smith dropped off the beer at defendant’s house and proceeded to Smith’s home to pick up her dog. On their way to Smith’s home, defendant was unable to steer her car around a turn with the result that her vehicle left the road and struck a tree near the right shoulder of the road. The police arrived on the scene shortly before 1:00 a.m. and found the vehicle “completely on its roof.” While treating defendant and before removing her from the vehicle, an emergency medical technician (EMT) discovered a beer bottle “[wjithin four inches” of defendant’s head. Smith was found underneath the trunk of the car on the passenger side of the vehicle. She died as a result of the extensive injuries suffered during the accident.
The morning following the accident defendant was interviewed by Officer Priole. At that time she stated that she had been driving between sixty and sixty-five miles per hour and that neither she nor Smith had been wearing a seatbelt. The posted *80speed limit was fifty miles per hour, but the recommended speed at the site of the accident was only thirty-five miles per hour. Defendant admitted that she and Smith had been drinking beer in the car.
A grand jury indicted defendant for second-degree vehicular homicide, N.J.S.A. 2C:ll-5. In addition, the police issued defendant summonses for several motor vehicle offenses, including driving while intoxicated (DWI), in violation of N.J.S.A. 39:4-50; reckless driving, in violation of N.J.S.A. 39:4-96; consumption of alcohol while driving, in violation of N.J.S.A. 39:4-51a; and failure to wear a seatbelt, in violation of N.J.S.A. 39:3-76.2f. The vehicular homicide was tried to a jury while the non-indictable offenses were tried simultaneously before the judge. At the close of all the evidence, the trial court instructed the jury that the State must prove beyond a reasonable doubt the elements of the vehicular homicide offense. The jury found defendant guilty of second-degree vehicular homicide, contrary to N.J.S.A 2C:ll-5b.
The trial judge, sitting without the jury, addressed the alleged motor vehicle violations. She found defendant guilty of all of the offenses except the DWI on which she reserved decision until sentencing on the vehicular homicide conviction. At sentencing, the judge first addressed the charge of driving while intoxicated and determined that “the defendant must have consumed substantially more than two or three beers as everyone remember[ed]” and that “[t]he manner in which the accident occurred ... corroborate[d] the fact that she was driving under the influence.” Based on the evidence presented during the vehicular homicide trial, the judge found that the proofs convinced her beyond a reasonable doubt that defendant was guilty of driving while intoxicated.
Following the trial court’s denial of defendant’s motion for a new trial, defendant was sentenced on the vehicular homicide charge. After evaluating the aggravating and mitigating factors, the judge sentenced defendant as if the second-degree offense were a third-degree crime and imposed the three-year parole ineligibility term mandated by N.J.S.A. 2C:ll-5b(l). The manda*81tory parole ineligibility term was applied because the judge found defendant was intoxicated at the time she committed the vehicular homicide.
Defendant appealed her vehicular homicide conviction, claiming her conviction should be reversed based on alleged trial error. She also contended that N.J.S.A. 2C:ll-5b(l) was unconstitutional because it permits a judge to find an element of vehicular homicide — intoxication—by a preponderance of the evidence, rather than by a jury beyond a reasonable doubt. The Appellate Division affirmed in part and reversed in part. State v. Stanton, 339 N.J.Super. 1, 770 A.2d 1198 (2001).
The court applied the constitutional doubt doctrine and held that the three-year mandatory minimum sentence was unconstitutionally imposed because the issue of defendant’s intoxication had not been decided by the jury. Id. at 6, 770 A.2d 1198. The panel interpreted this Court’s holding in State v. Johnson, 166 N.J. 523, 766 A.2d 1126 (2001), to mean that
if imposition of a statutorily mandated parole ineligibility term is based on the existence of a fact other than a record of a prior conviction, then, as a matter of the imperatives of the Fifth and Sixth Amendments, that fact must be found by a jury beyond a reasonable doubt. Thus, if that fact is not a discrete element of the offense which the jury must find in order to convict, then it must be submitted to the jury for its determination.
[Stanton, supra, 339 N.J.Super, at 6-7, 770 A.2d 1198.]
The Appellate Division recognized that “there is a textual difference between [the vehicular homicide’s mandatory minimum parole ineligibility,] N.J.S.A. 2C:ll-5b(2)[,] and the corresponding NERA provision [requiring a defendant to serve eighty-five percent of a sentence for committing a violent crime,] N.J.S.A. 2C:43-7.2.” Stanton, supra, 339 N.J.Super. at 7, 770 A.2d 1198. Specifically, “NERA omits any reference to the standard of proof necessary to establish the parole-ineligibility fact, and it does not say whether the fact-finder is the judge or jury.” Ibid. On the other hand, N.J.S.A. 2C:ll-5b(2) “specifies that the finding must only meet the preponderance of the evidence standard and provides that the finding must be made by the ‘court’ — presumably *82the judge.” Ibid. Despite this difference, the Appellate Division was
convinced that if constitutional principles require the NERA provision to be read as mandating a jury finding of the NERA predicate fact beyond a reasonable doubt in order for that statute to survive constitutional challenge, then, by the same token, N.J.S.A 2C:ll-5b(2) can survive constitutional challenge only if it.is read in the same way.
Ubm
In other words, “[t]he Johnson holding, as we understand it, applies to every statute imposing a mandatory parole ineligibility term because of the capacity of that term to increase real time.” Ibid. Rather than declare N.J.S.A. 2C:ll-5b(2) unconstitutional, the Appellate Division elected to engage in “judicial surgery” to sustain the statute on “an assumption that the Legislature intended to act in a constitutional manner, ... [stating:] That can only be done by excising ... the references to the preponderance standard and the court’s findings and then construing the excised statute as Johnson construed NERA.” Id. at 7-8, 770 A.2d 1198.
According to the procedure articulated in State v. DeLuca, 108 N.J. 98, 111, 527 A.2d 1355, cert. denied, New Jersey v. DeLuca, 484 U.S. 944, 108 S.Ct. 331, 98 L.Ed.2d 358 (1987), the trial judge was required to decide the DWI offense after the jury returned a verdict on vehicular homicide. Ibid. Although the DWI offense was not tried to a jury, each element of that offense, including intoxication, still had to be found beyond a reasonable doubt. Ibid. The Appellate Division found that although both N.J.S.A 2C:ll-5b and N.J.S.A. 39:4-50 define intoxication identically, the principles set forth in Johnson still required a jury finding of intoxication beyond a reasonable doubt. Stanton, supra, 339 N.J.Super. at 8-9, 770 A.2d 1198. The panel reasoned that even though “the judge found intoxication beyond a reasonable doubt [that] does not mean that the jury either did[,] or would have[,] [because] it was free to attribute the fatal accident to speeding alone and there was evidence on which it could have found that defendant was not intoxicated.” Ibid. As a remedy, the Appellate Division vacated the three-year parole disqualifier but affirmed defendant’s conviction, stating that it was “satisfied that *83there was no reversible error attending the jury verdict of guilt of vehicular homicide.” Id. at 9, 770 A.2d 1198. The panel remanded to the trial court with the direction that the judgment of conviction should be modified by vacating the parole ineligibility term. Ibid.
Defendant’s petition for certification was denied. State v. Stanton, 169 N.J. 609, 782 A.2d 427 (2001). The State’s cross-petition for certification challenging the Appellate Division’s vacation of the three-year parole disqualifier was granted. Ibid. While this appeal was pending, the United States Supreme Court granted certiorari in Harris v. United States on December 10, 2001. 534 U.S. 1064, 122 S.Ct. 663, 151 L.Ed.2d 578 (2001). We heard oral arguments on January 2, 2002, and decided to withhold disposition until Harris was decided. Harris was decided on June 24, 2002. Harris v. United States, 536 U.S. 545, 122 S.Ct. 2406, 153 L.Ed.2d 524 (2002). After supplemental briefs were filed with this Court, the case was reargued before us on November 18, 2002.
II.
The State argues that the Appellate Division erred in interpreting Johnson to require that the jury, rather than the judge, had to decide whether defendant was intoxicated before the sentence enhancement statute could be applied. In its supplemental brief, the State maintains that “[t]he decision of the United States Supreme Court in Harris [, supra, 536 U.S. 545, 122 S.Ct. 2406, 153 L.Ed.2d 524,] mandates a reversal of the Appellate Division in this case.” The State contends “that the mandatory parole term required under N.J.S.A. 2C:11-5b(l) when a vehicular homicide is committed by an individual who is under the influence of alcohol fully complies with all federal and state constitutional principles.”
A.
Our analysis of the issues presented must begin with the vehicular homicide statute and its sentencing provisions. The *84current vehicular homicide statute that has been in effect since 1995 provides:
a. Criminal homicide constitutes vehicular homicide when it is caused by driving a vehicle or vessel recklessly.
b. Except as provided in [N.J.S.A. 2C:ll-5b(3) ], vehicular homicide is a crime of the second-degree.
(1) If the defendant was operating the auto or vessel while under the influence of any intoxicating liquor, narcotic, hallucinogenic or habit-producing drug, or with a blood alcohol concentration at or above the prohibited level as prescribed in R.S.39:4-50, or if the defendant was operating the auto or vessel while his driver’s license or reciprocity privilege was suspended or revoked for any violation of R.S.39:4-50, section 2 of P.L.1981, c. 512 (C.39:4-50.4a), by the Director of the Division of Motor Vehicles pursuant to P.L.1982, c. 85 (C.39:5-30a et seq.), or by the court for a violation of R.S.39:4-96, the defendant shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment by the court. The term of imprisonment shall include the imposition of a minimum term. The minimum term shall be fixed at, or between, one-third and one-half of the sentence imposed by the court or three years, whichever is greater, during which the defendant shall be ineligible for parole.
(2) The court shall not impose a mandatory sentence pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection unless the grounds therefor have been established at a hearing. At the hearing, which may occur at the time of sentencing, the prosecutor shall establish by a preponderance of the evidence that the defendant was operating the auto or vessel while under the influence of any intoxicating liquor, narcotic, hallucinogenic or habit-producing drug, or with a blood alcohol concentration at or above the level prescribed in R.S.39:4-50 or that the defendant was operating the auto or vessel while his driver’s license or reciprocity privilege was suspended or revoked for any violation of R.S.39:4-50, section 2 of P.L.1981, c. 512 (C.39:4-50.4a), by the Director of the Division of Motor Vehicles pursuant to P.L.1982, c. 85 (C.39:5-30a et seq.), or by the court for a violation of R.S.39:4-96. In making its findings, the court shall take judicial notice of any evidence, testimony or information adduced at the trial, plea hearing, or other court proceedings and shall also consider the presentence report and any other relevant information.
[NJ.S.A 2C:11-5a, -5b(1) and (2).]
Subsection a describes what constitutes the offense of vehicular homicide. The “[prescribed culpability requirement applies to all material elements” of the offense. N.J.S.A. 2C:2-2c(l). Intoxication in combination with other evidence or standing alone may satisfy the recklessness element. State v. Jamerson, 153 N.J. 318, 335, 708 A.2d 1183 (1998); State v. LaBrutto, 114 N.J. 187, 204, 553 A.2d 335 (1989); State v. Casele, 198 N.J.Super. 462, 472, 487 A.2d 765 (App.Div.1985). In other words, a defendant’s sobriety or insobriety is only one of several circumstances a *85jury is permitted to consider when deciding whether the element of recklessness, as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:2-2b(3), has been established beyond a reasonable doubt. LaBrutto, supra, 114 N.J. at 204, 553 A.2d 335; see State v. Dively, 92 N.J. 573, 583 n. 7, 458 A.2d 502 (1983). Some of the other circumstances, other than intoxication, that are considered in relation to recklessness regardless of whether or not the operator was intoxicated are excessive speed, weather and lighting conditions, and known substantial safety defects in the motor vehicle or vessel. See, e.g., DeLuca, supra, 108 N.J. at 109, 527 A.2d 1355.
Subsection b of the statute focuses on the sentencing provisions for a second-degree vehicular homicide. That subsection mandates a minimum period of incarceration for a defendant convicted of vehicular homicide if that defendant is found by a judge, after conducting a hearing prescribed by N.J.S.A. 2C:ll-5b(2), to have been intoxicated at the time of the offense. In order to better understand the critical issue raised, with respect to the sentence enhancement, we must give context to the procedural framework in which the issue is presented.
B.
This is a typical case in which a defendant charged with vehicular homicide also is likely to be charged with DWI and other Title 39 offenses. To avoid double jeopardy based on “multiple punishments for the same offense,” DeLuca, supra, 108 N.J. at 102, 527 A.2d 1355 (internal citations omitted), the vehicular homicide and the Title 39 offenses must be consolidated for disposition. A jury hears the indictable-vehicular homicide as well as lesser-included disorderly and petty disorderly persons offenses. State v. Muniz, 118 N.J. 319, 327-32, 571 A.2d 948 (1990). Although Title 39 offenses such as DWI and careless driving are lesser-included offenses of the indictable-vehicular homicide offense for the purposes of the Double Jeopardy Clause, they are heard by the judge presiding over the jury trial who must “base his or her decision on the proofs adduced in the course of the *86[vehicular homicide] charge.” DeLuca, supra, 108 N.J. at 111, 527 A.2d 1355; Muniz, supra, 118 N.J. at 331 n. 1, 571 A.2d 948. Nonetheless, a defendant is entitled to have the jury instructed, as occurred in this case, that there are lesser-ineluded motor vehicle offenses for which the judge must decide defendant’s guilt or innocence. Muniz, supra, 118 N.J. at 332, 571 A.2d 948; State v. Brown, 228 N.J.Super. 211, 224, 549 A.2d 462 (App.Div.1988), rev’d on other grounds, 118 N.J. 595, 573 A.2d 886 (1990). Consistent with' the foregoing long-established policy and Rule 3:15-3, the jury in this case decided the vehicular homicide charge and the judge decided the Title 39 offenses, including the DWI. Needless to say, the judge applied the required beyond a reasonable doubt standard. See State v. Emery, 27 N.J. 348, 353, 142 A.2d 874 (1958).
Not infrequently, the State will rely on intoxication alone, or in combination with other circumstantial evidence, to establish the recklessness element of vehicular homicide. When intoxication is the sole basis to establish reckless operation of a motor vehicle or vessel before the jury, and if the jury convicts the defendant of vehicular homicide, the role of the judge in finding intoxication for sentence enhancement under N.J.S.A. 2C:11-5b(2) is simple. No hearing is required, for unless the judge accepts the jury’s finding of intoxication, the jury verdict cannot stand and there can be no DWI conviction. DeLuca, supra, 108 N.J. at 111, 527 A.2d 1355.
But when a defendant is on trial for both vehicular homicide and DWI and the State relies on intoxication and other circumstantial evidence to establish recklessness, unless a special interrogatory is submitted to the jury, there is no way of knowing the basis for the jury’s finding of recklessness. Under the existing law, no purpose would be served by special interrogatories. The recklessness element does not require juror unanimity when mixed evidence of recklessness is presented. See, e.g., State v. Frisby, 174 N.J. 583, 596-600, 811 A.2d 414 (2002); State v. Camacho, 153 N.J. 54, 69-72, 707 A.2d 455 (1998), cert. denied, 525 U.S. 864, 119 S.Ct. 153, 142 L.Ed.2d 125 (1998). Nor is a special interrogatory helpful in a *87merger context for two reasons. First, merger is not required when there is mixed evidence of recklessness such as excessive speed and intoxication. DeLuca, supra, 108 N.J. at 109, 527 A.2d 1355; State v. Baumann, 340 N.J.Super. 553, 556-57, 775 A.2d 3 (App.Div.2001); State v. Mara, 253 N.J.Super. 204, 213-14, 601 A.2d 718 (App.Div.1992); State v. Devlin, 234 N.J.Super. 545, 553-54, 561 A.2d 280 (App.Div.), certif. denied, 117 N.J. 653, 569 A.2d 1348 (1989); State v. Travers, 229 N.J.Super. 144, 151, 550 A.2d 1281 (App.Div.1988). Second, even when the DWI merges with vehicular homicide, the sentencing court must nonetheless impose the DWI penalties. State v. Wade, 169 N.J. 302, 303, 777 A.2d 346 (2001); Baumann, supra, 340 N.J.Super. at 556-57, 775 A.2d 3, Travers, supra, 229 N.J.Super. at 150-51, 550 A.2d 1281.
Here, the State relied on mixed evidence to prove recklessness, and because there is no right to trial by jury on DWI and other Title 39 charges, Blanton v. North Las Vegas, 489 U.S. 538, 543-44, 109 S.Ct. 1289, 1293, 103 L.Ed.2d 550, 556 (1989); State v. Hamm, 121 N.J. 109, 112-30, 577 A.2d 1259 (1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 947, 111 S.Ct. 1413, 113 L.Ed.2d 466 (1991); State v. Graff, 121 N.J. 131, 135, 577 A.2d 1270 (1990), the trial judge decided the Title 39 offenses, except the DWI, immediately after the jury convicted defendant of vehicular homicide. The judge thereafter conducted the sentence enhancement hearing simultaneously with deciding the DWI charge. After finding defendant guilty of DWI, the judge used that finding of intoxication to impose the mandatory three-year term on the vehicular homicide conviction.
III.
Next, we consider whether the federal or New Jersey constitution requires the jury, rather than the judge, to make the determination whether defendant was intoxicated for sentence enhancement purposes. The Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment “protects the accused against conviction except upon proof beyond a reasonable doubt of every fact necessary to *88constitute the crime with which he is charged.” In re Winship, 397 U.S. 358, 364, 90 S.Ct. 1068, 1073, 25 L.Ed.2d 368, 375 (1970). Although Article I of the New Jersey Constitution does not specifically enumerate the right to due process, it protects “ ‘values like those encompassed by the principiéis] of due process.’ ” Doe v. Poritz, 142 N.J. 1, 99, 662 A.2d 367 (1995) (internal citations omitted). The right to trial by jury of all serious crimes (indictable offenses in New Jersey) is guaranteed by the United States Constitution, art. Ill, § 2, cl. 3 and the Sixth Amendment, which has been made applicable to the states through the Fourteenth Amendment. Duncan v. Louisiana, 391 U.S. 145, 88 S.Ct. 1444, 20 L.Ed.2d 491 (1968).
A similar right to trial by jury is guaranteed under the New Jersey Constitution. N.J. Const, art. I, ¶ 9. “Hence, an accused is constitutionally entitled to have a jury find each ... element [of the offense charged] beyond a reasonable doubt before he or she is convicted.” State v. Anderson, 127 N.J. 191, 200, 603 A.2d 928 (1992). But there is no right to trial by jury of DWI or other Title 39 offenses because they are not deemed to be serious enough. Blanton, supra, 489 U.S. at 543-44, 109 S.Ct. at 1293, 103 L.Ed.2d at 556-57; Hamm, supra, 121 N.J. at 111, 577 A.2d 1259, Graff, supra, 121 N.J. at 135, 577 A.2d 1270. In view of those constitutional principles, the issue in this case is whether intoxication is truly a sentence enhancer under N.J.S.A 2C:11-5b(2) or an element of vehicular homicide.
A.
There is no litmus test for determining what is an element of a crime. Hence, we begin our analysis with the New Jersey Code of Criminal Justice, N.J.S.A 2C:1-1 to 104-9 (Code). N.J.S.A. 2C:1-14h defines an element of an offense as follows:
“Element of an offense” means (1) such conduct or (2) such attendant circumstances or (3) such a result of conduct as
(a) Is included in the description of the forbidden conduct in the definition of the offense;
*89(b) Establishes the required kind of culpability;
(c) Negatives an excuse or justification for such conduct;
(d) Negatives a defense under the statute of limitations; or
(e) Establishes jurisdiction or venue.
[Ibid.]
The focus in this appeal respecting the vehicular homicide will be on N.J.S.A. 2C:l-14h(l), (2), (3)(a) and (b). Because the issue of whether a sentence enhancement factor should be decided by the jury is intertwined with whether such a factor is an element of the offense tried before the jury, an initial review of recent United States Supreme Court decisions in this area will be informative.
B.
We disagree with Justice Zazzali’s dissent concluding “that when the finding of any fact triggers imposition of a minimum period of imprisonment a jury must find that fact beyond a reasonable doubt.” Post at 105, 820 A.2d at 655. Under that holding, he would invalidate many mandatory parole ineligibility statutes, including Vehicular Homicide, N.J.S.A. 2C:11-5b(l) and b(2); the Repeat Sex Offender Act, N.J.S.A 2C:14-6; the Three Strikes Law, N.J.S.A. 2C:43-7.1a and 7.2; the Graves Act, N.J.S.A. 2C:43-6c; and the criteria for extended term sentences, N.J.S.A. 2C:44-3. His reliance on our State Constitution ignores six prongs of a seven-part standard “for determining when to invoke our State Constitution as an independent source for protecting individual rights.” State v. Hunt, 91 N.J. 338, 363-68, 450 A.2d 952 (1982) (Handler, J., concurring). The dissent refers only to the textual language and does not analyze the legislative history, preexisting state law addressing sentence enhancement factors and parole ineligibility terms, structural differences between the federal and our State Constitutions, whether sentence enhancement and parole ineligibility are peculiar to New Jersey and do not require a uniform national policy, New Jersey’s history and tradition of providing trial by jury where such a right does not exist at common law or by statute, or distinctive public attitudes, which are less important than the other six components. Id. at *90362-68, 450 A.2d 952. Here, the dissenters’ use of our State Constitution to require a jury trial on the issue of intoxication as a predicate to parole ineligibility “spring[s] from pure intuition ... rather [than] from a process that is reasonable and reasoned.” Id. at 367, 450 A.2d 952.
We also disagree with the dissenters’ reliance on this Court’s decision in Johnson, supra, 166 N.J. 523, 766 A.2d 1126, to support their conclusion that a jury trial is required on all factual predicates for parole ineligibility terms. The reference in Johnson to the fact that a term of parole ineligibility is the “ ‘real time’ ” was intended by the Court merely to strengthen the constitutional doubt holding by demonstrating the difference between an eighty-five percent NERA term and other parole disqualifiers that are generally capped at fifty percent of the base term. Id. at 541, 766 A.2d 1126 (quoting State v. Mosley, 335 N.J.Super. 144, 157, 761 A.2d 130 (App.Div.2000), certif. denied, 167 N.J. 633, 772 A.2d 934 (2001)). To the extent that Johnson can be read in any way to suggest that jury trials are required on sentence enhancement factors when there is no constitutional doubt, we disavow that suggestion.
The dissent is based on the apparent belief that the sentence of three years without parole eligibility is too harsh. However, the Legislature has graded the crime committed by defendant second degree, and that represents “a legislative recognition of how harmful society perceives this crime to be.” State v. Thomas, 166 N.J. 560, 575, 767 A.2d 459 (2001). In order to reach the unwarranted conclusion that N.J.S.A. 2C:ll-5b(l) and b(2) are unconstitutional, the dissent mistakenly treats intoxication, which is a sentence enhancement factor, as if it were an element of second-degree vehicular homicide.
Similarly, we disagree with Justice Long’s dissent in which she concludes that intoxication is an element of second-degree vehicular homicide. That conclusion is based on a self-created chart in which she describes the offense involved in the present case as an “enhanced second-degree vehicular homicide” that involves intoxi*91cation as an element. Such an offense is not designated in the Code. Judges and Justices are not permitted to create criminal offenses. The essence of her dissent is the same as that expressed by Justice Zazzali: that every sentence enhancement factor becomes an element of the offense that must be decided by a jury. Such a conclusion is not supported by federal or state law.
The United States Supreme Court has addressed the issue whether certain conduct is a sentence enhancement factor or an element of the offense. McMillan v. Pennsylvania, 477 U.S. 79, 91, 106 S.Ct. 2411, 2419, 91 L.Ed.2d 67, 79 (1986), involved a statute that designated “visible possession of a firearm” as a sentencing enhancement factor. That statute required the judge to impose a minimum term of five years if the enhancer was present. Id. at 81,106 S.Ct. at 2413, 91 L.Ed.2d at 73. The Court held that the Constitution did not require Pennsylvania to treat the sentence enhancer as an element of the offense. Id. at 91,106 S.Ct. at 2419, 91 L.Ed.2d at 79. The Court reasoned that “link[ing] the ‘severity of punishment’ to ‘the presence or absence of an identified fact’ ” did not automatically make that fact an “element.” Id. at 84-85, 106 S.Ct. at 2415, 91. L.Ed.2d at 75 (quoting Patterson v. New York, 432 U.S. 197, 214, 97 S.Ct. 2319, 2329, 53 L.Ed.2d 281, 294 (1977)). Significantly, the Court observed that “the state legislature’s definition of the elements of the offense is usually dispositive[.]” McMillan, supra, 477 U.S. at 85, 106 S.Ct. at 2415, 91 L.Ed.2d at 75.
The Court in Almendarez-Torres v. United States, 523 U.S. 224, 118 S.Ct. 1219, 140 L.Ed.2d 350 (1998), recognized that Congress is best equipped to determine which factors are sentencing factors and which are elements of the offense. Id. at 228, 118 S.Ct. at 1223, 140 L.Ed.2d at 358. The Almendarez-Torres Court clearly rejected the “rule that any significant increase in a statutory maximum sentence would” [invoke the] constitutional ‘elements’ requirement. Id. at 247, 118 S.Ct. at 1232, 140 L.Ed.2d at 370.
A year later in Jones v. United States, 526 U.S. 227, 119 S.Ct. 1215, 143 L.Ed.2d 311 (1999), the Supreme Court began to *92examine mandatory-minimum-sentencing statutes under the constitutional doubt doctrine. Id. at 229, 119 S.Ct. at 1217, 143 L.Ed.2d at 317. The constitutional doubt doctrine states that when possible, a statute will be interpreted so that it does not conflict with the Constitution. Id. at 239, 119 S.Ct. at 1222, 143 L.Ed.2d at 323; United States ex rel. Attorney General v. Delaware & Hudson Co., 213 U.S. 366, 408, 29 S.Ct. 527, 536, 53 L.Ed. 836, 849 (1909). Jones concluded that when a statute can be construed in two ways, one of which creates constitutional questions and the other of which does not, a court is under a duty to adopt the interpretation that does not violate the constitution. Jones, supra, 526 U.S. at 239, 119 S.Ct. at 1222, 143 L.Ed.2d at 323.
The Court in Jones held that provisions of a carjacking statute that established higher penalties to be imposed when the offense resulted in serious bodily injury or death were not merely sentencing considerations but were additional elements of the offense. Id. at 233, 119 S.Ct. at 1219, 143 L.Ed.2d at 319. The Court stated that when a statute is unclear with respect to whether or not the factor is an element of the offense or a penalty aggravator, the Court should look to other federal and state statutes for guidance. Id. at 234-38, 119 S.Ct. at 1220-21, 143 L.Ed.2d at 320-23. The Court in Jones -determined that, in other federal and state statutes, serious bodily injury was considered an element rather than a sentencing factor. Id. at 239, 119 S.Ct. at 1222, 143 L.Ed.2d at 323. Therefore, the Court held that serious bodily injury was an element a jury must find beyond a reasonable doubt. Id. at 251-52,119 S.Ct. at 1228,143 L.Ed.2d at 330-32.
Before the next case reached the Supreme Court, we decided State v. Apprendi, 159 N.J. 7, 731 A.2d 485 (1999), rev’d, 530 U.S. 466, 120 S.Ct. 2348, 147 L. Ed.2d 435 (2000). There, we had to determine whether our hate-crime sentence enhancer, N.J.S.A. 2C:44-3e, violated the Due Process Clause. Defendant pled guilty to two second-degree offenses of possession of a weapon for an unlawful purpose. Apprendi, supra, 159 N.J. at 10, 731 A.2d 485. *93The ordinary sentence range for those offenses was between five and ten years. N.J.S.A. 2C:43-6a(2). The statute permitted an enhanced sentence in any case in which “[t]he defendant in committing the crime acted with a purpose to intimidate an individual or group of individuals because of race, color, gender, handicap, religion, sexual orientation or ethnicity.” N.J.S.A 2C:44-3e.1 That sentence enhancer exposed the defendant to a sentence that could double the ordinary sentence for those offenses. We held that because the hate-crime statute resembles McMillan, our “statute plainly does not transgress the limits set out in Patterson [regarding] due process of law---- There is simply no indication that the legislature restructured its criminal code and sentencing structures in an attempt to ‘evade’ the commands of Winship, swpra.” Apprendi, supra, 159 N.J. at 23-24, 731 A.2d 485. “A finding of biased motive or purpose to intimidate ... is a very traditional sentencing factor.” Id. at 24, 731 A.2d 485. A dissenting member of the Court, however, concluded that because the sentence enhancer focused on the defendant’s mental state at the time of the offense and was so “integral” to it, “it must be characterized as an element thereof.” Id. at 30, 731 A.2d 485 (Stein, J., dissenting].
The Supreme Court granted certiorari in Apprendi v. New Jersey and decided the case in 2000. 530 U.S. 466, 120 S.Ct. 2348, 147 L.Ed.2d 435. The Court held that our hate-crime statute is unconstitutional because the motive required for enhancing the penalty was essentially an element. Apprendi, supra, 530 U.S. at 492-93, 120 S.Ct. at 2364, 147 L.Ed.2d at 456-57. The Court in Apprendi concluded that by increasing the defendant’s maximum sentencing exposure based on a judge’s finding under a preponderance of the evidence standard, the hate-crime statute violated the defendant’s due process. Ibid. The Court also held that “[o]ther than the fact of a prior conviction, any fact that increases the penalty for a crime beyond the prescribed statutory maximum *94must be submitted to a jury, and proved beyond a reasonable doubt.” Id. at 490, 120 S.Ct. at 2362-63,147 L.Ed.2d at 455. The Court expressly stated that it was not overruling McMillan but “limiting] its holding to cases that do not involve the imposition of a sentence more severe than the statutory maximum for the offense established by the jury’s verdict — a limitation identified in the McMillan opinion itself.” Apprendi, supra, 530 U.S. at 487 n. 13,120 S.Ct. at 2361 n. 13, 147 L.Ed.2d at 453 n. 13.
The Supreme Court’s decision in Apprendi created a quagmire of unanswered questions in respect of whether trial judges are permitted to determine sentence enhancement factors. Indeed, this Court in Johnson, supra, 166 N.J. at 540, 766 A.2d 1126, found that Apprendi had created constitutional doubt regarding our No Early Release Act, N.J.S.A. 2C:43-7.2 (NERA), that “provides for mandatory minimum sentences for convictions constituting ‘violent crimes’ as defined by that statute.” Johnson, supra, 166 N.J. at 527, 766 A.2d 1126. We observed that although no direct constitutional question was presented in Johnson, as the parties had suggested, a question of statutory interpretation was presented, and “depending on how we interpret subsection (e) of NERA, could raise constitutional concerns” under the decisions of the United States Supreme Court. Id. at 540, 766 A.2d 1126. “If we interpret subsection (e) to require a jury to make the ‘violent crime’ finding beyond a reasonable doubt, we will have allayed any concern that NERA violates the Winship doctrine.” Ibid. Consequently, we held that
[b]eeause of the uncertainty expressed by the U.S. Supreme Court respecting the continuing vitality of McMillan, and the broad understanding of ‘punishment’ recognized by this Court, we will construe subsection (e) of NERA to require that the ‘violent crime’ condition must be submitted to a jury and found beyond a reasonable doubt. To do otherwise would be to subject NERA to constitutional challenge.
[Id. at 543-44, 766 A.2d 1126 (footnote omitted).]
In an apparent attempt to stem the confusion occurring across . the country in the aftermath of Apprendi with respect to whether McMillan had been overturned, the Supreme Court granted certiorari in Harris, supra, and decided the case on June 24, 2002. *95536 U.S. 545, 122 S.Ct. 2406, 153 L.Ed.2d 524. The defendant in Harris was convicted for drug trafficking under 18 U.S.C.A. § 924(c)(1)(A), which provided that a person who uses or carries a firearm during a drug trafficking crime, “shall, in addition to the punishment ... (i) be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not less than five years; (ii) if the firearm is brandished, be sentenced to ... not less than 7 years; and (iii) if the firearm is discharged, to be sentenced to ... not less than 10 years.” Harris, supra, 536 U.S. at 550-51, 122 S.Ct. at 2410-11, 153 L.Ed.2d at 533. The Supreme Court held that subsection 924(c)(1)(A) defines a single offense and thus “brandishing” or “discharging” a firearm were sentencing factors that did not require a finding by a jury, but could be determined by the judge. Harris, supra, 536 U.S. at 556, 122 S.Ct. at 2414, 153 L.Ed.2d at 537. The Court reaffirmed McMillan in the following clear language:
McMillan and Apprendi are consistent because there is a fundamental distinction between the factual findings that were at issue in those two cases. Apprendi said that any fact extending the defendant’s sentence beyond the maximum authorized by the jury’s verdict would have been considered an element of an aggravated crime — and thus the domain of the jury — by those who framed the Bill of Rights. The same cannot be said of a fact increasing the mandatory minimum (but not extending the sentence beyond the statutory maximum), for the jury’s verdict has authorized the judge to impose the minimum with or without the finding. As McMillan recognized, a statute may reserve this type of factual finding for the judge without violating the Constitution.
[Ibid]
The Harris Court thus retreated from the position it seemingly had taken in Apprendi wherein the Court appeared to move away from a long tradition of sentencing jurisprudence that restricted the role of the jury to determining the elements of the offense charged and leaving it to the legislature to structure judicial sentencing. In that respect, the Court stated:
That a fact affects the defendant’s sentence, even dramatically so, does not by itself make it an element.
Read together, McMillan and AppreTidi mean that those facts setting the outer limits of a sentence, and of the judicial power to impose it, are the elements of the crime for the purposes of the constitutional analysis. Within the range authorized by the jury’s verdict, however, the political system may channel judicial discre*96tion — and rely upon judicial expertise — by requiring defendants to serve minimum terms-after judges make certain factual findings. It is critical not to abandon that understanding at this late date. Legislatures and their constituents have relied upon McMillan to exercise control over sentencing through dozens of statutes like the one the Court approved in that ease____We see no reason to overturn these statutes or cast uncertainty upon the sentences imposed under them.
[Id. at 567-68,122 S.Ct. at 2419-20,153 L.Ed.2d at 544-45.]
Now that constitutional doubt has been removed from the analysis, which was part of defendant’s Due Process Clause claim, we must now decide whether intoxication was an element of vehicular homicide.
IV.
Given the absence of any litmus test for determining the elements of a particular offense, we turn again to the Code. N.J.S.A. 2C:l-14h instructs that we first examine the statute that makes certain conduct an offense. A vehicular homicide is defined as the death of another person that “is caused by driving a [motor] vehicle or- vessel recklessly.” N.J.S.A. 2C:ll-5a. As such, that second-degree offense has three elements: 1) that the defendant operated a motor vehicle or vessel, 2) that the defendant’s operation of that motor vehicle or vessel caused the death of another person, and 3) that the death of the victim was caused by the defendant’s reckless operation of the motor vehicle or vessel. See, e.g., Casele, supra, 198 N.J.Super. at 472, 487 A.2d 765. “[P]roof of defendant’s intoxication (or blood alcohol concentration) [is] a fact not required for the proof of [vehicular homicide], N.J.S.A. 2C:ll-5.” DeLuca, supra, 108 N.J. at 108, 527 A.2d 1355. Rather than being an element of the offense, intoxication was used in this case as “a mere circumstance to be considered in determining whether” defendant had acted recklessly. Wilson v. State, 60 N.J.L. 171, 184, 37 A. 954 (E. & A. 1897). Not only was intoxication not an element of vehicular homicide, unlike some offenses, it could not have been used in this case to “[negate] an element of the [vehicular homicide] offense.” N.J.S.A. 2C:2-8a; State v. Cameron, 104 N.J. 42, 51, 514 A.2d 1302 (1986). As the Supreme Court observed in Harris, the fact that intoxication *97“affects the defendant’s sentence, even dramatically so, does not by itself make it an element.” Harris, supra, 536 U.S. at 566, 122 S.Ct. at 2419, 153 L.Ed.2d at 544. Moreover, intoxication does not increase the penalty for vehicular homicide beyond the statutory maximum prescribed for that offense.
V.
Justice Albin in Part I of his dissent has mistakenly concluded that DWI is a lesser-included offense of vehicular homicide in order to justify his conclusion that defendant is entitled to a jury trial on DWI and reckless driving. That dissent fails to recognize that our law draws a distinction between, on the one hand, consolidating DWI and other Title 39 offenses with indictable offenses under the Code to avoid the bar of the Double Jeopardy Clause and, on the other hand, classifying DWI and other Title 39 offenses as lesser-included offenses of indicted Code offenses under N.J.S.A. 2C:l-8 so as to trigger a right to trial by jury. The blurring of that distinction by the dissent is contrary to the express will of the Legislature for more than three-quarters of a century and the constitutional jurisprudence of this State.
Not only was there no request to charge the jury that it had to decide the Title 39 offenses, the judge instructed the jury without objection that the judge would decide them. Consistent with what always has been our law, the court instructed the jury “that there are motor vehicle charges now pending against the defendant. The law requires that I alone decide those motor vehicle charges and I will do so after you have returned your verdict. Obviously your verdict should not depend on how you think I would decide the motor vehicle charges.” The jury trial issue was not raised in the Appellate Division. That issue was raised, for the first time, during the post-Harris oral argument, and even then, it was restricted to an assumption that intoxication is an element of vehicular homicide. Point I of Justice Albin’s dissent, however, does not depend on a finding that intoxication is an element of vehicular homicide and therefore must be decided by a jury. His *98sua sponte conclusion that DWI and other Title 39 offenses should be decided by the jury impaneled to try the vehicular homicide “converts us from the Court of last resort ... to some sort of super rescue-mission.” Whitfield v. Blackwood, 101 N.J. 500, 501, 502 A.2d 1132 (1986) (Clifford, J., concurring).
Historically, one accused of an indictable offense in New Jersey has a constitutional right to an indictment by a grand jury, N.J. Const, art. I, ¶ 8, and if indicted, to a trial by an impartial petit jury. N.J. Const, art. I, ¶ 9; State v. Maier, 13 N.J. 235, 250, 99 A.2d 21 (1953). Motor vehicle offenses such as DWIs fall within the generic category of petty offenses that do not fit within the Code’s definition of a lesser-included criminal offense. See N.J.S.A. 2C:1-14k; In re Buehrer, 50 N.J. 501, 517-19, 236 A.2d 592 (1967).
The rationale at common law for lesser-included criminal offenses being covered by an indictment is based on the notion that the grand jury considered the lesser offense as an ingredient of the greater criminal offense. State v. Johnson, 30 N.J.L. 185, 186 (Sup.Ct.1862). The lesser-included criminal offense must be of “the same general character as that charged” in the indictment. Ibid. In other words, the lesser-included criminal offense must be for a lower-degree offense that “is necessarily included in the higher one charged in the indictment,” State v. Staw, 97 N.J.L. 349, 350, 116 A. 425 (E. & A.1922) (citation omitted), or a “necessary ingredient” of the indicted offense, State v. Talley, 94 N.J. 385, 388, 466 A.2d 78 (1983). Hence, by 1942 there was a “well-established rule that the accused may be convicted of any crime of a lesser grade or degree, provided it is an ingredient of the greater offense alleged [in the indictment] and is therefore included therein.” State v. Newman, 128 N.J.L. 82, 84, 24 A.2d 206 (Sup.Ct.1942) (citation omitted). The foregoing common law rationale was adopted in the pre-Code case of State v. Saulnier, 63 N.J. 199, 205, 306 A.2d 67 (1973), holding that “a defendant may be found guilty of a lesser [criminal] offense ... included in the greater offense charged in the indictment.... ”
*99The Code embodies the statutory and common law with respect to criminal offenses. Title 39, on the other hand, of which DWI is a part, is referred to as “Motor Vehicles and Traffic Regulation.” N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 to:13-8. DWI is proscribed at N.J.S.A. 39:4-50 and it is a part of Article 9 that relates to “Operation of or Acts Affecting Operation of Vehicles and Street Cars.” In contrast, the Code relates to criminal conduct exclusively. Toward that end, the Code establishes a framework for prosecuting multiple criminal offenses. It provides that “[w]hen the same [criminal] conduct of a defendant may establish the commission of more than one [criminal] offense, the defendant ... may not ... be convicted of more than one offense if ... [o]ne offense is included in the other, as defined in subsection d. of this section.” N.J.S.A. 2C:1-8a(l). Subsection d states: “A defendant may be convicted of [a criminal] offense included in an offense charged whether or not the included offense is an indictable [criminal] offense.” N.J.S.A. 2C:1-8d. Subsection e instructs the trial court not to “charge the jury with respect to an included offense unless there is a rational basis for a verdict convicting the defendant of the included [criminal] offense.” N.J.S.A. 2C:l-8e. Clearly, all of N.J.S.A. 2C:1-8 applies to criminal offenses and not traffic-regulatory offenses.
The Code classifies three types of criminal offenses: 1) crimes of the first, second, third and fourth degree, 2) disorderly persons offenses, and 3) petty disorderly persons offenses. N.J.S.A. 2C:1-4a and b. Some of the crimes, disorderly persons and petty disorderly persons offenses are defined in statutes of this State outside the Code. When such statutes outside the Code declare a criminal offense to be a misdemeanor and “provides a maximum penalty of six months’ imprisonment or less, ... such provision shall constitute a disorderly persons offense.” N.J.S.A. 2C:l-4e. Generally, when other non-Code criminal offenses are described as misdemeanors without specifying a maximum term of imprisonment, those offenses “constitute for purpose of sentence a crime of the fourth degree.” N.J.S.A. 2C:43-lb; N.J.S.A 2C:l-5b. Non-Code criminal offenses “designated as a high misdemeanor shall *100constitute for the purpose of sentence a crime of the third degree.” N.J.S.A. 2C:43-lb.
Although DWI was a misdemeanor when first enacted, L. 1909, c. 127, it was reduced to a disorderly persons offense four years later. L. 1913, c. 67; State v. Hamm, supra, 121 N.J. at 119, 577 A.2d 1259. Finally, in 1921 “the Legislature downgraded DWI to a motor-vehicle offense, reaffirming and expanding the penalties in the 1913 law. L. 1921, c. 208, § 14(3), p. 665.” Hamm, supra, 121 N.J. at 120, 577 A.2d 1259. Consequently, since 1921, DWI and other Title 39 offenses have been characterized as “petty offenses.” State v. Senno, 79 N.J. 216, 223, 398 A.2d 873 (1979); State v. Macuk, 57 N.J. 1, 9, 268 A.2d 1 (1970). For example, this Court stated half a century ago that reddess driving violated a regulatory code and was not an offense within the contemplation of the New Jersey constitutional double jeopardy provision. State v. Shoopman, 11 N.J. 333, 340, 94 A.2d 493 (1953). Thus, “[t]he legislative and judicial history of DWI in New Jersey shows ... its consistent treatment as a non-criminal offense.” Hamm, supra, 121 N.J. at 129, 577 A.2d 1259.
The Code provides that “[t]he provisions of the Code not inconsistent with those of prior laws shall be construed as a continuation of such laws.” N.J.S.A. 2C:l-le. Guided by that rule of construction, we reaffirm our view that under the plain language of the Code, DWI and other Title 39 offenses are not “included criminal offenses.” In view of the legislative policy reflected in the Code and in Title 39 “with respect to the joinder of lesser-included offenses, the Code standards do not permit, and the common-law policies do not require, the ... submission to and disposition by a jury of motor vehicles violations in conjunction with its determination of offenses under the Code” when Title 39 offenses are consolidated with an indictable offense for trial. Muniz, supra, 118 N.J. at 331-32, 571 A.2d 948.
DWI and other Title 39 offenses are consolidated for trial with indicted offenses, not because they are lesser-included criminal offenses of the crimes charged in an indictment, but because our *101jurisprudence and Rule 3:15 — 3(a)(1) require consolidation of even Title 39 offenses to avoid double jeopardy problems. State v. DeLuca, supra, 108 N.J. at 102-111, 527 A.2d 1355; State v. Dively, supra, 92 N.J. at 578, 458 A.2d 502. When consolidation of criminal offenses is required to avoid double jeopardy problems, the jury must decide lesser-included crimes as well as disorderly and petty disorderly persons offenses because they are criminal offenses and it is presumed that the grand jury would have intended to include them within the four corners of the indictment. Viewed in that context, the indictment provides sufficient notice to the defendant. The same fact finder, the jury in a jury trial, must decide all of the criminal offenses — the indicted and the lesser-included criminal offenses — as required by the Code. N.J.S.A 2C:l-8d and e; R. 3:15-3(a)(2).
Requiring consolidation of all offenses for trial that are “based on the same conduct or arising from the same episode,” R. 3:15-3(a), to avoid double jeopardy problems, is not dispositive of whether the jury hearing the indicted offense or the presiding judge should decide the lesser offense. Although Dively, supra, 92 N.J. at 586, 458 A.2d 502, held that motor vehicular violations are subject to the Double Jeopardy Clause, that case did not indicate who should decide the Title 39 offenses after consolidation with the indicted offense. The Court in DeLuca acknowledged that various procedures had been suggested for handling “the death-by-auto charge, which may be tried before a jury and the DWI charge, as to which there is no right to trial by jury.” DeLuca, supra, 108 N.J. at 111, 527 A.2d 1355. Based on the absence of a constitutional right to trial by jury on the DWI offense, the Court protected the constitutional right to trial by jury on the death-by-auto and required the presiding judge to decide the Title 39 offense just as a municipal court judge would. Ibid. That principle was reaffirmed two and a half years later in Muniz, supra, 118 N.J. at 331-32, 571 A.2d 948. That was a reasonable and efficient accommodation that implements a defendant’s constitutional right to trial by jury. As noted previously, because Title 39 offenses are afforded double jeopardy protection, *102they must be consolidated with indicted offenses, but they are not lesser-included offenses under N.J.S.A. 2C:l-8.
Recognizing the need to retain separation between two competing constitutional strains, see State v. Johnson, 171 N.J. 192, 205, 793 A.2d 619 (2002); State v. Welsh, 84 N.J. 346, 354, 419 A.2d 1123 (1980), the Court in DeLuca and Muniz enforced the Double Jeopardy Clause without imposing a new requirement of a right to trial by jury for Title 39 offenses when no such right has existed at least since 1913 when DWI was downgraded from a misdemean- or to a disorderly persons offense. Unlike the dissent, we believe that “ ‘[l]aws, like houses, lean on one another.’” State v. Papasavvas, 170 N.J. 462, 522, 790 A.2d 798 (2002) (Coleman, J., dissenting) (quoting Edmund Burke, Tracts Relating to Popery Laws (1765), reprinted in IX The Writings and Speeches of Edmund Burke 452, 453 (Paul Langford et al. eds.1991)). The dissent’s conclusion that there should be a jury trial on the Title 39 offenses has no foundation in our Constitution, the jurisprudence of this Court, Rule 3:15-3, or legislative enactments. Hence, the dissent’s conclusion represents a drastic and an unwarranted departure from the existing law. Any change in the law to require trial by jury on DWI and other Title 39 offenses “should properly be by legislative, rather than judicial, judgment.” Hamm, supra, 121 N.J. at 129, 577 A.2d 1259.
VI.
We conclude, therefore, that because there is no right to trial by jury on a DWI offense or on the issue of intoxication for sentence enhancement purposes, because there is substantial credible evidence in the record to support the judge’s determination of intoxication, and because there is no constitutional doubt following Harris, the Appellate Division erred in vacating the three-year term of parole ineligibility.
The judgment of the Appellate Division is reversed and the judgment of the Law Division is reinstated.
*103LONG, J., dissenting.
Whatever else may be encompassed within the notion of “element of an offense,” it must, as a matter of logic and common sense incorporate a description of the forbidden conduct. N.J.S.A. 2C:ll-5 sets forth three entirely separate vehicular homicide offenses, each describing different conduct that the Legislature sought to interdict. The constituent elements of each of those offenses are as follows:
Offense Elements
First-degree vehicular homicide (10-20 year term)
Enhanced second-degree vehicular Homicide (5-10 year term with a mandatory three-year parole disqualifier)
Second-degree vehicular homicide (5-10 year term)
1. Causing death
2. Driving a vehicle recklessly
3. While intoxicated or while license revoked
4. On school property or a school crossing
1. Causing Death
2. Driving a vehicle recklessly
3. While intoxicated or while license revoked
1. Causing Death
2. Driving a vehicle recklessly
As is evident from that diagram, the statute describes three discrete offenses on an escalating scale of seriousness. The level of seriousness is directly related to the accelerating egregiousness of the defendant’s conduct. That conduct, in turn, is expressed by the number of elements in each offense. The ordinary second-degree offense has two elements — causing death and driving recklessly; the enhanced second-degree offense with mandatory parole ineligibility adds a third — intoxication; and the first-degree offense adds a fourth — school premises. The substance of the scheme could not be clearer, yet the Court allows the Legislature to wink and call intoxication in the enhanced second-degree offense a sentencing factor, thus removing it from the jury’s ambit.
At the very least, and as a matter of ordinary statutory interpretation, when a term is used more than once in a statute, it *104should have the same meaning and status in both places. Because it is conceded that intoxication is an element of the first-degree offense, how can it not be an element of the enhanced second-degree offense? The result is that a defendant charged with first-degree vehicular homicide, is entitled to a jury determination on intoxication whereas a defendant charged with enhanced second-degree vehicular homicide is not. There is no logical justification for such a scheme.
One final note, the majority’s suggestion that I have impermissibly “created” a criminal offense in my structural dissection of N.J.S.A. 2C:ll-5 is wide of the mark. Every act of statutory interpretation, the point of which is eschewing formalism in favor of substance, is exactly such a “creation.” That is what we are here for — to strip away artifice and lay bare the statutory scheme for what it is.
For the reasons I have expressed, I therefore dissent, joining my colleagues Zazzali and Albin.
Justices ZAZZALI and ALBIN join in this dissent.
This section of the statute was deleted by amendment P.L.2001, c. 443.

=== CASE 9737045 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:13:52.789318+00 ===

ZAZZALI, J.,
dissenting.
The State may not subject a citizen to criminal punishment unless it affords that citizen a trial by jury in which guilt is proved beyond a reasonable doubt. Because I believe that the majority has denied that right in this appeal, I respectfully dissent.
Today, one year after the Appellate Division vacated defendant’s parole disqualifier, the Court orders her back to prison to serve a twenty-six month term of incarceration. That term represents the balance of the three-year mandatory minimum sentence imposed as a result of the trial court’s determination that defendant was intoxicated when she committed vehicular homicide. Because a jury did not make that finding beyond a reasonable doubt, I believe that defendant’s imminent re-incarceration violates the jury trial protections of our State Constitution.
Consistent with the sentiments expressed by this Court in State v. Johnson, 166 N.J. 523, 766 A.2d 1126 (2001), as well as the *105broader protections we traditionally have afforded defendants under article 1, paragraphs 9 and 10 of the New Jersey Constitution, I would hold that when the finding of any fact triggers imposition of a minimum period of imprisonment a jury must find that fact beyond a reasonable doubt. Accordingly, I would hold unconstitutional on its face N.J.S.A. 2C:ll-5b(2), the statutory provision that sets forth the procedures by which the three-year mandatory minimum term at issue is imposed.
I
The right to trial by jury is “one of the most cherished rights in the long history of our Anglo-American jurisprudence.” State v. Ingenito, 87 N.J. 204, 210, 432 A.2d 912 (1981). It encompasses fundamental principles of fairness and due process that circumscribe a state’s power to punish criminal conduct. In re Winship, 397 U.S. 358, 364, 90 S.Ct. 1068, 1073, 25 L.Ed.2d 368, 375 (1970) (holding that Due Process Clause of Fourteenth Amendment “protects the accused against conviction except upon proof beyond a reasonable doubt of every fact necessary to constitute the crime for which he is charged”); State v. Anderson, 127 N.J. 191, 200, 603 A.2d 928 (1992)(noting that jury trial right is intertwined with right to due process of law); Ingenito, supra, 87 N.J. at 216 n. 5, 432 A.2d 912 (stating that “many of the concerns we have expressed in the jury context implicate broader due process concerns”). More specifically, it grants the criminally accused the right to have a jury determine whether the prosecution has proved beyond a reasonable doubt all of the facts to which criminal liability attaches. Anderson, supra, 127 N.J. at 200-01, 603 A.2d 928; Ingenito, supra, 87 N.J. at 213, 432 A.2d 912. Because the jury trial right is the paramount restraint on the government’s broad power to punish, we long have held that the severity of the punishment authorized by law is the “only reliable test” for determining when that right attaches.2 State v. Owens, 54 N.J. *106153, 160, 254 A.2d 97 (1969), cert. denied, Owens v. New Jersey, 396 U.S. 1021, 90 S.Ct. 593, 24 L.Ed.2d 514 (1970). See Anderson, supra, 127 N.J. at 205-06, 603 A.2d 928; State v. Hamm, 121 N.J. 109,112, 577 A.2d 1259 (1990), cert. denied, Hamm v. New Jersey, 499 U.S. 947, 111 S.Ct. 1413, 113 L.Ed.2d 466 (1991); Ingenito, supra, 87 N.J. 204, 213-14, 432 A.2d 912 (1981); In re Buehrer, 50 N.J. 501, 517-18, 236 A.2d 592 (1967).
We recently emphasized the constitutional significance of punishment in Johnson. In that case, we suggested that the proper benchmark for ascertaining whether a defendant’s jury trial right attaches is the length of the prison term, or “real time,” imposed pursuant to a mandatory minimum sentence. Johnson, supra, 166 N.J. at 541-42, 766 A.2d 1126. By adopting the reasoning of Harris v. United States, 536 U.S. 545, 122 S.Ct. 2406, 153 L.Ed.2d 524 (2002), however, the majority has abandoned this Court’s focus on a defendant’s “real time.”
The majority bases its denial of the jury trial right in part on its classification of intoxication as a sentencing factor rather than as an element of an offense. Ante at 97-98, 820 A.2d at 650. Similarly, the majority endorses the Harris plurality’s distinction between factual findings that increase a defendant’s maximum possible punishment, as in Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U.S. 466, 120 S.Ct. 2348, 147 L.Ed.2d 435 (2000), from those that trigger a mandatory minimum term of imprisonment, ■ as in McMillan v. Pennsylvania, 477 U.S. 79, 106 S.Ct. 2411, 91 L.Ed.2d 67 (1986). Ante at 95-97, 820 A.2d at 649-650. Because the severity of the punishment imposed is the proper measure of whether the jury *107trial right attaches, I find no principled basis for such distinctions. See Johnson, supra, 166 N.J. at 541-42, 766 A.2d 1126.
In Harris, a majority of the Supreme Court consisting of Justice Breyer and four dissenting Justices expressly rejected the view that a mandatory minimum term triggers any less constitutional scrutiny than an enhanced maximum term in respect of the right to a jury trial. Although Justice Breyer concurred in the Harris Court’s judgment that a fact that triggers a mandatory minimum generally does not need to be proved to a jury beyond a reasonable doubt, his concurrence was consistent with his dissenting opinion in Apprendi. In that dissent, he argued that jury trial protections should not necessarily attach to proof of facts that extend a defendant’s permissible sentencing range. See Apprendi, supra, 530 U.S. at 561, 120 S.Ct. at 2400, 147 L.Ed.2d at 498 (Breyer, J., dissenting). Thus, Justice Breyer would withhold the protection of a jury trial irrespective of whether a mandatory minimum or an extended maximum term is implicated. Harris, supra, 536 U.S. at 567-68, 122 S.Ct. at 2420, 153 L.Ed.2d at 544 (“I cannot agree with the plurality’s opinion insofar as it finds such a distinction [between Apprendi and Harris ].”)(Breyer, J., concurring in part and concurring in the judgment); see also Apprendi supra, 530 U.S. at 563-64, 120 S.Ct. at 2401, 147 L.Ed.2d at 500 (“I do not understand why, when a legislature authorizes a judge to impose a higher penalty ... a new crime is born; but where the legislature requires a judge to impose a higher penalty than he otherwise would (within a preexisting statutory range) based on similar criteria, it is not.”)(Breyer, J., dissenting). Justice Thomas, joined in dissent in Harris by Justices Stevens, Souter, and Ginsburg, also rejected the plurality’s distinction between those factual predicates that extend the outer limit of a sentence and those that trigger a mandatory minimum prison term. Harris, supra, 536 U.S. at 574, 122 S.Ct. at 2423, 153 L.Ed.2d at 549. (“[Sjuch fine distinctions with regard to vital constitutional liberties cannot withstand close scrutiny.”)(Thomas, J., dissenting). Thus, in contrast to the majority in this appeal, a majority of the Harris Court would decline to condition the right to a jury trial on *108whether a criminal statute provides for a mandatory minimum or an extended .maximum term.
II
On more than one occasion, this Court has demonstrated its willingness to extend the jury trial right to resolve uncertainties and to mitigate limitations created by the Supreme Court’s jurisprudence. In State v. Gilmore, for example, we held that the defendant’s right to a fair and impartial jury prohibited the prosecutor from using his peremptory challenges in a racially discriminatory manner. 103 N.J. 508, 528-29, 511 A.2d 1150 (1986). We looked to our State Constitution because the Supreme Court expressly declined to consider whether such a practice violated the defendant’s federal right to a jury trial. Id. at 522, 511 A.2d 1150. In so doing, we noted that recourse to the State Constitution’s jury trial provisions was justified in part because the scope of federal constitutional protections under the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment was uncertain. Ibid. In Anderson, supra, we overturned a criminal perjury conviction as a violation of the defendant’s state constitutional right to trial by jury. 127 N.J. 191, 603 A.2d 928. In the face of well-settled federal law that suggested a contrary result, we held that the practice of allowing the trial court, rather than the jury, to determine the materiality of perjured testimony violated our State Constitution. Id. at 204-05, 603 A.2d 928. In reaching that conclusion we noted that a majority of federal courts had not set forth adequate rationales for their contrary holdings. Ibid.
When, as in this appeal, the basis for the applicable federal law is both uncertain and unpersuasive we should not hesitate to reach an independent conclusion under our State Constitution. As Justice Pashman stated, “[t]he simplest but perhaps most compelling reason for extending state constitutional rights beyond their federal counterparts is that it strengthens the constitutional safeguards of fundamental liberties.” State v. Hunt, 91 N.J. 338, 355, 450 A.2d. 952 (1982) (Pashman, J., concurring). In the absence of *109a principled justification, I would not permit the Legislature to exempt select facts from jury scrutiny when the finding of those facts results in a significant term of imprisonment. Accordingly, I would hold that once the Legislature determines that a single fact triggers a specific amount of punishment that fact must be charged to a jury and proved beyond a reasonable doubt.
Ill
The State argues that the rule I propose could be read to entitle defendants to a jury trial on all factors that affect the length of a sentence. I note, however, that a mandatory minimum term, such as that imposed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C: 11 — 5b(1)—(2), differs significantly, for example, from a sentence adjusted pursuant to the guidelines set forth in our Criminal Code. Under N.J.S.A. 2C:44-1, a trial court that considers aggravating and mitigating circumstances at sentencing examines and balances numerous factors to make a cumulative assessment that results in a sentence within a prescribed statutory range. See State v. Roth, 95 N.J. 334, 359-60, 471 A.2d 370 (1984). In that process, no single factor unconditionally alters the range of punishment to which the defendant is exposed. Similarly, a factual finding leading to the imposition of a mandatory minimum differs significantly from a trial court’s decision whether to impose a consecutive rather than concurrent sentence under N.J.S.A. 2C:44-5a. Pursuant to that statute, the trial court must focus on the nature and circumstances of multiple convictions based on the guidelines established by this Court in State v. Yarbough, 100 N.J. 627, 498 A.2d 1239 (1985), cert. denied, Yarbough v. New Jersey, 475 U.S. 1014, 106 S.Ct. 1193, 89 L.Ed.2d 308 (1986). Under Yarbough, the trial court grounds its determination in the relationship between the various offenses, rather than any particular species of implicated conduct. See id. at 642-45, 498 A.2d 1239.
Finally, my proposed holding would not preclude the Legislature from creating future mandatory minimum penalties. It simply would require juries, rather than judges, to make the *110requisite factual findings that trigger the imposition of mandatory mínimums. Such a rule would hamper neither the Legislature’s prerogative to define crimes nor its capacity to impose punishment.
IV
In conclusion, because federal law in this area is uncertain and unpersuasive, I would hold that N.J.S.A. 2C:ll-5b(2) violates our State Constitution. I would extend the jury trial right to require that any fact that results in imposition of a mandatory minimum term of imprisonment must be proved to a jury beyond a reasonable doubt. The right- to trial by jury should not depend on whether the Legislature has declared that a finding of a particular fact will result in an enhanced maximum sentence, rather than in a mandatory minimum. Nor should it turn on an equally arbitrary distinction between sentencing factors and elements. As a matter of state constitutional law, our analysis must begin and end with the degree of punishment that the Legislature conditions on a specific factual determination. I therefore would affirm the Appellate Division on state constitutional grounds in accordance with the sentiments expressed by this Court in Johnson.
For the reasons I have expressed, I therefore dissent, joining my colleagues Long and Albin.
Justices LONG and ALBIN join in this opinion.
Under the New Jersey Constitution the accused is entitled to a jury trial whenever the legislatively prescribed punishment exceeds a six-month term of *106incarceration. State v. Hamm, 121 N.J. 109, 112, 577 A.2d 1259 (1990), cert. denied, Hamm v. New Jersey, 499 U.S. 947, 111 S.Ct. 1413, 113 L.Ed.2d 466 (1991); State v. Owens, 54 N.J. 153, 162, 254 A.2d 97 (1969), cert. denied, Owens v. New Jersey, 396 U.S. 1021, 90 S.Ct. 593, 24 L.Ed.2d 514 (1970). Thus, a mandatory minimum prison term of six months or less would not implicate a defendant's right to trial by jury.

=== CASE 9737046 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:13:52.795897+00 ===

ALBIN, J.,
dissenting.
The right to trial by jury is an ancient and revered right, a right embodied in our State Constitution before there was a Federal Constitution, a right as old as the Magna Carta.3 That right -has been devised to us through the ages and finds its home in our *111current New Jersey Constitution, which guarantees that the “right of trial by jury shall remain inviolate.” N.J. Const, art. I, ¶ 9. The majority opinion strikes a blow to that right by diminishing the role and importance of the jury in our system of criminal justice and by ceding from the jury to the judge the relevant fact-finding power that determines the real-time length of a defendant’s sentence. By radically altering the balance between the function of the jury and the judge, the majority opinion departs from this Court’s previously held belief that “[t]he responsibility of the jury in the domain of factual findings” is “preeminent,” and that in determining guilt or innocence, the jury “serves as the conscience of the community and the embodiment of the common sense and feelings reflective of society as a whole.” State v. Ingenito, 87 N.J. 204, 211-12, 432 A.2d 912 (1981) (citations omitted). I, therefore, join with the thoughtful dissents of. Justices Long and Zazzali and add these words to signal my concern about the path on which the Court now embarks.
One evening, Traci Stanton lost control of the Porsche she was driving, striking a tree off the side of the road and killing her sister-in-law, Nancy Smith, who was in the front passenger seat. The State claimed that Stanton recklessly operated the vehicle, causing Smith’s death. Stanton was charged with vehicular homicide, N.J.S.A 2C:ll-5, a second-degree crime, and several motor vehicle offenses, including reckless driving, N.J.S.A. 39:4-96, and driving while intoxicated (DWI), N.J.S.A. 39:4-50. The vehicular homicide charge was tried to a jury and the motor vehicle charges to a Superior Court judge in one proceeding pursuant to Rule 3:15-3.
The State presented the same evidence to the jury with respect to the indictable and motor vehicle charges, including evidence that Stanton was intoxicated at the time of the accident. After the jury rendered a verdict of guilty on the vehicular homicide charge, the Superior Court judge sat in judgment on the motor vehicle charges and, without taking any additional evidence or testimony, found Stanton guilty of reckless driving and DWI. The judge’s *112finding of guilt on the DWI charge had grave implications beyond the penalty range for that motor vehicle offense. The judge sentenced Stanton to a three-year state prison term based on the jury’s finding of vehicular homicide. The judge’s verdict on the DWI charge, however, required the imposition of a mandatory minimum three-year state prison term on the vehicular homicide charge pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:ll-5b(l). But for the DWI finding, Stanton would have been eligible for parole in nine months. See N.J.S.A. 30:4-123.51g. The judge’s factual finding exposed Stanton to a real-time sentence four times greater than the exposure resulting from the jury’s factual finding.
I.
The New Jersey Constitution empowers this Court to promulgate rules governing the “practice and procedure” in the Superior Court. N.J. Const, art. VI, § 2, ¶ 3; Winberry v. Salisbury, 5 N.J. 240, 255, 74 A.2d 406 (establishing that Court’s rule-making power, in matters of practice and procedure, is not subject to overriding legislation), cert. denied, 340 U.S. 877, 71 S.Ct. 123, 95 L.Ed. 638 (1950). In accordance with this authority, the Court enacted Rule 3:15-3, which provides that disorderly persons, petty disorderly, and motor vehicle complaints must be joined for trial with a criminal offense “based on the same conduct or arising from the same episode.” R. 3:15-3(a)(l). Unlike disorderly persons or petty disorderly persons offenses, which are submitted to the jury if they are lesser-included offenses, Rule 3:15-3(a)(2) requires lesser-included motor vehicle offenses of a criminal complaint to be decided by the Superior Court judge “on the proofs adduced in the course of trial.” Rule 3:15-3 is the codification of several decisions of this Court that I believe have mistakenly taken from the jury its rightful authority to decide lesser-included motor vehicle offenses arising from the same conduct of a criminal offense. See State v. Muniz, 118 N.J. 319, 571 A.2d 948 (1990); State v. DeLuca, 108 N.J. 98, 527 A.2d 1355, cert. denied, 484 U.S. 944, 108 S.Ct. 331, 98 L.Ed.2d 358 (1987). This rule is directly *113implicated in this case because it was the judge’s and not the jury’s verdict on the DWI complaint that mandated a three-year period of parole ineligibility. This Court has the constitutional power, and responsibility, to make its procedural rules logical and consistent, and this ease provides the opportunity to do so with respect to Rule 3:15-3. State v. Clark, 162 N.J. 201, 205-07, 744 A.2d 109 (2000) (stating that “the Court’s authority to engage in rule making includes the exclusive power to establish or modify Court Rules through judicial decisions”); George Siegler Co. v. Norton, 8 N.J. 374, 381-83, 86 A.2d 8 (1952) (holding statute addressing procedural aspects of contributory negligence operated within field of Court’s exclusive rule-making power and was superseded by Court’s rules and, therefore, no longer effective).
There is no sound reason why a jury in a vehicular homicide case should not decide the lesser-included offenses of DWI and reckless driving. A jury is no less capable of rendering a decision on reckless driving and DWI charges than on criminal charges. Our constitutional jurisprudence recognizes both DWI and reckless driving as lesser-included offenses of vehicular homicide. A finding of guilt of DWI will bar a subsequent prosecution of vehicular homicide on double jeopardy grounds if the sole evidence supporting the element of recklessness is intoxication related to the DWI charge. DeLuca, supra, 108 N.J. at 109, 527 A.2d 1355. Likewise, a municipal court conviction of reckless driving, N.J.S.A. 39:4-96, will bar a later criminal trial for recklessly causing death arising from the same evidence. State v. Dively, 92 N.J. 573, 583, 458 A.2d 502 (1983).
Our law requires that lesser-included offenses be charged to a jury if a rational basis in the evidence supports the lesser charges. State v. Choice, 98 N.J. 295, 299, 486 A.2d 833 (1985). The principle of charging a jury with lesser-included offenses serves two important purposes. It protects the prosecution against an outright acquittal when an element of the greater charge is not proven, and it protects a defendant from conviction of the more serious charge when the jury is given an all-or-nothing choice. *114State v. Neal, 229 N.J.Super. 28, 33, 550 A.2d 998 (App.Div.1988). Under this doctrine, no defendant should be acquitted or convicted of a particular crime merely because the jury was precluded from considering another charge that is rationally based on the record. No person should be found guilty of a more serious offense merely because a jury was denied the opportunity of finding guilt of a lesser offense. In short, a jury should be free to consider all lesser-included offenses that are reasonably related to the evidence and the crime charged. N.J.S.A. ■ 2C:l-8(d), (e). In this case the motor vehicle DWI and reckless driving charges and the vehicular homicide charges arose from the same evidence. Yet, the current state of our law precludes the lesser-included offenses of DWI and reckless driving from being submitted to the jury. Muniz, supra, 118 N.J. at 332, 571 A.2d 948.
Disorderly persons, petty disorderly persons, and serious motor vehicle offenses are quasi-criminal offenses. A person charged with a quasi-criminal offense is entitled to fundamental due process protections, including the presumption of innocence, which requires the State to bear the burden of proving guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. See State v. Garthe, 145 N.J. 1, 8, 678 A.2d 153 (1996); Dively, supra, 92 N.J. at 585, 458 A.2d 502; State v. Finamore, 338 N.J.Super. 130, 138-39, 768 A.2d 248 (App.Div. 2001); State v. Young, 242 N.J.Super. 467, 473, 577 A.2d 520 (App.Div.1990).
Disorderly persons, petty disorderly persons, and motor vehicle offenses are all subject to the jurisdiction of the municipal court. Disorderly persons and petty disorderly persons offenses, however, may be submitted to the jury in criminal trials as lesser-included offenses, despite the general jurisdiction of the municipal court in such matters. See N.J.S.A. 2C:l-8(e); R. 3:15-3. See also, e.g., DeLuca, supra, 108 N.J. at 111, 527 A.2d 1355 (stating that “Superior Court may assert jurisdiction over non-indietable offenses when they are lesser included offenses of the indictables” for purpose of submitting disorderly persons charges to jury); State v. Braxton, 330 N.J.Super. 561, 563, 568, 750 A.2d 185 *115(App.Div.2000) (affirming conviction where defendant was acquitted of charged aggravated assault and convicted of lesser-included offense of disorderly persons simple assault); State v. Green, 318 N.J.Super. 361, 375, 724 A.2d 254 (App.Div.1999) (holding that failure to give lesser-included charge of simple assault as lesser-included offense of aggravated assault on police officer was reversible error), aff'd, 163 N.J. 140, 747 A.2d 1234 (2000); State v. Lopez, 160 N.J.Super. 30, 36, 388 A.2d 1273 (App.Div.1978) (finding that disorderly persons theft offense should have been given to jury as lesser-included offense of criminal charges).
The same principles that support submitting disorderly persons offenses to the jury as lesser-included offenses apply as well to serious motor vehicle charges, such as DWI and reckless driving. The penalties for a conviction of DWI, even for a first-time offender, are more severe than for a petty disorderly persons offense. Compare N.J.S.A 39:4-50(a)(l) (providing that person who operates motor vehicle while intoxicated shall be subject to fines, suspension of license for not less than six months nor more than one year, “a period of detainment ... as prescribed by the program requirements of the Intoxicated Driver Resource Centers ... and, in the discretion of the court, a term of imprisonment of not more than 30 days”), with N.J.S.A. 2C:43-8 (stating that “person who has been convicted of a ... petty disorderly persons offense may be sentenced to imprisonment for a definite term which ... shall not exceed ... 30 days”). Penalties for a third DWI offense are even more severe, and include a minimum 180-day term of imprisonment. N.J.S.A. 39:4-50(a)(3). In its previous incarnations over the last century, DWI has been classified as a disorderly persons offense and a misdemeanor. State v. Hamm, 121 N.J. 109, 119, 577 A.2d 1259 (1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 947, 111 S.Ct. 1413, 113 L.Ed.2d 466 (1991). The nature of the offense and its relationship to the greater offense, not a classification by label, should govern whether the jury decides the issue. Notions of fairness, consistency in the fact-finding process, and respect for the jury as a truth-seeking body favor submitting DWI and *116reckless driving charges to the jury along with the vehicular homicide charge.
The majority takes the position that where the State presents evidence to support different theories of recklessness in a vehicular homicide case, ie., intoxication and speeding, unanimity on any one theory is not necessary, so long as all twelve jurors agree that the defendant was reckless. Ante at 86, 820 A.2d at 644. Because the jury renders a general verdict, the theory upon which the verdict is based is not known. Therefore, it is conceivable that in a vehicular homicide case in which various theories are presented to prove recklessness, all twelve jurors may reject intoxication as the basis for finding recklessness while the judge will be allowed to make a finding of intoxication to "render a DWI verdict. It is the potential for this kind of inconsistent result that undermines the integrity of dual fact-findings.
This Court’s precedents have compelled bifurcated fact-findings between the judge and the jury in vehicular homicide cases. Muniz, supra, 118 N.J. at 331-32, 571 A.2d 948; DeLuca, supra, 108 N.J. at 111, 527 A.2d 1355. In Dively, supra, we recognized that a reckless driving or DWI charge prosecuted in municipal court could bar the later prosecution of a vehicular homicide charge on double jeopardy grounds. To avoid this unjust result, the Court issued a directive to the municipal courts to withhold action on motor vehicle charges related to a vehicular homicide until authorized by the county prosecutor. 92 N.J. at 586, 589-90, 458 A.2d 502. In DeLuca, supra, we concluded that if evidence of recklessness in a vehicular homicide prosecution were based solely on intoxication, double jeopardy would bar a subsequent DWI prosecution on the same evidence. 108 N.J. at 100, 527 A.2d 1355. To resolve double jeopardy concerns in the future, the DeLuca Court directed the Superior Court, pursuant to its constitutional powers, to assume jurisdiction of the related municipal court matters in vehicular homicide cases. In such cases the Superior Court judge presiding over-the jury trial of the vehicular homicide case would sit as the trier of fact on the related motor vehicle *117violation, such as DWI. 108 N.J. at 111, 527 A.2d 1355. See also R. 3:15-3.
In Muniz, supra, this Court reversed the Appellate Division, which had concluded that, under the common law, lesser-included motor vehicle charges must be submitted to the jury in a vehicular homicide case. The Court determined that although lesser-included motor vehicle offenses should be joined in the prosecution of death-by-auto cases, they should be decided by the judge, not the jury. 118 N.J. at 331-32, 335, 571 A.2d 948. The Court reasoned that the policies behind the Code of Criminal Justice and Title 39, which governs motor vehicle violations, did not require the submission of those lesser-included offenses to the jury. Id. at 331, 571 A.2d 948. To mitigate the all-or-nothing effect this might have on a jury deciding a vehicular homicide case, the Court instructed the trial courts to make the jury aware that the Superior Court would render a decision on the related motor vehicle charges. Id. at 332, 571 A.2d 948.
This Court, in Muniz, provided no satisfactory rationale to justify denying jury consideration of a DWI charge in a vehicular homicide case where intoxication is part of the State’s proof of recklessness. There is no salutary purpose in the continued practice of two fact-findings, one by a jury and the other by a judge, in which both view the same evidence at the same trial. Had all the charges been submitted to the jury in this case, the constitutional issue, which now divides the Court, probably would have been avoided.
I do not suggest here that a DWI complaint that stands alone, one that is not joined with a criminal offense, should be tried to a jury. This matter, however, presents a different case. One of the State’s theories in this vehicular homicide ease was based on intoxication. The Superior Court judge charged the jury that it had to decide whether defendant “violated” the law “that a person may not operate a motor vehicle under the influence of intoxicating liquor,” as well as other motor vehicle laws, in “deciding whether or not she drove recklessly.” In essence, the jury was *118told to decide the DWI matter, but not to give voice to its judgment on the DWI complaint, which was left to the court’s determination. This, to me, is a process devoid of any sense.
Ultimately, any ruling of this Court must withstand the test of reason and experience. Adherence to a practice that does not advance any legitimate objective should be discarded in favor of one that does. Relevant motor vehicle charges that are lesser-included offenses of a vehicular homicide charge should be submitted to a jury.
n.
I fully concur with the well-reasoned opinions of Justices Long and Zazzali. However, the importance of the right to trial by jury compels me to add these thoughts. In interpreting our State Constitution, particularly the “right of trial by jury shall remain inviolate” provision, which is textually different from its federal counterpart, a decision of the United States Supreme Court is persuasive authority only if it can persuade by force of reason, logic, and historical interpretation. If federal precedent is an aid in interpreting a state constitutional right, infusing the right with purpose and meaning in light of our traditions and values, then we should make use of it. Alternatively, we are not bound to take bad advice, and when our state’s interests are not advanced by federal precedent, we must go our own way. Our state constitutional provisions need not be homogenized to fit within the interpretation of counterpart provisions of the Federal Constitution, particularly in this area where the United States Supreme Court’s interpretation of its “trial by jury” provision has been muddled and inconsistent, and has barely obtained the support of a majority of that Court. See State v. Hunt, 91 N.J. 338, 356, 450 A.2d 952 (1982) (Pashman, J., concurring) (questioning presumption that uniformity in constitutional analysis is unqualified advantage).
Our Court should not “adopt federal constitutional interpretations for the New Jersey Constitution merely for the sake of consistency.” Id. at 355, 450 A.2d 952 (Pashman, J., concurring). *119The textual language of the federal and state jury trial provisions are different; the history and application of those clauses to our federal and state laws have been different;4 the structure of the New Jersey Code of Criminal Justice and the Federal Sentencing Guidelines, and the roles that juries play in these distinct legislative schemes, are vastly different. The Federal Sentencing Guidelines leave many factual determinations to a judge that would be wholly unacceptable in our state system.5
The majority’s decision, which gives judges free rein to make factual determinations within the statutory maximum, theoretically permits the complete restructuring of the New Jersey Code of Criminal Justice, transferring powers traditionally reposed in juries to judges. One example will make the point. Currently, a jury determines whether a theft is greater than $200, $7500, or $75,000 for the purpose of grading the offense and determining the range of sentence. N.J.S.A. 2C:20-2b(4). The logic of the Court’s decision would allow the enactment of a statute limiting a jury to rendering a general verdict of theft with a maximum sentence of, say, twenty years. Under this construct, a judge would then make the factual determination as to the amount of the theft for the purpose of imposing a specific sentence within that range. This would be entirely contrary to our current law, and yet this potential scenario follows from the Court’s decision.
*120Our state is a separate and independent laboratory, a political experiment, in a larger federal system of states with varied customs, cultures, and values. See Hunt, supra, 91 N.J. at 356-57, 450 A.2d 952 (Pashman, J., concurring). Through the New Jersey Constitution, this Court is permitted to reject a federal “one-size-fits-all” approach to the interpretation of state constitutional rights. Our federal constitutional rights are a floor, a lowest common denominator, intended to apply to a diverse people spread over a geographical domain of fifty states. We can and should interpret our rights more expansively when it is in keeping with our special state interests.
We have no greater state interest than sustaining the right to trial by jury, ensuring the heritage that places great trust in the common wisdom of everyday men and women to make judgments on the most vital issues concerning their fellow citizens. Traci Stanton was entitled to have a jury decide the factual issue that now requires her to serve a three-year mandatory minimum jail term. By allowing a judge to make that critical finding of fact in this case, the Court has diminished one of our most important rights.
Justices LONG and ZAZZALI join in this opinion.
For reversal and reinstatement — Chief Justice PORITZ and Justices COLEMAN, VERNIERO and LaVECCHIA — 4.
Dissenting — Justices LONG, ZAZZALI and ALBIN — 3.
See N.J. Const, of 1176 art. XXII (stating “that the inestimable right of trial by jury shall remain confirmed as a part of the law of this Colony, without repeal, forever”) (reproduced at http:llwww.nj.gov/njfactsl njdoclOa.htm); J. Kendall Few, 1 In Defense of Trial by Jury 10 (1993).
See State v. Anderson, 127 N.J. 191, 194, 603 A.2d 928 (1992) (declining to follow federal law and, relying on State Constitution, declaring unconstitutional statutory provision making materiality element of perjury question of law and holding that, as element of crime, materiality must be determined beyond reasonable doubt by jury).
Compare Edwards v. United States, 523 U.S. 511, 513-14, 118 S.Ct. 1475, 1477, 140 L.Ed.2d 703, 708 (1998) (stating that Federal "Sentencing Guidelines instruct the judge ... to determine both the amount and the kind of 'controlled substances' for which a defendant should be held accountable — and then to impose a sentence that varies depending upon amount and kind"), with NJ.S.A. 2C:35-5c (stating that where degree of offense for manufacture, distribution, or possession with intent to manufacture or distribute controlled dangerous substance depends on quantity of substance, quantity shall be determined by trier of fact).

=== CASE 9737047 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:13:59.791804+00 ===

MESCHKE, Justice.
Bonnie Jacobs and Kevin Grosz appealed from dismissal of their claims for damages for their loss of consortium and for their emotional distress stemming from injury to Jennifer Grosz, their thirteen-year-old daughter. We reverse.
Jennifer attended dance classes on the third floor of a building in downtown Bismarck. On November 3, 1986, Jennifer and a friend left dance class early. They walked down to the second floor, where they rode an elevator servicing the first two floors of the building to the main floor. The elevator was cage-style and moved on a track attached to the wall of the building.
On the main floor, the girls began to play on the elevator by pushing the indicator button to make it ascend, grabbing the cage, “riding” it and then jumping off. Jennifer apparently became entangled and did not jump off the cage. As the elevator moved upwards, Jennifer was trapped *559against the first-floor ceiling, and her air supply was cut off. By the time she was rescued, she had suffered severe and irreversible brain damage. She is now confined to a wheelchair, can move only her eyes, and must be fed through a tube.
Jennifer’s divorced parents, individually and on her behalf, sued Anderson Building Company, former owner of the building and installer of the elevator; Herman Eg-gers, present owner of the building; and the Inclinator Company of America, manufacturer of the elevator. Eggers named the Dakota Academy for the Arts as a third-party defendant. Two of the parents’ nine theories were asserted individually, claiming tort damages for their loss of society and companionship with their minor child and for their emotional distress. Eg-gers moved for summary judgment to dismiss these and another claim. Treating it as a motion for judgment on the pleadings, the trial court dismissed these parents’ claims.
Jacobs and Grosz appealed the dismissal, arguing that North Dakota should recognize claims by the parents of an injured child for loss of society and companionship and for emotional distress arising from severe injuries to the child.
We first examine how these questions came here. The trial court considered Grosz and Jacobs, as individuals, completely dismissed from the suit. The court did not act directly on their motion for a N.D. R.CivJP. 54(b) determination and direction, saying that the appealability of dismissal of their entire claims obviated need for 54(b) action. Instead, the trial court stated, “I would conclude that a Rule 54(b) certification is appropriate here, since these issues can be promptly resolved without the necessity of preparation of a transcript and can be resolved in all probability before this case would, in the normal course of events, go to trial.”
As the trial court incompletely understood, a judgment can be sufficiently final when it disposes of important claims and parties, even though fewer than all in the action, to qualify under Rule 54(b). Although the trial judge mistakenly believed that express action was not necessary, he clearly determined that there was no just reason for delay and directed the entry of judgment. Since the trial court acted consistently with Rule 54(b), we conclude that this appeal is properly before us. First Trust Co. of North Dakota v. Conway, 345 N.W.2d 838, 841 (N.D.1984). See also Matter of the Estate of Stuckle, 427 N.W.2d 96 (N.D.1988) (Meschke, Justice, concurring).
The trial court dismissed the parents’ claims because “The law in this state, as reflected by the Supreme Court of the state, does not allow recovery_” However, we recently decided that damages for loss of society and companionship and for mental anguish could be awarded in an action for wrongful death of a child, Hopkins v. McBane, 427 N.W.2d 85 (N.D.1988), and also for loss of society and companionship in a parent’s action against an allegedly negligent tortfeasor in the injury of a minor child. First Trust Company of North Dakota v. Scheels Hardware, 429 N.W.2d 5 (N.D.1988).
The legislature recently acted to permit recovery in a wrongful death or injury action for noneconomic damages, including those arising from “... mental anguish, emotional distress, ... loss of society and companionship, loss of consortium, ...” NDCC 32-03.2-04.1 Although this section expressly applies only to claims ac*560cruing after July 8, 1987, it is indicative of legislative sentiment to allow these claims. See Hopkins, supra (VandeWalle, Justice, concurring specially).
The social policies have been declared by the legislature. Judicial attempts to make meaningful distinctions between noneco-nomic aspects of the parent-child relationship would now be implausible and futile.
There is no reason why the new procedure for making a single determination of the amount of noneconomic damages cannot be used in this case. NDCC 32-03.2-05.2 This narrow channeling of the various categories of noneconomic claims should allay, if not dispel, apprehensions about rational boundaries on tort damages, while permitting evidentiary submission of cognizable factors. See Prosser & Keeton, The Law of Torts § 4, at 23 (5th ed. 1984).
We reverse the trial court’s dismissal of these claims for loss of society and companionship and for emotional distress and remand for proceedings consistent with this opinion.
ERICKSTAD, C.J., LEVINE and GIERKE, JJ., and VERNON R. PEDERSON, Surrogate Justice, concur.
VERNON R. PEDERSON, Surrogate Justice, sitting in place of VANDE WALLE, J., disqualified.
. NDCC 32-03.2-04 says:
“Economic and noneconomic damages for wrongful death or injury to person. In any civil action for damages for wrongful death or injury to a person and whether arising out of breach of contract or tort, damages may be awarded by the trier of fact as follows:
“1. Compensation for economic damages, which are damages arising from medical expenses and medical care, rehabilitation services, custodial care, loss of earnings and earning capacity, loss of income or support, burial costs, cost of substitute domestic services, loss of employment or business or employment opportunities and other monetary losses.
"2. Compensation for noneconomic damages, which are damages arising from pain, suffering, inconvenience, physical impairment, disfigurement, mental anguish, emotional distress, fear of injury, loss or illness, loss of society and companionship, loss of *560consortium, injury to reputation, humiliation and other nonpecuniary damage.”
. NDCC 32-03.2-05 says:
“Separate finding on damages. In awarding compensation for damages to any party, the trier of fact shall make separate findings which must specify:
“1. The amount of compensation for past economic damages.
"2. The amount of compensation for future economic damages.
"3. The amount of compensation for non-economic damages.”
The only snatch of legislative history on this section, testimony of one witness before the House Judiciary Committee, explained:
"[This] [s]ection ... requires separate findings of damage. This is really nothing new because any plaintiff or defendant who is involved in litigation at this time can ask the court to include in the jury verdict a special verdict form asking the jury to do precisely what is provided for in this bill, ...” Hearings on HB 1571, House Judiciary Committee, 50th Leg.Sess., Feb. 4, 1987 (testimony of David Peterson).
See N.D.R.Civ.P. 49.

=== CASE 9737048 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:13:59.795882+00 ===

ON PETITION FOR REHEARING
MESCHKE, Justice.
On petition for rehearing, appellees requested reconsideration of whether wé “should abandon the zone-of-danger rule” utilized in our prior decision in Whetham v. Bismarck Hospital, 197 N.W.2d 678 (N.D. 1972). In a response requested by this court, appellants agreed that “a specific determination should be made as to whether North Dakota is going to follow the current trend in the law and overrule the ‘zone of danger’ test” applied in Whetham.
We adhere to our decision, but we do not overrule Whetham. Whetham, supra, involved only a claim for emotional and mental shock induced solely by the claimant’s apprehension of negligently caused injury to a third person. That is not true here. “As indicated in Chapter 47, emotional distress may be an element of damages in many cases where other interests have been invaded, and tort liability has arisen apart from the emotional distress.” Restatement, Torts (Second), § 46 at Comment (b).
In this case, akin to a wrongful death claim, we held that the parents of Jennifer Grosz are entitled to seek damages for loss of society and companionship for the devastating injuries to their daughter caused by the alleged negligence of the defendants. We view emotional distress as a constituent of those damages.
Therefore, we deny the petitions for rehearing.
ERICKSTAD, C.J., LEVINE and GIERKE, JJ., and VERNON R. PEDERSON, Surrogate Justice, concur.
VERNON R. PEDERSON, Surrogate Justice, sitting in place of VANDE WALLE, J., disqualified.

=== CASE 2208569 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:31.275255+00 ===

820 A.2d 582 (2003)
2003 ME 49
Spence BISBING
v.
MAINE MEDICAL CENTER.
Supreme Judicial Court of Maine.
Argued: March 11, 2003.
Decided: April 10, 2003.
*583 David M. Hirshon, Esq., Marshall J. Tinkle, Esq. (orally), Tompkins, Clough, Hirshon & Langer, P.A., Portland, for plaintiff.
Christopher C. Taintor, Esq. (orally), Robert W. Bower Jr., Esq., Norman, Hanson & DeTroy, LLC, Portland, for defendant.
Brian L. Champion, Esq., Verrill & Dana, LLP, Portland, Michael E. Malamut, Esq., New England Legal Foundation, Boston, for amicus curiae.
Panel: CLIFFORD, RUDMAN, ALEXANDER, CALKINS, and LEVY, JJ.
CALKINS, J.
[¶ 1] Maine Medical Center (MMC) appeals from a judgment entered after a jury trial in Superior Court (Cumberland County, Crowley, J.) awarding Spence Bisbing treble damages and attorney fees pursuant to 26 M.R.S.A. § 626 (Supp.2002) for unpaid vacation pay. MMC argues that section 626 contains an implied bad faith element. Bisbing cross-appeals, contesting the amount of attorney fees. We dismiss the cross-appeal as untimely and affirm the judgment.
I.
[¶ 2] Bisbing worked for MMC as an emergency room attending physician from 1996 to 2000. When he resigned, he requested that MMC pay him for accrued vacation pay. MMC refused, contending that Bisbing had used all his vacation time. Bisbing then brought this action, raising, inter alia, a claim for unpaid wages under section 626. The case was tried to a jury, which found that MMC owed Bisbing $27,500 in vacation pay. The jury was not asked whether MMC had acted in bad faith. The court trebled the damages pursuant *584 to section 626 and entered judgment for Bisbing for $82,500 plus attorney fees.
[¶ 3] The court entered an appealable final judgment on August 15, 2002, when it denied MMC's motion to alter or amend the judgment and awarded Bisbing $37,104.40 in attorney fees. On August 29, Bisbing filed a "motion for clarification" seeking an explanation of the amount of the fees the court had awarded. On August 30, the court denied the motion for clarification without explanation. MMC filed its timely notice of appeal the same day. Bisbing filed his notice of appeal on October 7.
II.
[¶ 4] On appeal, MMC does not contest the jury's finding that it owed Bisbing $27,500 in vacation pay, but it contends that the trial court erred in awarding Bisbing treble damages and attorney fees pursuant to 26 M.R.S.A. § 626 without a finding that MMC acted in bad faith or was otherwise culpable. Section 626 provides in relevant part:
An employee leaving employment must be paid in full within a reasonable time after demand at the office of the employer where payrolls are kept and wages are paid .... Whenever the terms of employment include provisions for paid vacations, vacation pay on cessation of employment has the same status as wages earned.
. . . .
An employer found in violation of this section is liable for the amount of unpaid wages and, in addition, the judgment rendered in favor of the employee or employees must include a reasonable rate of interest, an additional amount equal to twice the amount of those wages as liquidated damages and costs of suit, including a reasonable attorney's fee.
[¶ 5] The construction of section 626 is governed by the plain language of the statute. Gallant v. Bartash, Inc., 2002 ME 4, ¶ 3, 786 A.2d 628, 629. MMC advances numerous interpretive arguments, asserting the existence of an implied bad faith element because section 626 is allegedly a penal statute; because it should be read together with a related statute, 26 M.R.S.A. § 626-A (Supp.2002); because it should be read in light of statutes in other states that include such an element; and because such an interpretation is necessary to avoid constitutional problems. We need not address any of these arguments because section 626 is unambiguous. See State v. Millett, 392 A.2d 521, 525 (Me. 1978) ("[W]here the language of a statute [is] plain and unambiguous, there is no occasion for resorting to the rules of statutory interpretation."). There is no hint in the statute that treble damages and attorney fees can be awarded only on a showing that the employer has acted in bad faith. We are not free to impose such an element in disregard of the clear legislative intent expressed in the plain language of section 626.
[¶ 6] Contrary to MMC's argument, this result is entirely consistent with our case law. In Purdy v. Community Telecommunications Corp., 663 A.2d 25, 28 (Me. 1995), we declined to "engraft a good faith exception on [section 626]" at the behest of an employer that was faced with complicated calculations of the commissions due a former employee. We reasoned that "the Legislature has not ... provided for an exemption for action taken by an employer in good faith." Id. Although recognizing that "the effect of this statute is harsh, perhaps more so than the Legislature intended," we could not "ignore the statute's plain language and its broadly protective purpose." Id. Similarly, we stated in Burke v. Port Resort Realty Corp., 1999 *585 ME 138, ¶ 16, 737 A.2d 1055, 1060, that "[u]nlike similar statutes in some other jurisdictions, section 626 does not have a `bona fide dispute' exception." We have never recognized such an exception, and we have affirmed awards of section 626 treble damages and attorney fees without mentioning the employer's bad faith. See, e.g., Bernier v. Merrill Air Eng'rs, 2001 ME 17, ¶¶ 4-9, 770 A.2d 97, 100-01; Marston v. Newavom, 629 A.2d 587, 590-91 (Me.1993).
[¶ 7] In addition to its statutory interpretation arguments, MMC contends that as written, section 626 denies it due process. MMC does not cite, and we have not found, any case holding that a statute providing a private remedy of liquidated or multiple damages violates due process unless it includes a culpability element. The United States Supreme Court has said exactly the contrary, holding in Overnight Motor Transportation Co. v. Missel, 316 U.S. 572, 581-84, 62 S.Ct. 1216, 86 L.Ed. 1682 (1942), that a Fair Labor Standards Act provision awarding employees double damages for unpaid overtime, without regard to the good faith or reasonableness of the employer, did not violate due process. We likewise reject MMC's assertion that section 626 impermissibly burdens its right to a jury trial. The statutory remedies of treble damages and attorney fees accrue upon an employer's failure to pay wages within a reasonable time of demand, regardless of whether it subsequently seeks a jury trial.
III.
[¶ 8] Bisbing's cross-appeal complains only about the court's initial award of approximately $10,000 less than he requested in attorney fees and its subsequent refusal to explain that award. His notice of appeal was filed fifty-three days after the court awarded the attorney fees and thirty-eight days after the court denied his motion for clarification and MMC filed its notice of appeal. A cross-appeal must be filed within fourteen days of the first notice of appeal or twenty-one days of the judgment, whichever period expires later. M.R.App. P. 2(b)(3). Bisbing's cross-appeal was filed twenty-four days too late and must be dismissed. See Bourke v. City of S. Portland, 2002 ME 155, ¶¶ 3-4, 806 A.2d 1255, 1255-56.
[¶ 9] In addition to appealing the trial court's attorney fee award, Bisbing requests attorney fees on appeal. Although we have not specifically held that section 626 authorizes attorney fees on appeal, we have held that such an award was appropriate under other remedial statutes. Beaulieu v. Dorsey, 562 A.2d 678, 680 (Me.1989) (Unfair Trade Practices Act, 5 M.R.S.A. § 213 (2002)); Colony Cadillac & Oldsmobile, Inc. v. Yerdon, 558 A.2d 364, 369 (Me.1989) (Used Car Information Act, 10 M.R.S.A. § 1476(4) (1997)). To disallow attorney fees for defending an appeal would significantly dilute the award of attorney fees in the trial court. We conclude that Bisbing is entitled to attorney fees for defending the appeal, but not for prosecuting his untimely cross-appeal, and we remand the matter to the trial court to determine the amount of fees.
The entry is:
Judgment affirmed. Cross-appeal dismissed. Remanded for determination of attorney fees on appeal.

=== CASE 2208573 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:31.314174+00 ===

406 Mass. 380 (1990)
548 N.E.2d 843
COMMONWEALTH
vs.
ROD MATTHEWS.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Norfolk.
November 9, 1989.
January 9, 1990.
Present: LIACOS, C.J., WILKINS, ABRAMS, O'CONNOR, & GREANEY, JJ.
John T. Burns for the defendant.
Stephanie Martin Glennon, Assistant District Attorney, for the Commonwealth.
Robert H. Weber & Eileen D. Agnes, for Child Welfare League of America, Inc., & others, amici curiae, submitted a brief.
ABRAMS, J.
Convicted as an adult of murder in the second degree at the age of fifteen, the defendant, Rod Matthews, appeals. The defendant alleges error in (1) the decision to transfer his case to the Superior Court for trial as an adult; (2) the jury empanelment; (3) the jury instructions; and (4) the judge's refusal to vacate the sentence and resentence the defendant as a juvenile pursuant to G.L.c. 119, § 83. We conclude there is no error and affirm his conviction.
We summarize the facts. In the fall of 1986, the defendant, Rod Matthews, and the victim, fourteen year old Shaun Ouillette, were classmates at Canton High School. In late October, 1986, the defendant told two classmates, Robert Peterson and Jonathan Cash, that "[h]e wanted to know what it was like to kill someone." He wrote a note to a teacher stating that he liked to light fires and that he felt like killing people he hated.
Sometime in early November, after initially considering two boys to kill, the defendant told his two friends that he had finally decided to kill Shaun Ouillette. The defendant reasoned that Ouillette "would be easy to get to and he probably would be the least missed ... [because he] didn't have many friends." The defendant planned to kill Ouillette on November 19, 1986. A snow storm, however, cancelled school that day. The defendant postponed his plan to kill Ouillette until the next day.
On November 20, 1986, the defendant invited Shaun Ouillette to come over to his house following school. After playing *382 pool together, the defendant suggested that they go to the woods and build a fort. The defendant brought along a baseball bat, telling Ouillette he needed to return it to a friend. The victim walked into the woods with the defendant behind him. In an effort to disguise his own steps, the defendant walked by stepping in the footprints Ouillette left in the snow.
In the woods the defendant swung the bat, striking Ouillette on the head with enough force to severely crush the skull. Ouillette fell to his hands and knees, crying out for help. The defendant struck Ouillette several more times on the head, thereby killing him. The defendant then used snow to wipe blood off the bat.
A short time later, still carrying the bat, the defendant walked to Peterson's house and said that he had killed Ouillette. He then took Peterson to see the body. When Peterson asked why he had killed Ouillette, the defendant responded, "Just for the heck of it."
Peterson telephoned Cash and told him the defendant had killed Ouillette. Cash refused to believe him. For several days, the defendant would ask Cash, "Do you believe me?" Cash would say that he did not, and the defendant would ask, "Then where is Shaun?" Days later the defendant and Peterson took Cash to view the body. The defendant warned both not to tell anyone or they might be his next victims.
The police investigation into Ouillette's disappearance increasingly pointed to the defendant. During three separate police interviews, the defendant denied having any knowledge of Ouillette's whereabouts on or after November 20, 1986. In a fourth interview, he admitted that Ouillette had come to his house, but indicated that Ouillette had run away from home. In these interviews, the defendant appeared calm and unconcerned, usually grinning or smiling.
In early December, Cash secretly went back to the site of Ouillette's body. He noted the surroundings, returned home, and sent an anonymous letter to the police, describing the body's location and stating that the defendant had killed *383 Ouillette. Acting on this tip, investigators found Ouillette's body on December 11.
On December 13, 1986, the defendant, then fourteen years old, was arrested and arraigned in Stoughton District Court, in juvenile session, on a charge of delinquency by reason of the murder of Shaun Ouillette. Between April 24, 1987, and May 27, 1987, probable cause and juvenile transfer hearings were conducted in the District Court, pursuant to G.L.c. 119, § 61 (1988 ed.). The judge found probable cause, dismissed the juvenile complaint, and ordered that the defendant be transferred to the Superior Court Department for arraignment as an adult.
On July 5, 1987, a Norfolk county grand jury returned an indictment charging the defendant with murder in the first degree. After a hearing, the trial judge denied the defendant's motion to dismiss the indictment or, alternatively, to remand the case to the juvenile court. On March 10, 1988, a jury found Matthews guilty of murder in the second degree and, pursuant to G.L.c. 265, § 2 (1988 ed.), the judge sentenced him to imprisonment for life. The defendant appealed. We transferred the defendant's appeal to this court on our own motion.
1. Decision to transfer. Prior to trial, the defendant filed a motion to dismiss claiming that he was improperly transferred for trial as an adult under G.L.c. 119, § 61, because (1) neither the subsidiary findings nor the weight of the evidence in the record supports the District Court judge's ultimate conclusion that he is not amenable to rehabilitation as a juvenile; and (2) the judge refused to consider the defense of lack of criminal responsibility at the probable cause hearing. The motion was denied. The defendant asserts that the denial of the motion was error.
a. Amenability to rehabilitation. "[A] judge has considerable discretion, within this statutory framework, to determine whether a child should be treated as an adult." A Juvenile v. Commonwealth, 370 Mass. 272, 282 (1976). In reviewing a motion to dismiss an indictment, a Superior Court judge does not "review de novo the soundness of decisions made by Juvenile *384 Court judges" during juvenile proceedings. A Juvenile v. Commonwealth (No. 1), 380 Mass. 552, 556 (1980). Rather, the Superior Court judge considers "whether there has been a material failing in the prescribed steps leading to the issuance of the order of transfer." Id. at 557. "Serious deficiency in the subsidiary findings should count as a faulty step in the process of transfer, examinable" by a Superior Court judge on a motion to dismiss the indictment or by this court after trial and conviction on the criminal complaint. Id. at 558. The Superior Court judge determined that the District Court judge followed the procedure required by G.L.c. 119, § 61, and our cases, and made all statutorily required findings. See Commonwealth v. Hawkesworth, 405 Mass. 664, 669 (1989).
The District Court judge determined that the defendant was a fourteen year old juvenile who was charged with murder, "an offense involving the infliction ... of serious bodily harm." G.L.c. 119, § 61. The judge held the statutorily required transfer hearing, where he initially determined that probable cause existed to believe that the defendant had committed first degree murder as charged. He then considered the five statutorily delineated "factors."[1] G.L.c. 119, § 61. "[A] judge, having considered all relevant factors in light of the legislative intent and having made supportive findings, may legitimately conclude that transfer is warranted." A Juvenile, supra at 283. The judge made detailed written findings concerning each enumerated factor. See Two Juveniles v. Commonwealth, 381 Mass. 736, 741-742 (1980). A Juvenile v. Commonwealth (No. 1), 380 Mass. 552, 563 (1980).
*385 The District Court judge concluded that (1) the defendant presented a significant danger to the public, as demonstrated by the nature of the offense charged;[2] and (2) the defendant was not amenable to rehabilitation as a juvenile. G.L.c. 119, § 61. The defendant does not dispute the seriousness of the alleged offense. Rather, he argues that "[t]he transfer findings were unsupported by the weight of the evidence before the court." He asserts that the overwhelming evidence before the District Court judge demonstrated his amenability to rehabilitation and, therefore, he should have been treated as a juvenile. G.L.c. 119, § 61.
Based on the testimony he credited, the District Court judge determined that "there is little or no likelihood of rehabilitation of [the defendant] within the juvenile system due to the length of time treatment would be required and for [the] reason that there are no guarantees or assurances that rehabilitation or a measure thereof could be accomplished."[3] The defendant acknowledges that testimony varied concerning *386 the amount of time it would take to accomplish rehabilitation, but argues that "there was no evidence indicating [that his rehabilitation] could not be accomplished while [he] was still a juvenile and in the custody of appropriate state agencies."[4]
The record supports the judge's conclusion. Although expert testimony produced conflicting opinions as to the defendant's amenability to rehabilitation as a juvenile, even the most optimistic prognoses would place the defendant's rehabilitation well into adulthood. That the judge's finding is in "direct conflict" with the defendant's view of the evidence is not error. "The judge was entitled to resolve the conflicting testimony.... We do not `revise a judge's subsidiary findings of fact, where they are warranted by the evidence, or ... review the weight of the evidence related to the findings. In particular, it is inappropriate to ask us to reverse a judge's findings involving credibility, since he saw the witnesses and we did not.'" Commonwealth v. Day, 387 Mass. 915, 919 *387 (1983), quoting Commonwealth v. Murphy, 362 Mass. 542, 550-551 (1972) (Hennessey, J., concurring), and cases cited.
The defendant also asserts that both of the lower court's rulings "were based [on the] assumption that in order for there to be a `likelihood of rehabilitation,' it must be that such `Rehabilitation' could be completed while [the defendant] remained a [j]uvenile." The defendant argues that, because "jurisdiction over a [j]uvenile committed for a `mental illness' can extend far beyond his attaining his majority, the evidence was clear that the defendant was amenable to treatment and the `time limitation,' i.e. majority of [the] defendant, was an erroneous factor interposed by the [c]ourt."
Our law does provide for the possibility of civil commitment of a delinquent beyond the age of majority. See G.L.c. 119, § 83, and c. 120, §§ 16-20 (1988 ed.). This does not, however, render the transfer decision erroneous. The transfer statute only requires the judge "to focus on the minor's potential for successful treatment before the age of majority within existing juvenile facilities." A Juvenile, supra at 283 (emphasis supplied). See Two Juveniles, supra at 742; Commonwealth v. Hill, 387 Mass. 619, 622 (1982).
b. Probable cause and lack of criminal responsibility. At the probable cause portion of the transfer hearing, the defendant presented evidence of lack of criminal responsibility. He claims the judge erred in refusing to consider this evidence in making the probable cause determination. The defendant notes that in Commonwealth v. Ortiz, 393 Mass. 523, 534 n. 13 (1984), we stated in part that "the judge or magistrate should view the [probable cause] proceeding as if it were a trial." In Commonwealth v. Smith, 357 Mass. 168 (1970), we held that the defendant's criminal responsibility in a capital case is an issue of fact for a jury. Id. at 178. Relying on these cases, the defendant argues that, because the fact finder at a probable cause hearing is the judge, he may consider the question of criminal responsibility in his probable cause determination.
The defendant misconstrues our analogy between a probable cause hearing and a trial. The minimum quantum of evidence *388 required to find probable cause "is somewhat analogous in function to [a judge's] ruling on a motion for a directed verdict at trial as to whether there is sufficient evidence to warrant submission of the case to the jury." Myers v. Commonwealth, 363 Mass. 843, 850 (1973). Consequently, we have adopted a "`directed verdict' rule in defining the minimum quantum of credible evidence necessary to support a bind-over determination," id., pursuant to which the judge "should view the proceeding as if it were a trial, and should find probable cause only if the Commonwealth has presented sufficient evidence to send the case to a jury." Ortiz, supra at 535 n. 14.
Where evidence is sufficient to support a murder conviction, without regard to the defendant's criminal responsibility, directing a verdict of not guilty by reason of insanity "would constitute an unwarranted invasion of the province of the jury." Commonwealth v. Gould, 380 Mass. 672, 679 (1980). Similarly, a finding of "no probable cause by reason of insanity" would improperly expropriate a jury question.
The judge was required only to find that there was probable cause "to believe that the child has committed the offense or violation as charged." G.L.c. 119, § 61. The judge does not "resolve the issue of the juvenile's guilt or innocence." A Juvenile v. Commonwealth, supra at 279.
2. Jury impanelment. During jury selection, the judge informed prospective jurors that the defendant was then fifteen years old and asked whether that fact would "affect your ability to reach an impartial verdict based on the evidence and the law in this case."[5] The defendant claims that, as a result of this question and the follow-up colloquy, the judge erroneously excused two prospective jurors. Again, the record does not support the defendant's assertion.
The defendant claims that both prospective jurors were "excused simply because they expressed serious sympathy for *389 the juvenile's appearance in the adult court." The record reveals that neither juror expressed any belief as to how juveniles should be treated. One of the prospective jurors unequivocally answered the question affirmatively and the other stated that she did not know whether the defendant's age would affect her impartiality. On further examination, both indicated their inability to decide the case solely on the evidence and were excused. "Where, as here, the judge had the opportunity to observe the prospective juror[s] and to explore the possibility of partiality, we cannot say that he abused his discretion." Commonwealth v. Cameron, 385 Mass. 660, 668 (1982), citing Commonwealth v. Amazeen, 375 Mass. 73, 83 (1978).
The defendant claims further that exclusion of the two prospective jurors violated his constitutional right to a random selection of jurors from a fair cross-section of the community by eliminating a distinctive group  suburban parents or caretakers of adolescent children. The defendant fashions a shamefully frivolous argument. Suburban parents or caretakers of adolescent children are not a "distinctive" group from whose exclusion a defendant is constitutionally protected. See Commonwealth v. Soares, 377 Mass. 461, 488-489, cert. denied, 444 U.S. 881 (1979). Further, the record provides no support for the assertion that the excused panel members were even members of this "group."[6]
3. Jury instructions. The defendant argues the judge instructed the jury on criminal responsibility and mental impairment and that the instructions were erroneous. The defendant made no objection at trial to the instructions he now *390 attacks.[7] In support of his conclusions the defendant "parses the charge and attacks it piecemeal. We, however, view the charge in its entirety since the adequacy of instructions must be determined in light of their over-all impact on the jury." Commonwealth v. Sellon, 380 Mass. 220, 231-232 (1980). "The test is whether there is a substantial risk of a miscarriage of justice." Commonwealth v. Freeman, 352 Mass. 556, 564 (1967). We turn to the instructions.[8]
a. Instructions on criminal responsibility. The judge instructed the jury that, "in determining whether the defendant was sane at the time of the alleged crime, you may consider the fact that a great majority of persons are sane and the resulting probability that any particular person, including the defendant, is sane." The defendant acknowledges that this instruction, which concerned the "presumption of sanity," was proper. See Commonwealth v. Amaral, 389 Mass. 184, 190 (1983); Commonwealth v. Kostka, 370 Mass. 516, 530 (1976); Commonwealth v. Costa, 360 Mass. 177, 186 (1971); Commonwealth v. Clark, 292 Mass. 409, 415 (1935).
*391 The judge continued, stating that "[i]t is for the jury to decide whether you wish to draw that inference. The fact that I am giving you this rule, the rule that there is a presumption that the great majority of persons is sane, does not mean you must adopt it. It is a rule that you may or may not adopt depending on how you view all of the evidence, including the medical evidence given by the psychiatrists or psychologists who testified in this case."
The defendant argues that this instruction characterized the "presumption" of sanity as a rule of law, which "misled the jury into believing it deserved a higher consideration than other evidence, particularly the psychiatric testimony" and which "a reasonable juror could easily have viewed ... as mandatory ... and could interpret ... as a conclusive  direction [sic] to find sanity." Nowhere in the charge did the judge characterize the presumption of sanity as a rule of law.
The judge instructed the jury that it was free to accept or reject all or part of the expert testimony. The defendant argues that the instruction on the presumption of sanity, combined with the instruction on expert testimony, creates a "strong probability ... that the artificial weight given to the presumption in the charge caused ... the jury to ignore all the expert testimony." The charge clearly informed the jurors that they should review all of the evidence, including expert testimony, when deciding whether to draw an inference of sanity. See Commonwealth v. Walker, 370 Mass. 548, 578 n. 22, cert. denied, 429 U.S. 943 (1976). This question of the defendant's criminal responsibility was not made mandatory because the judge informed the jurors that they could accept or reject the testimony of any expert.
In this case, the isolated use of the term "presumption" was not error. Cf. Commonwealth v. Walker, supra at 578-580. The judge's instructions on the procedural operation of the presumption were proper. See Kostka, supra at 526-530. The instructions repeatedly assigned to the Commonwealth the burden of proving criminal responsibility beyond reasonable doubt. The Commonwealth placed no reliance on the presumption of sanity or on any inference of probable sanity. *392 See Amaral, supra at 191; Commonwealth v. Guiliana, 390 Mass. 464, 469-471 (1983); Commonwealth v. Mutina, 366 Mass. 810, 811 (1975). Rather, it relied on expert testimony and evidence of the nature and circumstances of the killing, Commonwealth v. Ricard, 355 Mass. 509, 514-515 (1969), to prove that the defendant was criminally responsible.
We repeat that the word "presumption" should not be used in instructing the jury that they can consider "that the majority of [persons] are sane and the resulting probability that any particular man is sane." Commonwealth v. Costa, supra at 186. See Commonwealth v. O'Brien, 377 Mass. 772, 780 (1979); Commonwealth v. Kostka, supra at 525 n. 5; Commonwealth v. Walker, supra at 578 n. 22.
b. Instructions on mental impairment. The defendant asserts that, in charging the jury on mental impairment, the judge erroneously limited the jury's consideration of the defendant's mental condition to the day of the killing only. He claims this prevented the jury from considering evidence of any mental impairment that may have existed prior to that day and could have affected his capacity to formulate specific intent or to deliberately premeditate.[9] The defendant misreads the instructions.
The judge properly instructed the jury to consider whether the defendant suffered any mental impairment on the day of the killing and, if so, whether it affected his ability to deliberately premeditate or to intend to commit murder with extreme atrocity or cruelty, or to formulate the specific intent to kill or to do grievous bodily harm. See Commonwealth v. Grey, 399 Mass. 469, 470-471 (1987). Commonwealth v. Dunton, 397 Mass. 101, 104 (1986). Commonwealth v. Gould, 380 Mass. 672, 680-686 (1980). Contrary to the defendant's assertions, the judge instructed the jury that it could "consider the defendant's conduct prior to November *393 20, 1986, on that date and subsequent thereto in order to determine whether the defendant had specific criminal intent." He also stated that the jury could "consider [any] long-standing mental illness [that the defendant may have suffered] in ascertaining whether the defendant had sufficient mental capacity to deliberately premeditate the acts charged or intended to kill with extreme cruelty or atrocity."
The defendant also argues that the judge erroneously "instructed generally as to the effect of a mental impairment, omitting completely any instruction as to the effect of mental impairment on the ability to formulate a `specific intent,' and confining the jury only to (1) premeditation and (2) extreme cruelty and atrocity." The record reveals that the judge explicitly gave the instructions which the defendant now claims were absent.
After giving general instructions on specific criminal intent, the judge told the jury that it could "consider the defendant's mental condition on the day in question [November 20, 1986], and whether he suffered any mental impairment on that particular day and, if so, whether it affected the requisite specific criminal intent which is necessary to the Commonwealth's proof of its case." This comports with our case law. See Grey, supra at 470-471; Dunton, supra at 104. He continued, stating that "[m]alice ... may be negated by a failure of the government to prove to a point beyond reasonable doubt that the defendant's specific criminal intent was not impaired by a mental condition he may have suffered on November 20, 1986, keeping in mind that the defendant must have the mental capacity to form a specific criminal intent to kill or do grievous bodily harm in a charge of murder." We have said that, "[w]hile a specific intent to kill satisfi[es] the malice requirement ... actual intent to kill is not a necessary element of murder in the second degree.... An intention to inflict injury on the victim which is not justified on any lawful ground or palliated by the existence of any mitigating circumstances is malicious within the meaning of the law." Commonwealth v. McGuirk, 376 Mass. 338, 345 (1978), quoting Commonwealth v. Bedrosian, 247 Mass. *394 573, 576 (1924). Thus, the instruction on malice was more favorable to the defendant than required.
The defendant next claims the judge gave an erroneous supplemental instruction. At the jury's request, the judge gave a supplemental instruction on the "[d]efinition of not guilty by reason of insanity, stressing the definition of criminal responsibility" and "[t]he relation of mental illness to criminal responsibility." The request itself described these issues as "somewhat intertwined." During the supplemental instructions, the judge stated that, "if the Commonwealth has proven to you to a point beyond reasonable doubt that [the defendant] was criminally responsible at that time, it is entitled to have you discard the issue of criminal responsibility entirely and to concentrate on whether or not the government has proven to you murder in the first degree, murder in the second degree or manslaughter."
The defendant claims that this "left the jury with the final impression that if they were convinced [that he] was criminally responsible, they need not determine the effect on his ability to formulate specific intent as the result of mental impairment." The defendant contends that it was erroneous not to reinstruct on the effect that mental impairment may have on specific intent. "[T]he law does not require repetition of the same thought at each turn." Commonwealth v. McLeod, 394 Mass. 727, 739, cert. denied sub nom. Aiello v. Massachusetts, 474 U.S. 919 (1985), quoting Commonwealth v. Peters, 372 Mass. 319, 324 (1977). Further, a supplemental instruction on mental impairment would have been unresponsive to the jury's request. See Commonwealth v. Pares-Ramirez, 400 Mass. 604, 610-611 (1987). Nothing in the supplemental instruction on criminal responsibility altered the earlier charge on the distinct concept of mental impairment. The instructions clearly distinguished between the two concepts. "[I]t must be presumed that in reaching the verdict, the jurors heeded the judge's instructions." Commonwealth v. Fidler, 377 Mass. 192, 199 (1979). There was no substantial risk of a miscarriage of justice.
*395 4. Motion for postconviction relief. Following the defendant's conviction of murder in the second degree, the judge imposed a life sentence, as provided by G.L.c. 265, § 2.[10] The defendant moved for postconviction relief under Mass. R. Crim. P. 30 (a), 378 Mass. 842, 900 (1979), requesting that the judge vacate the sentence and adjudicate him a delinquent juvenile, pursuant to G.L.c. 119, § 83 (1988 ed.). The motion was accompanied by a memorandum in support of the motion for postconviction relief. Neither the motion nor the memorandum contained any reference to new evidence or evidence obtained since the transfer hearing which was not offered at trial.
Section 83 provides, in part, that "the superior court may, in its discretion, and in lieu of a judgment of conviction and sentence, adjudicate such person as a delinquent child, and make such disposition as may be made by a district court or a juvenile court under section fifty-eight." G.L.c. 119, § 83. The judge denied the motion, ruling that he "[did] not have discretion under G.L.c. 119, § 83 where the jury has returned a verdict of murder in the 2nd Degree. See G.L.c. 265, § 2. The only sentence that can be imposed is a life sentence."
We agree with the defendant that § 83 is applicable to the defendant's case. "It would seem clear that these statutes [including G.L.c. 119, § 83,] placed discretion in the Superior Court over the sentencing of the defendant despite the language of G.L.c. 265, § 2." Commonwealth v. A Juvenile, 364 Mass. 103, 107 (1973). See D'Urbano v. Commonwealth, 345 Mass. 466, 476 (1963); G.L.c. 119, § 83. The statute gives the Superior Court judge an opportunity to reconsider whether the defendant should be treated as a juvenile in light of the entire trial, as well as the transfer hearing.
At the hearing on the motion, the judge commented that, if he had discretion, he would not exercise it because (1) the *396 defendant committed an especially brutal murder; and (2) the defendant displayed an utter lack of remorse for the killing. The reasons stated by the judge are sufficient to indicate that he did not abuse his discretion.
The defendant also claims that G.L.c. 119, § 83, "requires an evidentiary hearing on the issues to be decided by the court." We find no error in denying the defendant's motion for an evidentiary hearing. Nothing in G.L.c. 119, § 83, mandates an evidentiary hearing or undermines the judge's discretion to determine whether an evidentiary hearing is warranted. See Mass. R. Crim. P. 30 (c) (3), 378 Mass. 900 (1979); Commonwealth v. Stewart, 383 Mass. 253, 257 (1981). The judge had before him the full record of the juvenile transfer proceedings and had presided over the trial. At the hearing on the rule 30 (a) motion, the judge reiterated his familiarity with the extensive body of psychiatric testimony concerning the defendant. The transfer hearing presented the same issue as the postconviction motion: the defendant's need for psychiatric treatment and the desirability to treat him as a juvenile. The judge did not abuse his discretion in denying an evidentiary hearing on the motion. See Commonwealth v. Toney, 385 Mass. 575, 579-582 (1982); Commonwealth v. Coyne, 372 Mass. 599, 601 (1977). Cf. Commonwealth v. DeChristoforo, 360 Mass. 531, 543 (1971).
Judgment affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  General Laws c. 119, § 61, requires that, if the judge finds probable cause, he "shall then consider, but shall not be limited to, evidence of the following factors: (a) the seriousness of the alleged offense; (b) the child's family, school, and social history, including his court and juvenile delinquency record, if any; (c) adequate protection of the public; (d) the nature of any past treatment efforts for the child; and (e) the likelihood of rehabilitation of the child."
[2]  The defendant and amici note that at least one commentator has criticized consideration of a juvenile's "dangerousness" as a highly speculative factor. See Valliere, Transfer of Juvenile Offenders to Adult Courts in Massachusetts: Reevaluating the Rehabilitative Ideal, 20 Suffolk U.L. Rev. 989 (1986). The Legislature, however, has directed that a judge consider protection of the public. Thus, it would be error for a judge to ignore this factor.
[3]  The judge based his conclusion, in part, on the following subsidiary findings: "20. That extensive examinations and interviews were conducted by 3 Psychiatrists and a Psychologist who testified and the Court finds: ...
"b. Due to the degree of planning a murder, making a choice of victims and showing no emotion, concern or empathy for the victim or his family lead to belief that Rod Matthews is severely mentally ill.
"...
"g. That Rod Matthews presents the highest risk of danger to himself and others, that this risk is not acute but chronic and highly potential.
"h. That institutionalization is absolutely necessary to control Rod Matthews potential for danger and constant adult supervision is imperative.
"i. That there are no assurances that Rod Matthews psychiatric illness could be cured but it is within the realm of possibility that he could change or show improvement over many years of treatment by way of drugs and psychotherapy but always under the closest of supervision in a secure setting.
"j. That many years as expressed by the Psychiatrist and Psychologist exceeds any period of time during which Rod Matthews could be treated or controlled within the juvenile systems.
"...
"21. That the Department of Youth Services period of Correction control over a juvenile would not be sufficient to rehabilitate Rod Matthews and any further control would have to be accomplished by the Department of Mental Health without Correction Department control.
"22. That due to the length of time necessary to treat Rod Matthews and due to the fact that there is no guarantee or assurance of rehabilitating Rod Matthews during a period of time in excess of that which the juvenile system could be employed, the Court finds that Rod Matthews is not likely to be rehabilitated as a juvenile."
[4]  The defendant claims further that the Commonwealth "failed to sustain its burden of proving clearly and convincingly that there is no likelihood of rehabilitation." The appropriate statutory standard has to do with amenability to rehabilitation and does not require proof that rehabilitation is impossible.
[5]  The defendant filed a "motion for the examination of jurors." He requested in substance that the jurors be asked whether their ability to decide the case fairly and impartially would be affected by the defendant's status as a juvenile.
[6]  The fallacy of the defendant's argument is apparent from his own brief. He states that "[t]he record does not indicate that [one of the prospective jurors] was the mother, sister, or close relative of any adolescent boy, but the likelihood is that she was." Similarly, he writes that "[t]he record does not show whether [the other juror] was in the same discrete class ... [b]ut it does not indicate he was not in that group either." The record does show that a suburban father of teenage children who expressed concern for the defendant's young age was impaneled.
[7]  We think it telling that experienced defense counsel did not raise this issue at the conclusion of the charge.
[8]  In his argument on the instructions, the defendant also claims that the judge made two erroneous evidentiary rulings concerning his mental condition. In discussing these two rulings, the defendant makes no reference to the transcript and he cites no authority. Indeed, he recites as facts matters which do not conform to the transcript. Neither claim is properly before this court. See Mass. R.A.P. 16 (a) (4), as amended, 367 Mass. 921 (1975); Commonwealth v. Cundriff, 382 Mass. 137, 150-151 n. 22 (1980), cert. denied, 451 U.S. 973 (1981).
We briefly discuss these issues. The defendant argues that the judge erroneously excluded a question regarding the effects of the drug Ritalin. At the bench conference, the judge simply asked that the question be rephrased. The defendant did not rephrase the question and did not ask any further questions along that line of inquiry. The defendant has not shown any error.
The defendant also claims the judge erroneously limited testimony regarding his mental condition to experts. The record reveals that the judge indicated that, in his view, experts might be needed to testify about the side effects that a large amount of a particular drug may have on a particular individual. Evidence was neither offered nor excluded on that basis. Further, that was not the theory of the defendant's case.
[9]  The defendant was acquitted of murder in the first degree. Therefore, we need not consider the instructions on deliberate premeditation and extreme atrocity or cruelty. We nevertheless include references to them in our discussion in order to provide the context for the challenged instructions that are before this court.
[10]  General Laws c. 265, § 2, provides in pertinent part, "[w]hoever is guilty of murder in the second degree shall be punished by imprisonment in the state prison for life."

=== CASE 2208574 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:31.316782+00 ===

820 A.2d 868 (2003)
INDEPENDENCE BLUE CROSS, Petitioner
v.
WORKERS' COMPENSATION APPEAL BOARD (FRANKFORD HOSPITAL and Susan Nothnagel), Respondents.
Susan Nothnagel, Petitioner
v.
Workers' Compensation Appeal Board (Independence Blue Cross and Frankford Hospital), Respondents.
Commonwealth Court of Pennsylvania.
Argued March 3, 2003.
Decided April 7, 2003.
*870 John Jackson, Bromall, for petitioner.
Kenneth M. Rodgers, Philadelphia, for respondent, S. Nothnagel.
William F. Sweeney, Philadelphia, for respondent, Frankford Hospital.
BEFORE: SMITH-RIBNER, Judge, SIMPSON, Judge, and McCLOSKEY, Senior Judge.
*869 OPINION BY Judge SIMPSON.
In these consolidated matters, Independence Blue Cross (Blue Cross) petitions for review of the order of the Workers' Compensation Appeal Board (Board) that affirmed a dismissal of its review and penalty petitions because it waived its subrogation interest. Susan Nothnagel (Claimant) petitions for review of the Board's reversal of an award of attorney fees and costs. We affirm the Board in both matters.
In January 1994, Claimant sustained a back injury while working for Frankford Hospital (Employer). Employer denied the claim, and Claimant filed a claim petition. During the litigation, Claimant submitted her medical expenses to Blue Cross and Pennsylvania Blue Shield (Blue Shield), her health care insurers.
In June 1997, Workers' Compensation Judge (WCJ) Kelley granted Claimant's claim petition, and Employer appealed. Blue Cross and Blue Shield continued to pay Claimant's medical expenses.
While the appeal was pending, Employer and Claimant entered into a Compromise and Release (agreement) in July 1998. Claimant received a lump sum payment of $100,000. Based on information received from Blue Shield, Claimant paid it $11,000 from the proceeds. The agreement did not refer to Blue Cross. The agreement stated that there was no further Section 319 subrogation lien. WCJ Kelley approved the agreement.
Nearly 14 months after the approval of the agreement, Blue Cross filed a review petition against Employer, seeking subrogation because it paid a significant amount of Claimant's work-related medical expenses. Also, Blue Cross filed a penalty petition, seeking to set aside the agreement. Blue Cross alleged that the agreement contained material and possibly fraudulent misrepresentations regarding Claimant's medical expenses and the existence of a Section 319 subrogation lien.
Blue Cross's petitions were assigned to WCJ Snyder. At the initial hearing, both Employer and Claimant moved to dismiss the petitions. They asserted that Blue Cross never provided notice of its subrogation lien to either of them. They argued that Blue Cross was now time-barred from asserting a lien.
Also at the initial hearing, the WCJ accepted from Blue Cross a copy of the agreement, a printout summary of medical bills it paid and a document identifying diagnoses codes. Significantly, Blue Cross neither proved nor offered to prove that it notified a workers' compensation party of its subrogation interest. Also, Blue Cross neither proved nor offered to prove that it lacked notice of the claim petition proceedings and agreement approval proceedings.
The WCJ dismissed Blue Cross' review petition. He determined Blue Cross did not assert its subrogation interest during the claim proceeding and did not participate in the negotiation or hearing on the agreement. The WCJ concluded that Blue *871 Cross waived its subrogation interest by failing to raise it in a timely manner. The WCJ also dismissed the penalty petition, concluding that Blue Cross failed to prove a violation of the Workers' Compensation Act (Act).[1] Further, he found Blue Cross' contest was unreasonable, and he awarded attorney fees and costs.
On appeal, the Board reversed the award of attorney fees and costs. The Board affirmed the remainder of the award.
Before us, Blue Cross contests that it waived its subrogation interest by failing to present it at the time of the claim petition. Blue Cross notes it was not a party to the claim petition and did not receive notice of the proceedings. Blue Cross asserts an absolute statutory right to subrogation under Section 319 of the Act[2], a right which cannot be defeated by equitable considerations, such as lack of due diligence. It relies upon Thompson v. Workers' Compensation Appeal Bd. (USF & G Co. and Craig Welding & Equipment Rental), 566 Pa. 420, 781 A.2d 1146 (2001) for the proposition that subrogation is automatic and that there are no equitable exceptions to the absolute statutory language contained in Section 319.
Thompson involved an employer seeking subrogation from its employee's settlement with a tortfeasor. In the third-party lawsuit, the trial court precluded proof of medical bills and wage loss covered by workers' compensation as a spoliation sanction arising from the employer's failure to retain evidence.
After the case settled, the employer filed a petition to enforce its subrogation lien from the settlement proceeds paid by the third-party tortfeasor to the employee. The controlling issue was whether wrongdoing by the employer, which prejudiced the employee's third-party lawsuit, worked an equitable forfeiture of the subrogation interest. Ultimately, our Supreme Court held that the subrogation interest against the third-party recovery survived. Addressing the first paragraph of Section 319, it held that "[t]he statute is clear and unambiguous, and, by its terms, admits of no express exceptions, equitable or otherwise." Thompson, 566 Pa. at 429, 781 A.2d at 1151.
We do not agree that either Thompson or the first paragraph of Section 319 controls this case. The first paragraph of Section 319 pertains to an employer's subrogation interest in an injured employee's recovery against a third-party tortfeasor. As our Supreme Court recognized in Thompson, subrogation under this provision is automatic and absolute, there being no conditions in the statute.
In contrast, the second paragraph of Section 319 addresses adjustments between benefits payors, usually insurers. More importantly, the second paragraph of Section 319 contains explicit conditions not present in the first paragraph:
Where an employe has received payments for the disability or medical expense resulting from an injury in the course of his employment paid by the employer or an insurance company on the basis that the injury and disability were not compensable under this act in the event of an agreement or award for that injury the employer or insurance company who made the payments shall be subrogated out of the agreement or award to the amount so paid, if the right to subrogation is agreed to by the parties *872 or is established at the time of hearing before the referee or the board.
77 P.S. § 671. (Emphasis added.) Thus, the second paragraph of Section 319 contemplates subrogation established either by contract (agreed to by the parties) or by litigation (established at the time of the hearing). It is neither automatic nor absolute. Indeed, subrogation under the second paragraph of Section 319 is not self-executing and must be asserted with reasonable diligence. Baierl Chevrolet v. Workmen's Compensation Appeal Bd. (Schubert), 149 Pa.Cmwlth.367, 613 A.2d 132 (1992); Humphrey v. Workmen's Compensation Appeal Bd. (Supermarket Service), 100 Pa.Cmwlth.33, 514 A.2d 246 (1986). In summary, subrogation under this statutory provision arises differently than subrogation arising under the first paragraph of Section 319.
Blue Cross' subrogation arising under the second paragraph of Section 319 is subject to the statutory conditions. Subrogation arises if it "is agreed to by the parties or is established at the time of hearing...." Here, Blue Cross failed to establish subrogation as required by the statute. In particular, there was no offer to prove an agreement for subrogation, there was no offer to prove a request for subrogation at any of the hearings on the claim petition and agreement, and there was no offer to prove a request directed to any workers' compensation party that a subrogated interest be protected.
Blue Cross contends that it satisfied the statutory condition by attempting to establish its subrogation interest at a workers' compensation hearing after the claim proceedings. In particular, it argues that it may establish its subrogation interest after the claim proceedings at a hearing on its review and penalty petitions. However, case law holds otherwise.
In Baierl, after a 1988 approval of supplemental agreements disposed of a claim petition, Blue Cross and Blue Shield filed a 1989 review petition seeking to enforce their subrogation interest. We held that the insurers were not entitled to subrogation because the interest was not asserted during the pendency of the claim proceedings. Baierl controls Blue Cross' timeliness argument here.[3]
Blue Cross' contention that it lacked notice is not persuasive. Blue Cross neither proved nor offered to prove that it was unaware of the claim proceedings or of the proposed agreement.
Likewise, we find no merit in Blue Cross' penalty petition alleging the agreement contained material or possible fraudulent misrepresentations related to Section 319 liens. Blue Cross failed to offer any evidence that the representations in the agreement were knowingly false. Also, Blue Cross did not offer to prove that it notified any workers' compensation party of its interest. Thus, the record does not support a penalty, and we discern no basis to reverse the Board on this issue.
On the cross appeal, Claimant assigns error in the reversal of the award of attorney fees. The Board concluded the Act did not provide for an award of attorney fees against Blue Cross because Blue Cross was not contesting liability, but rather was trying to assert its subrogation interest. Claimant submits that the language of Section 440 allows attorney fees *873 for unreasonable contest, not only where an insurer is contesting liability, but also where it seeks to "otherwise modify compensation awards, agreements or other payment arrangements or to set aside final receipts." 77 P.S. § 996. We agree with the Board that the Act does not provide for Claimant's recovery of attorney fees from Blue Cross, but for different reasons.
It is a general rule that each party to litigation must pay its own attorney fees, unless there is statutory language providing for fees, the parties have a clear, contractual agreement or there is some other established exception. Corace v. Balint, 418 Pa. 262, 210 A.2d 882 (1965); Pa. State Police, Bureau of Liquor Control Enforcement, v. Benny Enterprises, Inc., 669 A.2d 1018 (Pa.Cmwlth.1995). The party claiming entitlement to an award of fees bears the burden of proving such entitlement. Jones v. Muir, 511 Pa. 535, 515 A.2d 855 (1986).
Contrary to Claimant's assertions, Section 440 of the Act provides no authority to award attorney fees against a party other than an employer or its workers' compensation insurer. In its entirety, Section 440 provides:
(a) In any contested case where the insurer has contested liability in whole or in part, including contested cases involving petitions to terminate, reinstate, increase, reduce or otherwise modify compensation awards, agreements or other payment arrangements or to set aside final receipts, the employe or his dependent, as the case may be, in whose favor the matter at issue has been finally determined in whole or in part shall be awarded, in addition to the award for compensation, a reasonable sum for costs incurred for attorney's fee, witnesses, necessary medical examination, and the value of unreimbursed lost time to attend the proceedings: Provided, That cost for attorney fees may be excluded when a reasonable basis for the contest has been established by the employer or the insurer.
(b) If counsel fees are awarded and assessed against the insurer or employer, then the workers' compensation judge must make a finding as to the amount and the length of time for which such counsel fee is payable based upon the complexity of the factual and legal issues involved, the skill required, the duration of the proceedings and the time and effort required and actually expended. If the insurer has paid or tendered payment of compensation and the controversy relates to the amount of compensation due, costs for attorney's fee shall be based only on the difference between the final award of compensation and the compensation paid or tendered by the insurer. (Emphasis added.)
The statute provides for attorney fees from an employer or insurer. By definition, "insurer" refers to an entity with which the employer has insured liability pursuant to the Act. See Section 109 of the Act, 77 P.S. § 29 and Section 305 of the Act, 77 P.S. § 501. Because this section does not confer authority to assess fees against a third-party benefit payor, such as Blue Cross, we reject Claimant's argument that she is entitled to attorney fees under Section 440.
Claimant next asserts entitlement to attorneys fees under 42 Pa.C.S. § 2503. She maintains that Blue Cross proceeded in bad faith because it did not offer evidence that Claimant failed to protect a subrogation claim of which she had notice. Claimant relies upon Patel v. Workmen's Compensation Appeal Bd. (Sauquoit Fibers Co.), 103 Pa.Cmwlth.290, 520 A.2d 525 (1987), to support her argument that Section 2503 of the Judicial Code is applicable to workers' compensation proceedings.
*874 In Patel, a workers' compensation claimant filed a third claim for the same injuries previously twice denied. The WCJ and Board denied the third claim, and Patel appealed to this Court a third time. Concluding that the appeal was repetitious and wholly frivolous, this Court awarded reasonable appellate counsel fees pursuant to Section 2503(7) of the Judicial Code and Pa. R.A.P. 2744.
Contrary to Claimant's assertions, Patel does not stand for the proposition that the Board may award attorneys fees. Section 2503 of the Judicial Code applies only to components of the unified judicial system, unless there is specific language otherwise. Pleasant Valley School Dist. v. Dep't of Cmty. Affairs, 127 Pa.Cmwlth. 85, 560 A.2d 935 (1989); Duquesne Light Co. v. Pa. Public Utility Comm'n, 117 Pa. Cmwlth. 28, 543 A.2d 196 (1988); Pennsylvania Bd. of Probation and Parole v. Baker, 82 Pa.Cmwlth. 86, 474 A.2d 415 (1984). Section 2503 does not contain express language authorizing the WCJ or Board to award costs and fees. Our holding in Patel is consistent with these cases.
We are sympathetic to Claimant's arguments. Nevertheless, this Court's authority to award counsel fees under Section 2503 arises not from a party's conduct in matters prior to the commencement of the appeal, but rather from a party's conduct before this Court. Gossman v. Lower Chanceford Township Bd. of Supervisors, 503 Pa. 392, 469 A.2d 996 (1983); Dep't of Transportation, Bureau of Driver Licensing v. Smith, 145 Pa.Cmwlth. 164, 602 A.2d 499 (1992). For us to award attorney fees, we must find Blue Cross' prosecution of its appeal to be arbitrary, vexatious or in bad faith. Id. Because the impact of our Supreme Court's recent decision in Thompson on subrogation under the second paragraph of Section 319 has not been addressed before this opinion, we decline to do so.
Accordingly, the order of the Board is affirmed.
ORDER
AND NOW, this 7th day of April, 2003, we affirm the order of the Workers' Compensation Appeal Board.
NOTES
[1]  Act of June 2, 1915, P.L. 736, as amended, 77 P.S. §§ 1-1041.4, 2501-2626.
[2]  Act of June 2, 1915, P.L. 736, as amended, 77 P.S. § 671.
[3]  We do not address whether an employer or insurance company may assert a subrogation interest after a claim petition is resolved upon proof that, despite due diligence, it did not timely discover the injuries were work related. Blue Cross did not make such an offer of proof here. Given that Blue Shield protected its subrogation interest, it is unclear how Blue Cross would proceed on this issue.

=== CASE 9737049 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:14:09.758947+00 ===

JUSTICE HARTMAN delivered the opinion of the court: The subject of this appeal concerns the application of Illinois Supreme Court Rule 504 (107 Ill. 2d R. 504), which provides, in part, that appearance dates for traffic cases shall be set “not less than 14 days but within 49 days after the date of the arrest, whenever practicable.” The State contends the circuit court erroneously granted defendant’s motion to dismiss on the grounds that it was practicable to schedule defendant’s appearance date within the time period set forth by Supreme Court Rule 504. On September 2, 1987, defendant was arrested in Schaumburg, Illinois, and charged with driving under the influence of alcohol, following too closely, failing to signal when required, driving on a revoked license and transportation of open alcohol, The arresting Schaumburg police officer scheduled defendant’s first court appearance for September 15, 1987, 13 days after the arrest. Defendant appeared on September 15 and requested a continuance to arrange for an attorney. The continuance was granted to October 20, 1987. On that date, defendant’s attorney appeared and orally moved to dismiss pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 504; in response, the State requested a continuance. On October 27, 1987, a hearing was conducted on defendant’s written motion to dismiss. The arresting officer testified that he scheduled defendant’s court appearance on September 15, 1987. Although this date was one day earlier than the 14-day minimal time limit set forth in the guidelines of Supreme Court Rule 504, it was the officer’s first scheduled court date following defendant’s arrest. The officer’s next scheduled court date was October 20, 1987, 48 days after the arrest. The officer testified he did not set the court appearance on the later date because he thought it should be scheduled before the 46-day statutory summary license suspension deprived defendant of his driver’s license. The officer also stated that he was away at a five-day seminar beginning on October 5, 1987, and on vacation for nine days beginning on October 10,1987. Defense counsel argued that the courtroom in which defendant’s case would have been heard was in the same facility in which the police station was located. Counsel also claimed there were at least nine court dates for the Schaumburg police department on the court calendar prosecuted by the State’s Attorney’s office within the prescribed time period. Lastly, defense counsel stated that the adjoining communities of Elk Grove Village, Hoffman Estates, and Hanover Park had assistant State’s Attorneys available during the time period at issue. In response, the State admitted that the case was not set within the 14- to 49-day period prescribed by Rule 504, but contended it was not practicable for the officer to do so. The circuit court granted defendant’s motion to dismiss, pursuant to Rule 504. In determining that it was practicable for the arresting officer to schedule defendant’s court date within the 14- to 49-day period, the court observed that “the officer was present in court and did testify on the 49th day on one of his regular key dates. *** [Ejvidently it was very practicable to be here because he was here and that was his scheduled date.” The court then concluded: “The officer had a practicable date on the 49th day, undisputed. He chose, in good faith, to set a different date because he was concerned about the 46 days of the summary suspension. *** However, under those Supreme Court Rules, I do not believe that Rule 504 was followed. It was obviously practicable to set the uniformed [sic] traffic citation for the 49th day. And, therefore the uniform traffic citation charges will be dismissed pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 504.” The State appeals.  The State first contends the circuit court abused its discretion when it granted defendant’s motion to dismiss, suggesting defendant waived his right to present the motion by failing to do so at his initial court appearance. This contention is without merit; defendant’s objection to his appearance date was raised in a timely fashion and addressed thoroughly by the circuit court at the October 27, 1987, hearing.  The State next contends the dismissal was improper because it was impracticable to schedule defendant’s appearance date between the 14- to 49-day period set forth in Supreme Court Rule 504. It is undisputed that the appearance date was not set within the specified period. That fact, however, is not sufficient in and of itself to require dismissal; the rule is not absolute and is directory only as to the time limitations. (Village of Park Forest v. Fagan (1976), 64 Ill. 2d 264, 356 N.E.2d 59; People v. Hutson (1977), 45 Ill. App. 3d 977, 360 N.E.2d 548.) If the appearance date is not set within the rule’s time period, the State is required to establish it was impracticable to do so. (Fagan, 64 Ill. 2d 264; People v. Hutson, 45 Ill. App. 3d at 979.) Further, the circuit court’s determination regarding the impracticability of setting that date within the prescribed period will not be disturbed absent an abuse of discretion. People v. Hutson, 45 Ill. App. 3d at 979.  The question on appeal, therefore, is not whether the failure to schedule defendant’s appearance date within the time period of Rule 504 caused “any injury to [the] public interest or [to] private rights,” as suggested by the dissent. (See 191 Ill. App. 3d at 967.) We do not read Fagan to allow noncompliance with the time periods prescribed in Rule 504 as long as no “injury to the public interest or to private rights” results; that language in Fagan supported the supreme court’s conclusion that those time limitations were directory. The court then states in the following paragraph (Fagan, 64 Ill. 2d at 268): “To comply with the rule, an arresting officer should schedule [timely] appearance dates ‘whenever practicable, ’ notwithstanding the directory construction we hereby give to the rule.” (Emphasis added.) The good intentions of the arresting officer or the convenience of the parties are irrelevant where, as here, it was practicable to set the appearance date within 14 to 49 days after the date of the arrest.  Therefore, we must determine whether the circuit court abused its discretion in finding that it was practicable to set the appearance date within the rule-prescribed 14- to 49-day period after defendant’s arrest. In the instant case, defendant’s appearance date was scheduled 13 days after his arrest, rather than the 14-day minimum specified in Rule 504. The circuit court expressly noted, however, that the arresting officer was scheduled for a regular court date, and in fact did appear in court, within a 49-day period after defendant’s arrest. Based upon these facts, the court found that it was practicable for the appearance date to be set within the time period provided in Rule 504. The record further indicates that the court recognized but rejected the “good faith” reason for setting the date outside of the 14- to 49-day span, instead closely following the plain language of the rule. In light of its careful review of the circumstances, we simply cannot say the circuit court abused its discretion in finding that it was practicable to set the appearance date within the guidelines of Rule 504. The order of dismissal must be affirmed. Affirmed. BILANDIC, P.J., concurs.

=== CASE 9737050 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:14:09.763288+00 ===

JUSTICE SCARIANO, dissenting: I respectfully dissent. As the majority opinion notes, the supreme court held in Village of Park Forest v. Fagan (1976), 64 Ill. 2d 264, 267, 356 N.E.2d 59, that the language of Rule 504 “clearly indicates that the 45-day period is not meant to be absolute.” The court went on to “observe that Rule 504 contains no language which denies the municipality’s right to prosecute or the trial court’s jurisdiction to hear the case where the appearance date is not timely set. *** Nor do we believe that violation of the rule would ordinarily cause any injury to public interest or private rights.” Accordingly, the court held “that the time limitations in Rule 504 are directory.” 64 Ill. 2d at 268. Here, although it appears to have been practicable to have set the case within the time frame of the rule, the record establishes that the officer did not do so because he thought he had to schedule the matter before the defendant’s statutory summary suspension went into effect. The trial judge acknowledged that the officer “chose, in good faith, to set a different date because he was concerned about the 46 days of the summary suspension. Nobody could fault him for that.” Nevertheless, the judge dismissed the “charges pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 504” because “it was .obviously practicable to set the *** citation for the 49th day.” Defendant does not disagree with the trial judge’s finding that Officer Young acted in good faith when he missed complying with Rule 504 by one day; nor does he dispute that the officer's good faith was based on the honest belief that defendant’s case had to be scheduled before the statutory summary suspension went into effect “because my next court day was the 20th of October, and I thought for the law enforcement sworn report it had to be 46 days or prior, or earlier.” I therefore find it difficult to understand how Officer Young’s sincere attempt to accommodate defendant, in the words of our supreme court in Fagan, caused “any injury to [the] public interest or [to] private rights.” Nor do I read the supreme court’s holding in Fagan “that the time limitations in Rule 504 are directory” to be regarded as ad hoc. 64 Ill. 2d at 268. Accordingly, I would reverse and remand the cause for trial.

=== CASE 9737099 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:15:53.142476+00 ===

GARFIELD, Chief Justice.
This appeal involves an important question as to the time within which a law action to set aside probate of a will under Iowa Probate Code, chapter 633 Code 1966, must be commenced and the manner of commencing it.
More particularly, the question is whether the statute of limitations for the commencement of such an action is tolled by the filing of the petition or is plaintiff also required to deliver an original notice thereof to the sheriff of the proper county with intent that it be served immediately.
The trial court held merely filing the petition is insufficient. We affirm the decision.
I. On September 7, 1965 Arthur T. Conley, a brother, filed with the clerk of the district court of Dallas County the will of R. M. Conley, deceased, together with his petition for probate thereof and appointment of petitioner and Roger Dagel as executors. On the next day the will was admitted to probate and Arthur T. Conley and Roger Dagel were appointed executors by the clerk of the court. No notice of filing the petition or hearing thereon was given prior to making the order.
The appointees filed their oaths as executors, letters of appointment issued and notice of probate, dated September 8, was published on September 10 and 17, 1965 in strict compliance with Code section 633.304. (References, unless otherwise indicated, are to Iowa Code 1966.)
The notice, addressed to all persons interested in the estate, recited: “any action to set aside said will must be brought in the district court of said county within one year from the date of the second publication of this notice, or thereafter be forever barred.” (emphasis added) This is the exact language of the form for such notice found in section 633.304 and required thereby.
Plaintiff, a daughter, on September 10, 1966 filed her petition at law to set aside probate of the will as not properly executed and the result of undue influence. On the same date an original notice of the filing of the petition was delivered to the sheriff of Dallas County. However, the notice recited the petition was on file with the clerk of the district court of Polk County and re*320quired appearance “before said Court at Des Moines, Polk County.”
On September 20, 1966, a year and three days after the date of the second publication of the notice of probate of will and appointment of executors above referred to, a proper original notice of the filing of plaintiff’s petition to set aside probate of the will was delivered to the sheriff of Dallas County to be served on Roger Dagel, a co-executor, only defendant to the action residing in Dallas County.' This notice was served on Dagel September 22, 1966.
On September 29, 1966 defendants to plaintiff’s action filed their special appearance thereto challenging the court’s jurisdiction on the ground the first original notice, requiring appearance at Des Moines, county seat of Polk County, was void. In her resistance to this special appearance plaintiff asserted that merely filing her petition to set aside probate of the will within one year after the date of the second publication of the executors’ notice thereof conferred jurisdiction on the Dallas County court to determine the matter, irrespective of the contents of the first original notice.
Defendants’ special appearance was sustained as to the original notice first served upon them. No complaint has been made of this ruling nor is it here contended, as it was in the resistance to the special appearance just referred to, it was unnecessary to serve, or deliver to the sheriff for service, an original notice of plaintiff’s action.
Thereafter defendants filed answer to plaintiff’s petition alleging it was barred by limitations because no valid original notice thereof was served or placed for service until more than a year from the date of the second publication of the notice of probate.
In her reply to defendants’ answer plaintiff alleged the order admitting the will to probate was entered without notice or appearance by anyone, her petition to set aside probate was filed before entry of an order approving the final report and therefore the order for probate was reviewable by the court. Also that filing plaintiff’s petition on September 10, 1966 met the requirement of code section 633.309.
On defendants’ motion for adjudication of law points under rules 105 and 176 Rules of Civil Procedure the trial court held, as indicated at the outset hereof, that merely filing plaintiff’s petition to set aside probate of the will within a year after the date of the second publication of notice of probate of the will, without at least delivering original notice thereof to the sheriff of the proper county with intent that it be served immediately, was insufficient to toll the statute of limitations for the commencement of such an action as plaintiff’s.
II. Plaintiff relies upon two code sections, principally 633.37: “All orders entered without notice or appearance are reviewable by the court at any time prior to the entry of the order approving the final report.”
The quoted section codifies the rule applied by many decisions of ours under sections 638.9, 638.10 Iowa Code, 1962 and earlier codes prior to the adoption of our present Probate Code by the Sixtieth G.A. in 1963. In re Estate of Swanson, 239 Iowa 294, 305-307, 31 N.W.2d 385, 392 and citations; In re Estate of Jenkins, 245 Iowa 939, 941, 65 N.W.2d 92, 93 and citations.
The other section on which plaintiff relies, although apparently less strongly, is 633.309: “Time within which contest must be filed. A petition to contest or set aside the probate of a will must be filed in the court in which the will was admitted to probate within one year from the date of second publication of notice of admission of such will to probate and not thereafter.”
From this it is argued in effect the statute of limitations for bringing such an action as plaintiff’s is tolled by. merely filing the petition in the proper court within the year even though original notice thereof is not served or delivered for service to the *321sheriff of the proper county within such time.
III. In seeking the meaning of the code sections plaintiff relies on and others, the entire Probate Code of which they are part should be considered. “Each section must be construed with the act as a whole and all parts of the act considered, compared and construed together.” Bruce v. Wookey, Iowa, 154 N.W.2d 93, 94, citing Manilla Community School District, etc. v. Halverson, 251 Iowa 496, 101 N.W.2d 705. See also Ahrweiler v. Board of Sup’rs, 226 Iowa 229, 231, 283 N.W. 889; Everding v. Board of Education, 247 Iowa 743, 747, 76 N.W.2d 205, 208 and citations; Rath v. Rath Packing Co., 257 Iowa 1277, 1284-1285, 136 N.W.2d 410, 414.
Bruce v. Wookey holds a claim against a decedent’s estate was barred under our Probate Code for failure of claimant to file request for hearing within 20 days after the claim was disallowed. Sections 633.-440, 633.442.
The Manilla Community School District opinion, supra, points out it is not permissible to rest the interpretation of a legislative act upon any one part or to give undue effect thereto, (pages 501-502 of 251 Iowa, page 708 of 101 N.W.2d.)
We think the rule expressed in Bruce v. Wookey and many other Iowa precedents leads to an affirmance of the trial court’s decision here.
IV. Section 633.304 provides in part: “Notice of probate of will with administration. On admission of a will to probate, the executor shall, as soon as letters are issued, cause to be published once each week for two consecutive weeks in a daily or weekly newspaper of general circulation published in the county in which the estate is pending, a notice of admission of the will to probate and of the appointment of the executor, in which shall he included a notice that any action to set aside the pro-hate of said will must he brought within one year from the date of the second publication of said notice or thereafter be forever barred, and there shall also be included therein a notice to debtors to make payment, and to creditors having claims against said estate to file them with the clerk within six months from the second publication of said notice, or thereafter be forever barred, (emphasis added)
“Such notice shall be substantially in the following form:”
This statute proceeds to set out in detail the form of notice which shall be published. It designates the court and county in which the will was probated, gives testator’s name, is addressed to all persons interested in his estate, gives the date on which the will was admitted to probate and the name of the executor appointed. This recital is included in the statutory notice: “Any action to set aside said will must be brought in the district court of said county within one year from the date of the second publication of this notice, or thereafter be forever barred.” (emphasis added)
Following the recital just quoted, the statutory form further provides for notice that all persons indebted to the estate are requested to make immediate payment to the executor and all creditors shall file their claims “within six months from the second publication of this notice (unless otherwise allowed or paid)” or “such claim shall thereafter be forever barred.”
It is significant that the provision we have italicized in the first paragraph of 633.304 and the language similar thereto quoted from the statutory form for notice were not included in the Probate Code enacted by the Sixtieth G.A. in 1963. Both the italicized provision in the first paragraph and the language similar thereto in the form for notice were added by section 22, chapter 432, pages 816, 817 Laws of the Sixty-first G.A. in 1965 and are included in section 633.304 of the 1966 Code.
Prior to adoption of the Probate Code, the applicable part of section 614.1, subd. 3 *322Code 1962, in the chapter on Limitations of Actions, stated, subject to a proviso we need not consider at this point, that actions to set aside a will may be brought within two years from the time the will is filed in the clerk’s office for probate and notice thereof given “and not afterwards.” This provision of 614.1, subd. 3 was deleted by the Probate Code (section 707, chapter 326, page 508 Laws Sixtieth G.A.) and 614.1, subd. 3 so appears in the 1966 Iowa Code.
It thus seems clear it was the purpose of the legislature to shorten the time for commencing actions to set aside probate of a will from the two years specified in section 614.1, subd. 3 Code 1962 to one year from the date of second publication of the notice of probate and appointment of executor as required by section 633.304 Code 1966, supra.
So far as now pertinent, section 633.311 provides: “An action * * * to set aside a will, is triable in the probate court as an action at law, and the Rules of Civil Procedure governing law actions, including demand for jury trial, shall be applicable thereto.” Incidentally, the purpose of the reference to demand for jury trial was doubtless to change the rule adopted by Division I of our opinion in In re Estate of Hermence, 235 Iowa 745, 747, 15 N.W.2d 905, 906.
Sections 633.33 and 633.34 also contain provisions similar to 633.311, supra. Section 633.33 provides actions to set aside or contest wills and certain others “shall be triable in probate as law actions * * *.” And 633.34 states “All actions triable in probate shall be governed by the Rules of Civil Procedure, except as provided otherwise in this (Probate) Code.”
Section 633.312 is also important: “Join-der of parties. In all actions to contest or set aside a will, all known interested parties who have not joined wtih the contestants as plaintiffs in the action, shall be joined with proponents as defendants. When additional interested parties become known, the court shall order them brought in as party defendants. All such defendants shall be brought in by serving them with notice pursuant to the Rules of Civil Procedure.”
This last section points up the fallacy of the assertion, previously referred to, in plaintiff’s resistance to defendant’s special appearance that merely filing her petition to set aside probate of the will within the year from the second publication of the notice of probate conferred jurisdiction on the court to determine validity of the will, irrespective of an original notice. As before indicated, we do not understand plaintiff makes such a contention here although she maintains, as she must, service of original notice or its delivery to the sheriff for service need not be made within the year.
It is plain the Rules of Civil Procedure, by express provisions of our Probate Code, apply to such actions as plaintiff’s. We do not understand this is disputed.
R.C.P. 48 states: “Commencing actions. A civil action is commenced by serving the defendant with an original notice.” R.C.P. 49 broadens 48 on the question here involved. It provides: “Tolling limitations. For the purpose of determining whether an action has been commenced within the time allowed by statutes for limitation of actions, whether the limitation inheres in the statutes creating the remedy or not, the delivery of the original notice to the sheriff of the proper county with the intent that it be served immediately * * * shall also be deemed a commencement of the action.” (emphasis added)
In determining whether plaintiff’s action was “brought” within the year from the second publication of notice of probate as section 633.304 requires, rules 48 and 49 cannot be ignored. They state when such an action is “commenced.” The two terms “brought” and “commenced”, as here used, are synonymous. No provision of the Probate Code nor Rule of Civil Procedure called to our attention would support a holding this action was brought prior to service *323or delivery to the sheriff for service of the original notice on at least one defendant.
The requirement of section 633.309, quoted in Division II, supra, on which plaintiff relies that the petition must be filed within the year may not fairly be construed as a provision that the action is brought by merely filing the petition when rules 48 and 49 R.C.P., which the Probate Code makes applicable thereto, expressly state the action is commenced by serving the original notice or delivering it to the sheriff for service. A mere implication which might be drawn from 633.309, standing alone, cannot prevail over express provisions contrary thereto. Neither service nor delivery therefor was made here within the year.
Rules 48 and 49 supersede statutes to like effect of long standing, as far back as sections 1714-1715 and 1663 Code 1851. The legislature could hardly have intended by the enactment of section 633.309 to overturn rules* of such long standing. This from 50 Am.Jur., Statutes, section 340, page 333 is applicable: “Courts, do not, however, favor repeals of settled principles by implication, and the legislature in the enactment of a statute will not be presumed to intend to overturn long-established legal principles, unless such intention is made clearly to appear by express declarations or by necessary implication. To the contrary, the legislature will be presumed not to intend to overturn long-established principles of law, and the statute will be so construed, unless an intention to do so plainly appears by express declaration or necessary or unmistakable implication, and the language employed admits of no other reasonable construction. * * * ”
In connection with this quotation it is noted we have repeatedly held our Rules of Civil Procedure, in effect since 1943, have the force and effect of statute. We have also held many times that for the purpose of tolling the statute of limitations an action is commenced by service of original notice or delivery thereof to the proper sheriff with intent it be served immediately. Several of our precedents to such effect are cited in Anno. 27. A.L.R.2d 236, 285-286. One is Fernekes v. Case, 75 Iowa 152, 39 N.W. 238, where a fatally defective notice was served during the statutory period and a valid notice was not served or delivered for service until after the limitation period expired. It” was held the action was barred. Pendy v. Cole, 211 Iowa 199, 201, 233 N.W. 47, 48, approves Fernekes v. Case. Another similar precedent is Jones & Magee Lbr. Co. v. Boggs, 63 Iowa 589, 591, 19 N.W. 678.
We are not to be understood as holding service or delivery for service of the original notice of such an action must be made upon all defendants within the year. Additional interested parties may be added when they become known. Section 633.312, supra (633.311 of the original Probate Code enacted in 1963), so provides and In re Estate of Ditz, 255 Iowa 1272, 1279-1280, 125 N.W.2d 814, 818-819, so holds. The Ditz opinion takes note of the provisions of the Probate Code although it was not there applicable.
In Ditz the executors served notice on the other interested parties of the probate of the will, thus shortening to one year the period for bringing action to set aside probate under section 614.1, subd. 3 Code 1962. Five interested parties brought such action in time by filing their petition and serving original notice on some of the defendants within the year but others were brought in later. This from the Ditz opinion accords with our holding here: “ * * * when any interested person * * * institutes an action by filing his petition and serving any other interested person within the year’s period of limitation, the running of the statute as to all other interested parties is tolled and they may be added later with the same effect as though timely action was commenced against all.” (emphasis added)
V. Section 633.37, quoted in Division II, supra, does not afford plaintiff an avoid-*324anee of the bar of the statute of limitations.
Section 633.293 expressly provides that when a petition for probate of a will is filed the court or clerk may, in its or his discretion, hear it forthwith, with or without requiring notice, and upon proof of due execution admit it to probate.
Section 633.22 confers upon the clerk within his county all powers of the court and judge in the admission of wills to probate, when not contested, (par. 3) and in other matters.
And the next section provides: “633.23 Clerk’s action reviewed. Any person aggrieved by any order made or entered by the clerk under the powers conferred in section 633.22 may have the same reviewed in court upon motion filed within six months or before the hearing on the final report of the fiduciary, whichever is the earlier, and upon such notice as the court may prescribe.”
Sections 633.22 and 633.23 are quite simir lar to sections 632.1 and 632.3, respectively, Code 1962 and earlier codes. Section 633.-22 deals specifically with admission of wills to probate by the clerk and 633.23 provides a specific remedy for review of such orders. These two sections, together with 633.293, must be deemed specific statutory provisions dealing with the admission of wills to probate by the clerk without prior notice and to provide a remedy therefor. Section 633.37, however, which plaintiff seeks to invoke purports to be a general provision dealing with all probate orders entered without notice.
We think this from 50 Am.Jur., Statutes, section 367, pages 371-372, has application here: “It is an old and familiar principle * * * that where there is in the same statute a specific provision, and also a general one which in its most comprehensive sense would include matters embraced in the former, the particular provision must control, and the general provision must be taken to affect only such cases within its general language as are not within the provisions of the particular provision. Additional words of qualification needed to harmonize a general and a prior special provision in the same statute should be added to the general provision, rather than to the special one.”
The United States Supreme Court has frequently used the language just quoted and we have approved it at least three times. Ginsberg & Sons v. Popkin, 285 U.S. 204, 208, 52 S.Ct. 322, 76 L.Ed. 704, 708, and citations; Crawford v. Iowa State Highway Comm., 247 Iowa 736, 740, 76 N.W.2d 187, 189-190; State v. Flack, 251 Iowa 529, 535, 101 N.W.2d 535, 539; Rath v. Rath Packing Co., 257 Iowa 1277, 1288, 136 N.W.2d 410, 416.
The above rule is no less applicable here even though section 633.293 was enacted in 1965 by the Sixty-first G.A. in lieu of the former section 293 enacted in 1963 by the Sixtieth G.A. It provided for notice of the time fixed for probate by one publication at least seven days prior to such time. Sections 633.22, 633.23 and 633.37 were all enacted as part of the same act by the Sixtieth G.A.
A rule many times applied by us, closely related to the one quoted above, “is that where a general statute, if standing alone, would include the same matter as a special statute and thus conflict with it, the latter will prevail and the former must give way. The special provision will be considered an exception to or qualification of the general one. (citations).” Rath v. Rath Packing Co., supra; State v. Halverson, Iowa, 155 N.W.2d 177, 181.
Kruse v. Gaines, 258 Iowa 983, 986, 139 N.W.2d 535, 536, cites nine Iowa decisions and other authority for “the basic principle that when a general statute is in conflict with a specific statute, the latter ordinarily prevails, whether enacted before or after the general statute.” (emphasis added)
*325If section 633.37 has the effect plaintiff contends for, it conflicts with section 633.-23 both quoted supra. Section 633.23 allows only up to six months to file motion for review of the clerk’s admission of this will to probate. Section 633.37 permits review of orders entered without notice or appearance at any time prior to the approval of the final report.
Our conclusion on the point now considered finds support in Hoover v. Hoover, 238 Iowa 88, 92-93, 26 N.W.2d 98, 100, under somewhat different facts. There the clerk admitted a will to probate on notice published only once on the second day before the date of the hearing. It is apparent such a notice would not be likely to reach interested parties and would be little better than no prior notice. In a law action to set aside probate of the will on grounds of lack of due execution, mental incompetence and undue influence we held contestants who did not proceed under section 632.3 Code 1946 to review the clerk’s order for notice could not attack it “when the statutes provide an ample remedy for review in the court below.”
In lieu of proceeding under section 633.23 of course plaintiff could bring the action she brought provided she did so within the period of limitation. She did neither but, as stated, claims the right to contest the will at any time before the executors’ final report is approved. The legislature could hardly have intended 633.37 as a method of avoiding the bar of the statute. See In re Estate of Huston, 238 Iowa 297, 304-306, 27 N.W.2d 26, 30-31, which rejects a contention somewhat like the one plaintiff makes here. See also In re Price’s Estate, 230 Iowa 1228, 300 N.W. 542; In re Will of McKinstry, 204 Iowa 487, 215 N.W. 497.
In re Estate of Pierce, 245 Iowa 22, 25-28, 60 N.W.2d 894, 896-898, heirs objected to the executor’s final report on the ground the clerk’s order for notice of hearing on probate of the will violated due process by providing for only one publication in a newspaper and posting in three public places when the addresses of the objectors were known or easily discoverable. Reliance was on Mullane v. Central Hanover Bank & Trust Co., 339 U.S. 306, 70 S.Ct. 652, 94 L.Ed. 865.
The Pierce opinion rejects the contention, holds the probate of the will was valid and the heirs were not thereby deprived of the right to contest the will in an original action brought within the statutory period of limitation (then two years from the time the will was filed for probate and notice thereof given). The opinion also reviews our prior decisions on the effect of original admission of a will to probate without contest and holds it establishes nothing but its due execution and publication and authorizes the executor to proceed with administration of the estate.
In re Estate of Marty, 256 Iowa 74, 78, 126 N.W.2d 303, 305, cites In re Estate of Pierce; Kelly v. Kelly, 158 Iowa 56, 56-61, 138 N.W. 851, 852-853, and section 633.38 Code 1962 for this: “In Iowa, admission of a will to probate is evidence of its due execution, and no more, in the absence of a contest.” Section 633.293 Code, 1966 requires only proof of due execution of the will.
Further, we think the fact the clerk’s order admitting the will to probate was made without notice given prior thereto, as 633.293 permits, does not mean it was entered without notice, within the meaning of section 633.37, in view of the notice given pursuant to section 633.304 on admission of the will to probate as soon as letters appointing the executors issued. As stated, this notice was dated the very day the clerk’s order was made, first published two days later, and plainly stated an action to set aside the will might be brought within one year from the date of the second publication. As having some bearing, see In re Price’s Estate, supra, 230 Iowa 1228, 1236, 300 N.W. 542, 546.
Not until plaintiff failed to bring her action within the year, after having failed *326to proceed under section 633.23 supra, was her right to bring it cut off.
While the appeal mainly involves questions of statutory construction, we may observe that no claim of violation of due process or other constitutional right is asserted. “And it is important to observe that due process does not require, as to all proceedings, that notice be given prior to the initiation of the proceedings.” 16 Am.Jur.2d, Constitutional Law, section 564, page 969. Precedents cited in the footnote, including Hanover Nat. Bank of City of New York v. Moyses, 186 U.S. 181, 192, 22 S.Ct. 857, 46 L.Ed. 1113, 1120-1121, support the text.
Similarly, 16A C.J.S. Constitutional Law § 619 c, pages 811-812, states notice “need not be given in all cases at the very inception of the proceedings.”
'Generally in many proceedings the requirement of due process for notice is met where, as here, there is a proper notice and opportunity for a de novo hearing on -review of the initial order. Id. at page 801. See also Hansen v. Haugh, Iowa, 149 N.W.2d 169, 174-175 and citations.
Although section 633.37 is new, as stated in Division II, supra, it codifies the rule applied by many decisions of ours •under sections 638.9, 638.10 Code 1962 and prior codes. No decision has come to our attention in which the rule referred to lias been held to permit bringing a will •contest after the statute of limitations has run. Orders which have been reviewed -under the rule plaintiff relies on are those •made without any notice during administration, mostly allowing or disallowing claims •of creditors or fees for the personal representative or his attorney. See In re Estate of Swanson, supra, 239 Iowa 294, 505-307, 31 N.W.2d 385, 392 and citations; In re Estate of Huston, supra, 238 Iowa 297, 304-306, 27 N.W.2d 26, 30-31.
The judgment is
Affirmed.
All Justices concur except LeGRAND and BECKER, JJ., who dissent.

=== CASE 9737100 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:15:53.148244+00 ===

LeGRAND, Justice
(dissenting).
I respectfully dissent.
Prior to the enactment of the Probate Code in 1963, a proceeding to set aside a will was an independent action which was required to be brought within the period set out in what was then subsection 3 of section 614.1 of the Code of Iowa.
That subsection was repealed at the time the Probate Code was adopted, and we now have a new procedure by which one may challenge the validity of a will. The Probate Code did not, as the majority suggests, merely shorten the period for filing a will contest from two years to one, which could have been accomplished by a simple amendment to section 614.1(3) ; on the contrary it effected basic changes in the procedure itself.
Part 5 of the Probate Code deals with “Actions to Set Aside or Contest Wills.” It covers three possible methods of attack. One may ask to have a will set aside by filing a petition in the prohate proceedings within one year from the executor’s second publication of notice of admission of the will to probate (sections 633.308, 633.309) , one may file objections to the probate of the will (section 633.310); or one may seek a declaratory judgment to establish a will (section 633.320). As in the majority opinion, all references to the Probate Code are to the 1966 Code of Iowa.
I find it significant that only in section 633.320 authorizing suit for declaratory judgment, which is a separate action not part of the prohate proceedings, is the language that a party “may bring an action,”
Elsewhere in Part 5 of the Probate Code, and specifically in sections 633.308 and 633.309, the legislature says a petition may be filed in the probate proceedings. This it seems to me, indicates an intention to distinguish between the filing of a petition, *327on the one hand, and the bringing of an action, on the other.
If what was done here is “bringing an action” to contest a will, then I concede the majority is right. However, all the provisions of Part 5 make such a conclusion untenable. Why, for instance, if that is the case, should the legislature talk at all about notice? Rules 48 and 49 would, of course, apply as they do in all such cases.
Yet here there is a special provision as to serving a notice. (section 633.312) Again it should be noted the section does not state an original notice should be served; it merely refers to a notice, which shall be served “pursuant” to the Rules of Civil Procedure. Under the circumstances here I take this to mean the manner, not the time, of service. There is no language justifying the implication, especially in view of the express provisions of sections 633.308, 633.309, that this requires the notice to be served within the one year period.
To hold with the majority it must be assumed the legislature used the term “file a petition” interchangeably with “bring an action” and used “notice” interchangeably with “original notice.” I have been able to find no previous occasion when it has done so. “Original notice” has always had a precise meaning under our rules and it has been used in that technical sense; it immediately suggests jurisdiction is involved. Why was its use avoided here?
I cannot believe the legislature inadvertently used “file a petition” to mean “bring an action” nor that “notice” was intended to mean “original notice.” I find this particularly true because section 633.320, dealing with the same subject and authorizing a separate declaratory judgment action, expressly provides such action may be brought. Incidentally I might add, too, this section omits any mention of notice for the obvious reason this matter is covered, as always when suit is brought, by Rules 48 and 49, RCP.
I would hold the statutory procedure here is not the bringing of an action and that the filing of the petition alone is sufficient to confer jurisdiction. To the extent that section 633.304 conflicts with this — and that is the only section which lends support to the majority — I simply say such conflict should be resolved for, not against, a litigant who has complied with the exact terms of sections 633.308 and 633.309 and who now finds himself dismissed out of court because of it.
I would reverse and remand for trial.
BECKER, J., joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 2208891 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:34.370341+00 ===

804 N.E.2d 519 (2004)
208 Ill. 2d 414
281 Ill. Dec. 554
Khalid J. BAJWA, Adm'r of the Estate of Muhammad Cheema, a/k/a Manwar Ahmad Bajwa, Deceased, Appellee and Cross-Appellant,
v.
METROPOLITAN LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY, Appellant and Cross-Appellee.
No. 95051.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
January 23, 2004.
*523 Chittenden, Murday & Novotny, L.L.C. (Joseph J. Hasman and David F. Schmidt, of counsel), Lawrence X. Pusateri, and Peterson & Ross, L.L.C. (Anna M. Loftus, of counsel), Chicago, for appellant and cross-appellee.
Corboy & Demetrio, P.C., Chicago (Philip H. Corboy, Thomas A. Demetrio, Philip H. Corboy, Jr., and Francis Patrick Murphy, of counsel), for appellee and cross-appellant
Justice THOMAS delivered the opinion of the court:
Plaintiff, Khalid J. Bajwa, as administrator of the estate of Muhammad Cheema, filed an action under the Wrongful Death Act (740 ILCS 180/1 et seq. (West 1998)), alleging that the negligent issuance of a life insurance policy by defendant, Metropolitan Life Insurance Company (Met Life), proximately caused the murder of Muhammad Cheema (decedent or A. Cheema) by the beneficiary of the policy. Met Life filed a motion to dismiss pursuant to section 2-615 of the Code of Civil Procedure (the Code) (735 ILCS 5/2-615 (West 2000)). The circuit court of Cook County granted the motion. The appellate court reversed and remanded the cause for further proceedings. 333 Ill.App.3d 558, 267 Ill. Dec. 237, 776 N.E.2d 609. We granted Met Life's petition for leave to appeal pusuant to Supreme Court Rule 315 (177 Ill.2d R. 315), to consider an issue of first impression in Illinois: whether a cause of action for negligent issuance of a life insurance policy should be recognized, where there are a number of anomalies in the application process and plaintiff alleges that the insurer should have known that the supposed insured did not know of the policy and did not give his consent to it, thereby proximately causing the death of the insured.
BACKGROUND
The plaintiff's fourth amended complaint and the attached exhibits reveal that in December 1992, Muhammad U. Cheema (U. Cheema) met with Met Life account representative Imtiaz Sheik to fill out an insurance policy on the life of A. Cheema. U. Cheema falsely represented himself as the son of A. Cheema and provided some personal information necessary to fill out part A of the application. U. Cheema designated himself as the beneficiary and arranged for the policy premiums to be deducted from his own bank account. U. Cheema then told the agent that he would take the application to his "father" to obtain his signature. This was a violation of Met Life's standard procedural rules, requiring that the agent meet personally with the proposed insured to witness the signature on the application and to propound certain questions to the proposed insured. Nevertheless, Sheik agreed to this deviation from procedure, and U. Cheema returned the application with it signed "A. Cheema." Agent Sheik then signed part A of the application, under the heading "Witness," indicating that he had personally witnessed the proposed insured sign the application. When the policy was contested following the decedent's death, Sheik admitted that he had not witnessed the proposed insured's signature.
*524 For part B of Met Life's application process, the proposed insured was required to submit to a medical examination conducted by a paramedical examiner hired by Met Life. The medical exam resulted in a number of discrepancies between part A and part B of the application: the proposed insured's mailing address was listed as 6400 N. Ridge, # 305, Chicago, IL in part A, but the address of his residence was listed as 5101 N. Slunden, Chicago, IL in part B; the social security numbers listed for the proposed insured in part A and part B were not the same; and the spaces provided for disclosing previous treatment for high blood pressure and previous surgery were checked "no" in part A, but were checked "yes" in part B.
The paramedical examiner certified in part C of the application that he had personally examined A. Cheema. However, the person examined by the paramedical examiner was 5 feet 11 inches tall and 195 pounds, while decedent was actually 5 feet 8 inches tall and 213 pounds.
Prior to the issuance of the policy, a Met Life underwriter noticed a number of additional irregularities in the application that required further investigation. In that regard, he questioned why U. Cheema, rather than A. Cheema's wife, was the policy beneficiary, and why the beneficiary was paying the premiums rather than the insured, and finally, he questioned why the policy was for $200,000 when A. Cheema's income, according to Met Life's guidelines, did not qualify him for that large of a policy amount. Despite these discrepancies, the underwriter decided the application was acceptable and issued the policy on January 18,1993.
After the policy was issued, someone identifying himself as "Muhammad Cheema" called Met Life on five different occasions, purporting to be the insured and asking questions about possible coverage in the event of the insured's death. Met Life found these calls "strange enough" to send the case to the Consulting Services area, where the file was "noted." Nine days after the last of those calls was made to Met Life, the real A. Cheema was stabbed and beaten to death in his apartment. According to plaintiff, U. Cheema murdered the decedent in order to collect the life insurance benefits from the policy provided by Met Life.
Plaintiff filed a fourth amended complaint on February 19, 1999, alleging that Met Life negligently issued an insurance policy on the life of the decedent. Count IV of that complaint alleged that Met Life was negligent in the following ways: (1) issued a life insurance policy on the life of the decedent without investigating the veracity of the information on the insurance application and personally meeting with the insured; (2) issued a policy in favor of a beneficiary who did not possess an insurable interest on the life of the insured; (3) relied upon misrepresentations of its agent in underwriting the policy; (4) failed to warn decedent of the suspicious phone calls; and (5) provided motivation for the murder. Count V alleged gross negligence for the same acts. Count VI alleged negligent supervision of agent Sheik. The trial court granted Met Life's 2-615 motion to dismiss these counts of the complaint.[1]
*525 The appellate court reversed, finding that plaintiff could maintain a cause of action for negligent issuance of an insurance policy. In so doing, it looked to cases from other jurisdictions that have considered the matter and found that courts in those states have recognized the validity of such claims on three different grounds: (1) where the insurer should have known that the person who procured and owned the policy, and who was named as beneficiary, had no insurable interest in the life of the insured; (2) where the insurer had knowledge that the insured was unaware of and did not consent to the policy; and (3) where the insurer had actual knowledge of the beneficiary's intent to murder the insured and failed to take action. 333 Ill. App. 3d at 565, 267 Ill. Dec. 237, 776 N.E.2d 609.
As to the insurable interest ground, the appellate court noted that "while it has long been the established law of Illinois that the purchaser of an insurance policy must have an insurable interest in the insured's life [citation], it has also long been held that `one may insure his own life for the benefit of another having no insurable interest therein [citation].'" 333 Ill. App. 3d at 568, 267 Ill. Dec. 237, 776 N.E.2d 609. The court then found that plaintiffs pleadings were insufficient because they failed to make this distinctionplaintiff did not allege that Met Life issued an insurance policy on the life of the decedent to an individual who did not possess an insurable interest, but, rather, that Met Life allowed the policy owner to designate a beneficiary who did not possess an insurable interest. Accordingly, the court concluded that plaintiff's allegations as they relate to an insurable interest were insufficient to state a cause of action. 333 Ill. App. 3d at 569, 267 Ill. Dec. 237, 776 N.E.2d 609.
With respect to the second ground of possible recovery, however, the appellate court found that Met Life had a duty to ascertain, prior to the issuance of a policy on the life of another, whether the individual named as the insured is aware of and has consented to the procurement of the policy. The court found that the various irregularities in the application process, combined with the suspicious phone calls, were sufficient to put the insurer on notice that an investigation was warranted. 333 Ill.App.3d at 580, 267 Ill. Dec. 237, 776 N.E.2d 609. The court then rejected the notion that actual knowledge was necessary to establish liability on the part of the insured. 333 Ill.App.3d at 578-79, 267 Ill. Dec. 237, 776 N.E.2d 609.
ANALYSIS
As noted above, the circuit court dismissed plaintiff's complaint after Met Life brought a section 2-615 motion to dismiss. A section 2-615 motion to dismiss challenges the legal sufficiency of the complaint. Chandler v. Illinois Central R.R. Co., 207 Ill. 2d 331, 348, 278 Ill. Dec. 340, 798 N.E.2d 724 (2003). In reviewing a section 2-615 dismissal, a reviewing court must decide whether the allegations, when construed in the light most favorable to the plaintiff, are sufficient to establish a cause of action upon which relief may be granted. People ex rel. Ryan v. Telemarketing Associates, Inc., 198 Ill. 2d 345, 351, 261 Ill. Dec. 319, 763 N.E.2d 289 (2001). A cause of action should be dismissed only if it is clearly apparent from the pleadings that no set of facts can be proven which will entitle the plaintiff to recovery. Chandler, 207 Ill.2d at 349, 278 Ill. Dec. 340, 798 N.E.2d 724. Review of a section 2-615 dismissal is conducted de novo. Telemarketing Associates, Inc., 198 *526 Ill.2d at 351, 261 Ill. Dec. 319, 763 N.E.2d 289; Chandler, 207 IB.2d at 349, 278 Ill. Dec. 340, 798 N.E.2d 724.
To recover in a negligence action, a plaintiff must allege facts from which a court will find a duty of care owed by the defendant to the plaintiff, a breach of that duty, and an injury proximately caused by the breach. Chandler, 207 Ill.2d at 340, 349, 278 Ill. Dec. 340, 798 N.E.2d 724. The existence of a duty depends on whether the plaintiff and the defendant stood in such a relationship to each other that the law will impose upon the defendant an obligation of reasonable conduct for the benefit of the plaintiff. Happel v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., 199 Ill. 2d 179, 186, 262 Ill. Dec. 815, 766 N.E.2d 1118 (2002). Whether a duty of care exists is a question of law to be determined by the court. Marshall v. City of Centralia, 143 Ill. 2d 1, 6, 155 Ill. Dec. 802, 570 N.E.2d 315 (1991). However, the question of whether defendant breached its duty and whether the breach was the proximate cause of the plaintiff's injuries are factual matters for the jury to decide. Chandler, 207 Ill.2d at 340, 278 Ill. Dec. 340, 798 N.E.2d 724; Thompson v. County of Cook, 154 Ill. 2d 374, 382, 181 Ill. Dec. 922, 609 N.E.2d 290 (1993).
As the appellate court correctly noted, courts in other jurisdictions have recognized a cause of action for negligent issuance or continuation of a life insurance policy in three situations: (1) where the beneficiary who procured the insurance lacks an insurable interest (Liberty National Life Insurance Co. v. Weldon, 267 Ala. 171, 100 So. 2d 696 (1957)); (2) where there is a lack of knowledge and consent to the policy by the insured (Ramey v. Carolina Life Insurance Co., 244 S.C. 16, 135 S.E.2d 362 (1964); Williams v. John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Co., 718 S.W.2d 611 (Mo.Ct.App.1986); Wren v. New York Life Insurance Co., 59 F.R.D. 484 (N.D.Ga.1973), aff'd, 493 F.2d 839 (5th Cir.1974)); and (3) where the insurer has actual notice of a plot by the beneficiary to murder the insured (Bodine v. Federal Kemper Life Assurance Co., 912 F.2d 1373 (11th Cir.1990); Bacon v. Federal Kemper Life Insurance Co., 400 Mass. 850, 512 N.E.2d 941 (1987); Life Insurance Co. of Georgia v. Lopez, 443 So. 2d 947 (Fla. 1983)). Because plaintiff does not challenge the appellate court's ruling that the allegations of plaintiff's fourth amended complaint failed to state a cause of action under the first and third grounds noted above, we will limit our analysis to the second groundwhether plaintiff stated a cause of action based on the decedent's lack of knowledge and consent to the policy.
The leading case on point is Ramey v. Carolina Life Insurance Co., 244 S.C. 16, 135 S.E.2d 362 (1964). There, the South Carolina Supreme Court recognized a cause of action for negligent issuance of a life insurance policy based on the lack of knowledge and consent of the insured. In Ramey, the wife procured the policy on the life of her husband without his consent, forged his signature on the application, and named herself beneficiary. After surviving his wife's attempt to murder him by poisoning, the husband brought an action against the insurer for the personal injuries he sustained, contending that issuance of the policy proximately caused his wife to poison him with the hope of collecting the proceeds of the policy. The insurer knew that the husband was unaware of the policy and that the signature was a forgery. The court noted that generally a wife has an insurable interest, but nevertheless concluded that even with an insurable interest, insurance taken out on the life of another, without consent, is against public policy. Ramey, 244 S.C. at 22, 135 S.E.2d *527 at 365, citing Hack v. Metz, 173 S.C. 413, 418, 176 S.E. 314, 316 (1934); Holloman v. Life Insurance Co. of Virginia, 192 S.C. 454, 7 S.E.2d 169 (1940) (the authorities are generally to the effect that, except in the case of an infant, a policy of life insurance taken out without the knowledge and consent of the insured is not enforceable); 29 Am.Jur. Insurance § 231, at 617 (1960) ("[a] wife, for example, cannot be permitted to obtain insurance on the life of her husband without his knowledge and consent; such a practice it has been deemed, might be a fruitful source of crime"). The Ramey court concluded by holding that "an insurance company has a duty to use reasonable care not to issue a policy of life insurance in favor of a beneficiary * * * without the knowledge or consent of the insured, and this would especially be true, where as here, the company knew or had reason to know that such was the situation." Ramey, 244 S.C. at 25, 135 S.E.2d at 366.
In reaching its holding, Ramey relied upon Liberty National Life Insurance Co. v. Weldon, 267 Ala. 171, 100 So. 2d 696 (1957). There, an aunt obtained life insurance on her two-year-old niece and then poisoned the child to death. The father of the child filed suit against the insurer, alleging that the company "knew or should have known" that the aunt had no insurable interest, and the company failed to exercise reasonable diligence to ascertain whether an insurable interest existed. Weldon, 267 Ala. at 178-82, 100 So. 2d at 700-04. In finding that a duty existed, the Alabama Supreme Court noted that the rule against issuing policies on the life of a person without his knowledge and consent is designed to protect human life. It stated that an insured is placed in a position of extreme danger where a policy of insurance is issued in favor of a beneficiary with no insurable interest. Given that such policies are unreasonably dangerous because of the risk of murder, the court held that "it would be an anomaly to hold that insurance companies have no duty to use reasonable care not to create a situation which may prove to be a stimulus for murder." Weldon, 267 Ala. at 186, 100 So. 2d at 708.
The holdings in Ramey and Weldon were followed by the Missouri Appellate Court in Williams v. John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Co., 718 S.W.2d 611 (Mo.Ct.App.1986). There, an agent of the insurance company, who was an acquaintance of the plaintiff, submitted an application to the insurer on the life of the plaintiff without the plaintiff's knowledge or consent. The insurance company's internal protocol required that an agent witness the signing of an insurance application. The named beneficiary was originally plaintiff's wife, but was later changed to a friend of the agent. Thereafter, plaintiff was shot, but not killed. The plaintiff sued, contending that the insurance company failed to make any direct contact with him about the policy. The appellate court found that the plaintiff could maintain his suit for negligent issuance of the policy. Specifically, the court held as follows:
"The negligent issuance of a life insurance policy is unlikely to lead to an attempt on the insured's life. However, murder is such a serious crime that [it] is against public policy not to discourage any act which even marginally increases the risk that a murder will be attempted. We therefore refuse to hold that an insurance company has no liability if it negligently issues an insurance policy which acts as an incentive for a murder or attempted murder. The increased risk caused by the negligent issuance of life insurance may be slight, but it is certainly foreseeable. Our decision in this regard is in accord with the decisions of other states which have dealt *528 with this issue." Williams, 718 S.W.2d at 613.
Similarly, in Bacon v. Federal Kemper Life Insurance Co., 400 Mass. 850, 512 N.E.2d 941 (1987), the decedent's business partner forged a change of beneficiary form and then murdered the decedent. The court found that a duty existed, but the evidence was insufficient to establish a breach of duty. The Bacon court explained the scope of the duty owed:
"The only duty that the law imposes on an insurance company to protect its insured is that the company take reasonable steps to determine whether the insured has consented to the policy or the change of beneficiary. In the cases in which an insurance company has been found liable for harm to its insureds, the company either had actual knowledge that the insured had not consented to the policy [citation], or should have known that the person who procured the policy did not have an insurable interest in the life of the insured." Bacon, 400 Mass. at 855, 512 N.E.2d at 944.
Additionally, a federal district court cited Ramey approvingly in Wren v. New York Life Insurance Co., 59 F.R.D. 484 (N.D.Ga.1973), aff'd, 493 F.2d 839 (5th Cir. 1974). In Wren, the plaintiff filled out an application for life insurance on her former husband. The application designated her as the beneficiary and bore the supposed signature of her former husband. It was undisputed, however, that the former husband did not sign the application. After the death of her former husband, plaintiff filed suit to collect the insurance proceeds, contending that she signed his name to the application with his knowledge and consent. The heirs of the deceased insured filed a motion to intervene, alleging a cause of action for negligent issuance of a policy. The heirs claimed that the insurance company issued the policy without the insured's knowledge and consent, naming the former wife as beneficiary, and that this "created a fruitful source of crime and a situation which might prove to be a stimulus for murder." Wren, 59 F.R.D. at 486." The heirs further alleged that the former wife did in fact kill the insured. The court essentially found that the heirs had alleged a legitimate tort claims patterned after Ramey, but concluded that the heirs' claim should be brought in a separate action. Wren, 59 F.R.D. at 487.
Most recently, in Vereen v. Liberty Life Insurance Co., 306 S.C. 423, 412 S.E.2d 425 (App.1991), the court considered a negligent-issuance-of-insurance claim where the agent of the insurance company perpetrated a fraud on the company by filling out a life insurance application in the name of a person the agent had never met and then naming a fictitious beneficiary. The insurance company issued the policy, and the insured was later murdered by a man who had conspired with the insurance company agent to collect the policy proceeds. The appellate court affirmed a directed verdict in favor of the insurance company on the basis of agency law principles, finding that the insurance company employee was not acting within the scope of his employment in defrauding the company. The court did, however, take the opportunity to reaffirm the holding of Ramey, noting that "[t]his case presents a classic, though tragic, illustration of why the law prohibits issuing policies on the life of a person without his knowledge or consent." Vereen, 306 S.C. at 427, 412 S.E.2d at 428, citing Ramey, 244 S.C. at 25,135 S.E.2d at 366-67.
The foregoing cases provide ample and persuasive authority for concluding that an insurance company owes a duty of due care to advise a proposed insured of a life insurance policy taken out on his life. We believe that the appellate court correctly *529 concluded that "an insurer may not, with impunity, provide coverage on someone's life without undertaking reasonable precautions to ascertain whether the insured is aware of and has consented to the issuance of the policy." 333 Ill.App.3d at 578, 267 Ill. Dec. 237, 776 N.E.2d 609.
Our conclusion is supported by consideration of the traditional factors that are relevant to a court's imposition of a duty. To determine whether a duty exists under certain circumstances, a court must consider the following factors: (1) the reasonable foreseeability of the injury; (2) the likelihood of the injury; (3) the magnitude of guarding against the injury; (4) the consequences of placing that burden on the defendant. Jones v. Chicago HMO Ltd. of Illinois, 191 Ill. 2d 278, 303, 246 Ill. Dec. 654, 730 N.E.2d 1119 (2000); Bucheleres v. Chicago Park District, 171 Ill. 2d 435, 456, 216 Ill. Dec. 568, 665 N.E.2d 826 (1996). The question of the existence of a duty turns largely on public policy considerations. Jones, 191 Ill.2d at 303, 246 Ill. Dec. 654, 730 N.E.2d 1119.
Here, we believe that it is reasonably foreseeable that a policy taken out on someone's life without his knowledge or consent could lead to injury or death at the hands of the person who procured the policy, and that there is a sufficient likelihood of injury. As the Ramey court noted, it is well recognized that "a policy of insurance taken out on the life of another without his knowledge or consent is void and against public policy in that it might be a fruitful source of crime." Ramey, 244 S.C. at 22, 135 S.E.2d at 365. The rule against issuing these kinds of policies is designed to protect human life, and policies issued in violation of the rule are not considered "`dangerous because they are illegal, [but] they are illegal because they are dangerous.'" Ramey, 244 S.C. at 24, 135 S.E.2d at 366, quoting Weldon, 267 Ala. at 186,100 So.2d at 708.
The remaining factors of the duty analysis also favor placing a burden of due care on the insurance company under the circumstances of the present case. Such a burden would be a modest one compared to the potential for serious injury. When faced with various anomalies in the application process, an insurance company may be able to satisfy its duty of due care by simply refusing to issue the policy, or by postponing the decision to issue the policy and requiring more documentation from the proposed insured, or by undertaking some minimal background investigation. In some cases, the insurer may be able to meet its burden of care by following its own internal procedures, which are presumably designed to detect fraud in the application process. In reaching our conclusion that a duty of care existed in the present case, we make no determination as to whether Met Life's conduct amounted to a breach of that duty.
Met Life argues that the appellate court adopted the wrong standard of care when it concluded that Met Life had a duty to take reasonable precautions to determine whether the insured was aware of the policy. Met Life maintains that a plaintiff should not be able to state a cause of action for negligent underwriting unless he alleges that there is "actual knowledge" on the part of the insurance company that the policy application was somehow fraudulent. It claims that none of the cases cited by the appellate court support a "should have known" standard. Met Life asserts that in all of the cases relied upon by the appellate court, including Ramey, the insurance companies possessed actual knowledge either that the application was fraudulent or that the insured's life was in jeopardy.
The standard of care, also known as the standard of conduct, falls *530 within the duty element of the negligence analysis. Jones, 191 Ill.2d at 294, 246 Ill. Dec. 654, 730 N.E.2d 1119. As the Jones court explained, " '[w]hat the defendant must do, or must not do, is a question of the standard of conduct required to satisfy the duty.' "(Emphasis in original.) Jones, 191 Ill.2d at 295, 246 Ill. Dec. 654, 730 N.E.2d 1119, quoting W. Prosser, Torts, at 324 (4th ed.1971). In an ordinary negligence case, the standard of care required of a defendant is to act as would an "'"ordinarily careful person"' or a `"reasonably prudent" person.'" Jones, 191 Ill.2d at 295, 246 Ill. Dec. 654, 730 N.E.2d 1119, quoting Advincula v. United Blood Services, 176 Ill. 2d 1, 22, 223 Ill. Dec. 1, 678 N.E.2d 1009 (1996), quoting Cunis v. Brennan, 56 Ill. 2d 372, 376, 308 N.E.2d 617 (1974).
Met Life's assertion that actual knowledge is required must be rejected. It misconstrues the holding of Ramey. It happened to be the case in Ramey that the insurance company was aware that the insurance policy was obtained by the beneficiary and not by the insured. However, Ramey in no way held that actual knowledge was a prerequisite for maintaining a cause of action. Instead, Ramey applied a reasonable care standard and simply con cluded that the duty was underscored by actual knowledge on the part of the insurance company: "an insurance company has a duty to use reasonable care not to issue a policy of life insurance in favor of a beneficiary * * * without the knowledge or consent of the insured, and this would especially be true, where as here, the company knew or had reason to know that such was the situation." (Emphasis added.) Ramey, 244 S.C. at 25, 135 S.E.2d at 366.
As the appellate court correctly noted, "Whether based upon actual knowledge or whether the insurer is held to a reasonable duty of inquiry, its liability would still be predicated upon a negligence theory. * * * [T]he insurer [has not] provided any basis that would permit this court to limit the liability of the insurer to willful negligence alone. Such actual knowledge would merely heighten the element of foreseeability, which could then be considered by the fact finder. To draw the line at actual knowledge rather than what the insurer reasonably should have known would be an arbitrary compartmentalization, legislative in nature." 333 Ill.App.3d at 579, 267 Ill. Dec. 237, 776 N.E.2d 609.
As noted above, plaintiff's fourth amended complaint alleged that Met Life issued the insurance policy based on an application process that did not follow its own internal rules, which required that the agent meet with the proposed insured for part A of the application. It further alleged that the application was in fact completed by someone other than the insured, who claimed to be related. Additionally, the complaint alleged negligence on the part of Met Life in issuing the policy in the face of a number of peculiar circumstances: the beneficiary was paying the policy premiums, the policy was written for a larger amount than normally allowed for the proposed insured's income, and the named beneficiary was the proposed insured's son, not his wife. The complaint and exhibits attached thereto also indicate discrepancies between part A of the application and the medical screening portion, as well as a number of suspicious phone calls shortly after the policy was issued. Viewing all of these facts cumulatively and in the light most favorable to plaintiff, we believe that plaintiff has alleged sufficient facts so as to survive a motion to dismiss the complaint for failure to state a cause of action under section 2-615 of the Code.
Met Life next argues that even if the appellate court set the correct standard of *531 care, it misapplied that standard by failing to consider the general rule that if there is an inconsistency between an allegation of a complaint and a fact as shown in an exhibit attached to the complaint, the exhibit controls and the fact alleged in the complaint is not admitted as true for purposes of a section 2-615 motion to dismiss. Met Life argues that the insurance application is attached as an exhibit and it shows that while A. Cheema may not have met with the Met Life agent during the initial application process, Met Life's paramedical examiner did meet with A. Cheema for the medical portion of the application and certified that A. Cheema did sign the application and did attend the paramedical examination. Therefore, Met Life continues, A. Cheema must have known about the policy
In Garrison v. Choh, 308 Ill. App. 3d 48, 53, 241 Ill. Dec. 376, 719 N.E.2d 237 (1999), the appellate court set forth the principles governing when a fact revealed in an exhibit attached to a complaint will control over an inconsistent allegation of the complaint. The court stated as follows:
"Section 2-606 of the Code requires that a written instrument upon which a claim or defense is founded must be attached to the pleading as an exhibit or recited therein. If the instrument is attached to the pleading as an exhibit, it constitutes part of the pleading for purposes of ruling on motions relating to the pleadings and for purposes of determining what issues have been raised for trial. 735 ILCS 5/2-606 (West 1996). See F.H. Prince & Co. v. Towers Financial Corp., 275 Ill.App.3d 792, 797 211 Ill. Dec. 950], 656 N.E.2d 142, 146 (1995); Evers v. Edward Hospital Ass'n, 247 Ill.App.3d 717, 724 [187 Ill. Dec. 490], 617 N.E.2d 1211, 1217 (1993); 3 R. Michael, Illinois Practice § 23.9, at 332-33 (1989). The exhibits to which section 2-606 applies generally consist of instruments being sued upon, such as contracts or agreements. See, e.g., Farm Credit Bank v. Biethman, 262 Ill.App.3d 614 [199 Ill. Dec. 958], 634 N.E.2d 1312 (1994) (promissory note and deed of trust); F.H. Prince & Co., 275 Ill.App.3d 792 [211 Ill. Dec. 950], 656 N.E.2d 142 (settlement agreement, promissory note and guaranty); McCormick v. McCormick, 118 Ill.App.3d 455 [74 Ill. Dec. 73], 455 N.E.2d 103 (1983) (trust instrument). For more extensive listing of the types of agreements upon which the claim was founded, see Fowley v. Braden, 4 Ill.2d 355, 359, 122 N.E.2d 559, 562 (1954). In the case of a conflict between such written exhibits and the allegations of a pleading, the exhibits control. E.g., F.H. Prince & Co., 275 Ill.App.3d at 797 [211 Ill. Dec. 950], 656 N.E.2d at 146.
While the obligation of section 2-606 to attach a written instrument to the complaint is limited to documents on which a claim or defense is based, a party is not prohibited from attaching any written document to the complaint. See generally 3 R. Michael, Illinois Practice § 23.9, at 332 (1989). Any document attached to the pleading will be treated as part of the pleading if the pleading specifically incorporates it by reference. `To incorporate a document as an exhibit, the pleading must refer to a specifically identified instrument and must clearly manifest an intent to incorporate it as a part of that pleading.' 3 R. Michael, Illinois Practice § 23.9, at 331-32 (1989). See Wolford v. Household Finance Corp., 105 Ill.App.3d 1102, 1105 [61 Ill. Dec. 831], 435 N.E.2d 528, 530 (1982); Camp Creek Duck Farm, Inc. v. Shell Oil Co., 103 Ill.App.3d 81, 86 [58 Ill. Dec. 443], 430 N.E.2d 385, 388 (1981). When the exhibit is not an instrument *532 upon which the claim or defense is founded but, rather, is merely evidence supporting the pleader's allegations, the rule that the exhibit controls over conflicting averments in the pleading is inapplicable. See, e.g., In re Estate of Davis, 225 Ill.App.3d 998, 1003 [168 Ill. Dec. 40, 589 N.E.2d 154] (1992) (the court need not accept as true the facts set forth in exhibits upon which the complaint is not founded); McCormick, 118 Ill.App.3d at 460-61 [74 Ill. Dec. 73], 455 N.E.2d at 108-09 (finding exhibits totaling 150 pages were not conclusive because they were not instruments upon which the claim was based); see also 3 R. Michael, Illinois Practice § 23.9, at 334 (1989)." Garrison, 308 Ill.App.3d at 53-54, 241 Ill. Dec. 376, 719 N.E.2d 237.
In the present case, it is unnecessary for us to decide whether the insurance application attached to plaintiff's complaint was an exhibit upon which plaintiff's claim was founded because the exhibit is clearly not inconsistent with the complaint. Plaintiff's fourth amended complaint essentially alleges that Met Life's insurance agent did not personally meet with the insured, but instead falsely stated that he had met with the insured and asked the required questions. It is also clearly inferred from plaintiff's complaint that the person appearing The attached medical exam portion of the application merely indicates that the paramedical examiner certified that someone he believed to be named A. Cheema appeared for the exam. Thus, there is no inconsistency between the complaint and the exhibit.
Met Life additionally argues that plaintiff, as the administrator of decedent's estate, took an inconsistent position in a related probate action by attempting to collect the policy proceeds. Specifically, Met Life maintains that plaintiff claimed in probate court that A. Cheema did sign the insurance application. Accordingly, it contends, plaintiff should be collaterally estopped from arguing anything contrary here.
We find no merit to Met Life's argument. The minimum requirements for application of collateral estoppel have been stated as follows: (1) the issue decided in the prior adjudication is identical with the one presented in the suit in question; (2) there was a final judgment on the merits in the prior adjudication; and (3) the party against whom the estoppel is asserted was a party or in privity with a party to the prior adjudication. American Family Mutual Insurance Co. v. Savickas, 193 Ill. 2d 378, 387, 250 Ill. Dec. 682, 739 N.E.2d 445 (2000). Collateral estoppel is an equitable doctrine; thus, even where the threshold requirements of the doctrine are satisfied, collateral estoppel must not be applied to preclude parties from presenting their claims or defenses unless it is clear that no unfairness results to the party being estopped. Nowak v. St. Rita High School, 197 Ill. 2d 381, 391, 258 Ill. Dec. 782, 757 N.E.2d 471 (2001).
We find that the doctrine is not applicable under the facts of this case. Met Life is attempting to use the doctrine defensively, that is, it seeks to prevent plaintiff from asserting a claim plaintiff had previously litigated and lost. See Talarico v. Dunlap, 177 Ill. 2d 185, 191, 226 Ill. Dec. 222, 685 N.E.2d 325 (1997). The problem with Met Life's collateral estoppel argument is that the adjudication in the prior probate proceeding was consistent with the position plaintiff takes here. Met Life itself, in effect, took the position in the probate proceeding that plaintiff now advocatesthat A. Cheema did not sign the application. In the probate proceeding, Met Life submitted a motion pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 216 (134 Ill.2d R. *533 216), requesting that plaintiff admit that A. Cheema did not sign the application and this fact was eventually deemed admitted pursuant to the motion. The claim plaintiff now asserts in the instant proceeding is that the real A. Cheema did not sign the application. This is consistent with the outcome of the probate proceeding. Accordingly, collateral estoppel does not apply to plaintiff's present claim.
Met Life further argues that the appellate court erred in failing to give proper weight to Met Life's contention that an identification card was presented by A. Cheema at the medical exam. Met Life urges that regardless of what the standard of care might be, when an insurance company uses a state-issued identification card to verify the identity of the person it is intending to insure, the insurer has satisfied its duty of care.
In essence, Met Life is advocating that, as a matter of law, simple verification of a state identification relieves it of any duty to investigate further and trumps the following anomalies known to Met Life: (1) discrepancies between the application and the medical exam existed; (2) the son, not the wife, was the beneficiary; (3) the proposed insured was not present for the meeting with the agent to sign part A of the application; (4) someone claiming to be the son, not the insured, procured the policy; (5) the amount of coverage was in excess of the guidelines; (6) and Met Life received a number of suspicious phone calls following issuance of the policy. The problem with Met Life's argument is that procedurally this case is before this court on a section 2-615 motion to dismiss, which tests the legal sufficiency of plaintiff's complaint (Chandler, 207 Ill.2d at 348, 278 Ill. Dec. 340, 798 N.E.2d 724). None of the allegations of plaintiff's fourth amended complaint mention any reliance on the state identification card, nor is reliance on the identification card mentioned in any of plaintiff's exhibits. Thus, the matter has no bearing on whether plaintiff stated a cause of action. We further observe that the question of Met Life's reliance on the identification cardin the face of the anomalies in the application process and the subsequent suspicious phone callsis germane to the question of whether Met Life breached the standard of care by issuing the policy and continuing it until the decedent's death. This is a quintessential question of fact to be resolved by the trier of fact. Chandler, 207 Ill.2d at 340, 278 Ill. Dec. 340, 798 N.E.2d 724; Thompson, 154 Ill.2d at 382, 181 Ill. Dec. 922, 609 N.E.2d 290.
We now turn to plaintiff's request for cross-relief. Plaintiff asks that we reverse the trial court's dismissal with prejudice of the portion of plaintiff's fourth amended complaint that alleged that the policy was negligently issued because the beneficiary had no insurable interest. As we have explained, the plaintiff's allegations were insufficient because they failed to allege that Met Life issued an insurance policy on the life of the decedent to an individual who did not possess an insurable interest. Plaintiff acknowledges that the allegations of the complaint were insufficient in this regard, but requests leave to amend his complaint on remand to properly plead a duty based on Met Life's failure to ensure that the procurer of the policy retained an insurable interest.
The general rule is that where a trial court dismisses a complaint and plaintiff does not seek leave to amend, the cause of action must stand or fall on the sufficiency of the stricken pleading. Teter v. Clemens, 112 Ill. 2d 252, 260-61, 97 Ill. Dec. 467, 492 N.E.2d 1340 (1986); Stamp v. Touche Ross & Co., 263 Ill.App.3d 1010, 1018-19, 201 Ill. Dec. 184, 636 N.E.2d 616 (1993). In the interest of judicial economy *534 and to prevent a plaintiff from circumventing the rule against interlocutory appeals, a party should not ordinarily be permitted to stand on his pleadings before the trial court and then seek leave to amend in the appellate court after the dismissal of the trial court is affirmed. See Stamp, 263 Ill.App.3d at 1019, 201 Ill. Dec. 184, 636 N.E.2d 616. However, this general rule is not without exception, and in certain cases a reviewing court may properly allow a plaintiff the opportunity to amend pleadings on remand. See, e.g., Miller v. Gupta, 174 Ill. 2d 120, 128-29, 220 Ill. Dec. 217, 672 N.E.2d 1229 (1996) (the appellate court properly allowed plaintiff the opportunity to amend a negligence count where this court decided a case that favorably affected the potential count while the case was pending before the appellate court). Thus, where the invalidity of plaintiff's legal theory is determined for the first time in the reviewing court, and where it would have been futile to request amendment in the trial court, a court of review may allow the plaintiff the opportunity to amend the complaint to cure the defect on remand in spite of the failure to seek leave to amend in the first instance in the trial court. See Stamp, 263 Ill.App.3d at 1021, 201 Ill. Dec. 184, 636 N.E.2d 616; Johnson v. Lincoln Christian College, 150 Ill.App.3d 733, 749, 103 Ill. Dec. 842, 501 N.E.2d 1380 (1986).
Here the exception, to the general rule clearly applies, and we will therefore allow amendment on remand. The trial court dismissed plaintiff's fourth amended complaint on the basis that an allegation of "actual knowledge" on the part of the insurance company was a prerequisite for maintaining a cause of action in this case. The trial court further ruled that the insurer's knowledge must include not only knowledge of the plan to obtain the insurance policy by fraudulent means, but also knowledge of the plan to murder the reputed insured. In other words, under the trial court's narrow view of the case, plaintiff could only maintain a cause of action if he alleged that the insurance company had actual knowledge of the plot to murder the decedent. Thus, any attempt by plaintiff to request leave to amend his fourth amended complaint to allege that the procurer of the policy lacked an insurable interest would have been futile. This is made clear by the colloquy that took place between the trial court and plaintiff's counsel at the hearing on plaintiff's motion to reconsider the section 2-615 dismissal:
"MR. WISE: * * * My understanding and my reading of the law is that Defendant has a duty not to issue a life insurance policy to a person who has no insurable interest unless the insured is told a policy has issued on his life.
My understanding of the law is that the issuance of a life insurance policy with no insurable interest without telling the insured is motive for murder. That's foreseeability. * * * Now whether they exercised due care to learn whether or not the purchaser had an insurable interest is a question of fact.
* * *
THE COURT: * * * [W]hen did the Defendant learn that a fraud had been perpetrated upon it?
MR. WISE: That's unclear. I don't think its relevant.
THE COURT: The knowledge of the corporation at the time it issued the policy is relevant under Illinois law.
* * *
MR. WISE: Are we in agreement, or are we not, an understanding of the law that Met Life has responsibility not to issue a life insurance policy to a person without an insurable interest?
THE COURT: It was never decided by this court because that was never the issue.
* * *
*535 MR. WISE: The question of whether the Courtwhether the insurance company can be liable when a third party murders someone is a question of intervening cause, which is way down the line. Right? I mean * * * if they have breached their duty * * *, then thendefense may later be well the murder was an intervening cause, but that's a step further down the line.
I am concerned because when I read your opinion that there has to be actual knowledge by the insurance company, what is the actual knowledge the court believes is required in order for liability to attach to the insurance company? Actual knowledge of the fact that the person purchasing the insurance policy does not have an insurable interest? Or actual knowledge that the insured has not been informed that there is a policy on his life?
* * *
THE COURT: You will notice that Illinois is silent on this.
* * *
MR. WISE: Illinois law, it's a negligent [sic] case; duty breach, causation. Now it hasn't been specifically applied in Illinois where a company has sold a policy to a person without an insurable interest, and I understand that. The question is whether or not negligence and a duty to act with due care for everyone falls into these circumstances, and I think that the Alabama case says that it does.
And those cases which this court cited to where there is actual knowledge, I don't think anyone has discussed whether that is a condition precedent to liability, or whether it is evidence that was present in those cases without which there would be no recovery."
The trial court then denied plaintiff's motion to reconsider. From the preceding account, it is apparent that counsel did argue before the trial court that a cause of action could be alleged based on Met Life's negligent issuance of a life insurance policy to a person without an insurable interest, where plaintiff had alleged facts from which it could be concluded that the insurer reasonably should have known that the procurer of the policy lacked an insurable interest. It is also apparent from the trial court's comments that it dismissed plaintiff's insurable-interest claim solely for failure to properly allege "actual knowledge" on the part of the insurance company. Thus, a request for leave to amend the complaint to more artfully allege a lack of an insurable interest by the procurer of the policy would have been futile. The trial court's dismissal based on its belief that actual knowledge was required has now been reversed on review. Accordingly, we find that plaintiff is entitled to amend his complaint on remand as he has requested.
CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, we conclude that plaintiff's fourth amended complaint sufficiently alleges a cause of action for negligent issuance of a life insurance policy based on the proposed insured's lack of knowledge and consent to the policy. We further conclude that on remand, plaintiff may amend his pleadings to properly plead a cause of action based on a lack of an insurable interest. Accordingly, we affirm the judgment of the appellate court as modified.
Appellate court judgment affirmed as modified.
Justice FITZGERALD took no part in the consideration or decision of this case.
NOTES
[1]  Plaintiff's fourth amended complaint contained seven counts. Counts I through III involved allegations of negligence against other defendants and are apparently still pending in the circuit court. Count VII alleged that Met Life had "actual knowledge" of the following: the person who took the paramedical exam was an imposter; U. Cheema was not the son of the decedent; and U. Cheema procured the policy with the intent to murder the decedent and collect the policy benefits. The circuit court granted summary judgment in favor of Met Life on count VII, and the appellate court affirmed. Plaintiff does not argue the propriety of this ruling before this court.

=== CASE 2208897 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:34.428932+00 ===

177 Cal. App. 2d 744 (1960)
LOS ANGELES CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT OF LOS ANGELES COUNTY et al., Respondents,
v.
LANDIER INVESTMENT COMPANY (a Corporation) et al., Appellants.
Civ. No. 24037.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. One.
Feb. 9, 1960.
Kasch & Cook and Leo N. Cook for Appellants.
Harold W. Kennedy, County Counsel, William E. Lamoreaux and Clarence H. Langstaff, Assistant County Counsel, and Jerry F. Halverson, Deputy County Counsel, for Respondents.
LILLIE, J.
The present proceeding grew out of various contracts entered into during the years 1948 and 1950, between the plaintiffs and defendant Landier Management Company, for the transportation of the pupils of plaintiff school districts. Within a year following the letting of the last contract, it was represented to the plaintiffs that three members of their governing board had an interest contrary to law in the subject of certain of the aforesaid agreements. Accordingly, in November of 1951, plaintiffs filed an action for declaratory relief wherein the asserted interest was set forth and wherefore it was prayed that the contracts in question be declared void ad initio and they recover the entire sum paid out thereunder, amounting to $1,548,852.74. The Landier defendants appeared by way of answer, which included a denial that the three members' participation in the several transactions constituted an "interest" proscribed by California statutes. Much of the then pertinent law is discussed in People v. Becker (1952), 112 Cal. App. 2d 324 [246 P.2d 103], and People v. Elliott (1953), 115 Cal. App. 2d 410 [252 P.2d 661], which sustained the removal from office of two board members mentioned in the complaint for declaratory relief.
The action was noticed for trial on May 27, 1952, and thereafter continued from time to time; finally, on March 18, *748 1954, trial was set for August 17, 1954. Meantime, in the early part of 1953, negotiations for settlement were in progress between plaintiffs' counsel and separate counsel for Landier Investment Company and F. P. Landier (appellants herein), and the other Landier defendants respectively. These negotiations are reflected by certain correspondence which was considered by the court below and which has been made a part of the record on appeal. One proposed settlement formula would have involved payment to plaintiffs of the excess profits (approximating $123,000) over and above those profits considered to be fair and reasonable by a board of experts. This proposal was rejected, as it did not constitute a return of all profits realized under the contracts; and it was stated by plaintiffs' counsel that "unless a far more substantial settlement is made, the public policy would appear ... to require the Courts ... to decide what amount the School Districts should recover." Thereafter, by letter dated June 22, 1954, the attorney for Mr. Landier and Landier Investment offered to pay the sum of $264,776.86 in yearly installments of $33,097.11 without interest on principal or installments, and declared that "the amount of the judgment, if the plaintiffs were successful ... would necessarily be the amount prayed for ... or over $1,000,000.00," and would compel the institution of bankruptcy proceedings to obtain relief therefrom. Negotiations for settlement continued. As a result, by letter dated July 7, 1954, plaintiffs' counsel sought approval by plaintiffs' governing board of "a formal offer (from defendants) to settle this litigation as to all of the defendants." Under a proposed stipulation contemplated thereunder and to be executed by all parties, defendants F. L. Landier and Landier Investment Company would pay the total sum of $264,776.86, without interest upon principal or any installments, in the following manner: one-eighth thereof, or $33,097.11, on the twentieth day of October of each year, commencing October 20, 1955, until the whole amount was paid, the action then to be dismissed as to the other defendants. Included in the stipulation would also be a provision that in the event of default in any payment for a period of 30 days, after 30-day notice of such default, without further notice, judgment could be entered against defendants F. P. Landier and Landier Investment for twice the unpaid balance. Acceptance of the offer was recommended by plaintiffs' counsel to their governing board for the following reasons: "1. It is substantial, exceeding one quarter of a million dollars. 2. It provides an economic sanction for *749 failure to meet the payments. 3. It would pay to the School Districts all profits which have been made under the four contracts. The settlement would therefore remove all profit from these contracts."
As to the possibility of defendants' relief from their obligation by way of discharge in bankruptcy, the letter declared that "it seems to us that those possibilities are as well covered in this settlement as they can be in business transactions of this sort," adding: "(t)he threat of a judgment in the amount of twice the unpaid balance due on the settlement is just about as potent an economic weapon as the Board could have to enforce payment of the full amount provided by the settlement." Counsel for defendants gave written approval of this letter which "constitutes an accurate statement of the offer to settle the subject litigation which is hereby confirmed by Mr. F. P. Landier and Landier Investment Co." On August 17, 1954, a "Stipulation for Settlement" was executed by a representative of plaintiffs' governing board, defendant Landier (for himself and Landier Investment) and the attorneys for all parties concerned, and thereafter filed with the court; subsequently the action was dismissed as to defendants Landier Management and Landier Transit and marked "off calendar" as to F. P. Landier and Landier Investment.
Three payments, totalling $99,291.33, were subsequently made. In June of 1958 defendants substituted present counsel as their attorneys; and thereafter, on July 30, 1958, they noticed a motion to be relieved of the "Stipulation for Settlement" executed by them and filed with the lower court almost four years previously. Contending that its provisions constituted a penalty with no relation to any damage sustained (Civ. Code,  1670), defendants prayed that paragraph three of the Stipulation be modified to provide that in the event of default, judgment be entered for the balance due and unpaid, not for twice the unpaid balance due as therein provided, and that the payments theretofore made be adjudged a reasonable and fair settlement of the litigation; and that the action accordingly be dismissed with prejudice to them. The motion was denied; and on November 5, 1958 (appellants concededly then being in default), on ex parte application of respondents, judgment in the sum of $300,971.06, double the balance unpaid, was rendered for plaintiffs pursuant to the stipulation on the original complaint. *750
On this appeal from the judgment entered pursuant to respondents' ex parte application, appellants in effect ask this court to review the trial court's order denying their motion for relief from the stipulation by renewing the contentions made on their motion to the lower court that the double payment provision of the stipulation is penal in character and therefore unenforceable; and that subsequent amendments to the Education Code eliminated any legal objections to the contracts which were the subject of the action for declaratory relief. Although there appears to be merit to the first of these contentions, since "it is judicial action, and not judicial reasoning or argument, which is the subject of review" (International etc. Workers v. Landowitz, 20 Cal. 2d 418, 423 [126 P.2d 609]), we are of the opinion that the denial of the motion was proper in the light of procedural matters and principles hereinafter discussed.
[1] Ordinarily a party may be relieved from a stipulation only upon timely application to the court wherein it was made, notice thereof first being given to the opposing party (46 Cal.Jur.2d, Stipulations, p. 46). [2] A hearing should then be had on affidavits and counteraffidavits (Warburton v. Kieferle, 135 Cal. App. 2d 278, 286 [287 P.2d 1]), and the court, in the exercise of its sound discretion, may set aside a stipulation entered into through inadvertence, excusable neglect, fraud, mistake of fact or law, where the facts stipulated have changed or there has been a change in the underlying conditions that could not have not been anticipated, or where special circumstances exist rendering it unjust to enforce the stipulation (46 Cal.Jur.2d, supra, pp. 43-44). See also Gonzalez v. Pacific Greyhound Lines, 34 Cal. 2d 749, 755 [214 P.2d 809]. In the case at bar, appellants properly complied with the requirement that the discretion and powers of the trial court to grant relief must first be invoked; but failed to file any supporting affidavit which would explain the lack of timeliness manifest on the face of the written motion. The competency of appellants' previous counsel is not challenged, nor is there any claim of misrepresentation; in short the memorandum of points and authorities accompanying the motion simply suggests that their execution of the stipulation was based on a mistake of law and other special circumstances, including an asserted change in the law governing the main action.
[3] Appellants properly maintain that a stipulation is a contract (Palmer v. City of Long Beach, 33 Cal. 2d 134, *751 142 [199 P.2d 952]); that being so, the rules for construction of contracts are said to govern (Jackson v. Puget Sound Lumber Co., 123 Cal. 97, 100 [55 P. 788]). [4, 5] Hence, a person who seeks relief from the burdensome effects of a stipulation may be fully protected by enforcement of the stipulation in a reasonable and nonburdensome manner (1 Witkin, California Procedure, p. 70); it has also been said that where a party endeavors to nullify a stipulation entirely, it "is in effect an attempt to rescind the agreement" (1 Witkin, California Procedure, p. 70). [6] Whether the stipulation be entirely void (as claimed by appellants) and their motion accordingly considered one to cancel such an instrument (Sullivan v. Dunnigan, 171 Cal. App. 2d 662, 667-668 [341 P.2d 404]), or whether the stipulation was originally valid and the attack thereon in the nature of an attempt to rescind or to reform the agreement, it is settled that some degree of promptness is required in the assertion of such claims. [7] Actions for cancellation, rescission and reformation on the ground of mistake ordinarily are controlled by section 338, subdivision 4, Code of Civil Procedure, which provides for a three-year limitation. [8] From the standpoint of laches, whether a party has acted with promptness is a question of fact and depends on the circumstances of the particular case (12 Cal.Jur.2d, Contracts, p. 412; Sullivan v. Dunnigan, supra). [9] As in other situations where a party seeks relief from the consequences of his own act, the discretion of the trial court is broad and unless clearly abused will not warrant appellate interference (Moffitt v. Jordan, 127 Cal. 628, 629 [60 P. 175]).
[10] In the early case bearing upon a similar problem, it was observed that "the court should require a stronger showing to justify relief from the effect of a mistake in law than in case of a mistake as to the matter of fact" (Ward v. Clay, 82 Cal. 502, 510 [23 P. 50, 227]); thus, it must be established that the mistake of law was mutual or arose from a misrepresentation of the law by one party of which the other was aware but did not rectify (Civ. Code,  1578). As to the changes in the law which are said to control, the amendments to the Education Code, subsequently to be discussed, were enacted in 1955, some three years prior to the motion for relief; during that period the stipulation was acted upon by the parties and the agreement partly performed.
[11a] These considerations, apart from any view taken of the formal grounds of the motion, might well have influenced *752 the trial court in its determination that an insufficient showing had been made and that it would be inequitable not to recognize the stipulation's binding effect (Webster v. Webster, 216 Cal. 485, 490-491 [14 P.2d 522]). Respondents were ready and apparently desirous of going to trial, and, it appears, had undergone certain expenses in the preparation therefor. The main contracts then being void as against public policy, respondents' right to recover sums paid thereunder can admit of no dispute (Miller v. McKinnon, 20 Cal. 2d 83 [124 P.2d 34, 140 A.L.R. 570]; County of Shasta v. Moody, 90 Cal. App. 519 [265 P. 1032]; upon such a proceeding, appellants' rights would have been purely defensive in character. Mention must again be made of appellants' concession that the stipulation for settlement constituted a contract between the parties; therefore, their refusal to comply was tantamount to a breach thereof. By the terms of the instrument, they stipulated that in the event of such breach the court could, on application of the respondents, enter judgment in the stipulated amount. [12] One who agrees to waive or forego a right is precluded from afterwards asserting that right (Faye v. Feldman, 128 Cal. App. 2d 319, 328 [275 P.2d 121]). [11b] Appellants bargained for and obtained an extension of time to meet the claims properly asserted by respondents; bankruptcy proceedings, then in the offing, were thereby averted. In these circumstances, it cannot be said that there was any abuse of discretion in denying relief from a stipulation voluntarily entered into under the advice of competent counsel.
[13a] Taking up the claim that the provision for double payment constitutes a penalty, paragraph III of the stipulation reads in pertinent part as follows: "Said defendants shall have thirty days' grace from and after the due date of any of said installments within which to pay such installments. In the event default occurs in the payment of any such installment and said default continues for thirty days after written notice of such default ... a judgment in favor of the plaintiffs ... and against said defendants Felicien P. Landier and Landier Investment Co. for twice the amount of the unpaid balance of said $264,776.86 shall be entered without further notice." Generally recognized is the principle that an agreement for the payment of a penalty is invalid; our statutory law and its interpretation in this state are in accord therewith. Thus, section 1670 of the Civil Code declares that a provision in a contract which provides for the amount of damages to be *753 paid in the event of a breach is void, except as expressly provided in section 1671: "(t)he parties to a contract may agree therein upon an amount which shall be presumed to be the amount of damage sustained by a breach thereof, when, from the nature of the case, it would be impracticable or extremely difficult to fix the actual damage." [14] Whether or not it would be "impracticable or extremely difficult to fix" such actual damage is generally a question of fact in each instance (Rice v. Schmid, 18 Cal. 2d 382, 385 [115 P.2d 498, 138 A.L.R. 589]), which must be resolved through an examination of the circumstances attendant on the making of the contract, as well as by an examination of the terms of the contract itself (Better Food Mkts. v. American Dist. Tel. Co., 40 Cal. 2d 179, 188 [253 P.2d 10, 42 A.L.R. 2d 580]). [15] Stated otherwise, whether a provision for the payment of a fixed sum is a valid stipulation for liquidated damages or an invalid stipulation for a penalty depends on the intent of the parties to the agreement (Hanlon Drydock etc. Co. v. McNear, 70 Cal. App. 204, 210-211 [232 P. 1002]).
[13b] Indicative of such intent is the use by respondents' counsel of the terms "economic weapon" and "economic sanction" in the course of correspondence leading up to the stipulation--this letter, it will be recalled, was approved by appellants' then attorney as "an accurate statement of the offer to settle the subject litigation." (Emphasis added.) While the terminology used is not conclusive it is entitled to some weight (Better Food Mkts. v. American Dist. Tel. Co., supra, 40 Cal. 2d 179, 187). Correspondence between the parties also discloses the statement by appellants' counsel, under date of June 22, 1954, that "(i)f a judgment is entered against F. P. Landier and Landier Investment Co., the amount of the judgment, if the plaintiffs were successful in said action, would necessarily be the amount prayed for in the complaint, or over $1,000,000.00." (Emphasis added.) The accuracy of this evaluation of the problem was never challenged; instead, we have in the case at bar, first, an agreement substituting (in a lesser sum) the amount of damages sustained for a certain and definite measure of damages fixed by decisional law (Miller v. McKinnon, supra, 20 Cal. 2d 83, 88-89), and second, the inclusion therein of a provision calling for payment of certain monies in the event of nonpayment of the lesser sum. Assuming, despite Miller v. McKinnon, supra, that the original damages were not readily ascertainable, they certainly became ascertainable at the time of the execution of the stipulation; *754 hence, the provision for nonpayment of the lesser sum was a penalty bearing "no reasonable relation to the losses the parties considered might be sustained" (Atkinson v. Pacific Fire Extinguisher Co., 40 Cal. 2d 192, 197 [253 P.2d 18]). In Freedman v. Rector, Warden & V. of St. Matthias Parish, 37 Cal. 2d 16, 22 [230 P.2d 629, 31 A.L.R. 2d 1], it was said: "A penalty equal to the net benefits conferred by part performance bears no such (rational) relationship." While that case was concerned with forfeiture in a vendor-vendee situation and the facts indicating a penalty were much stronger, the general reasoning there adopted and the policy of the law against penalties are equally applicable here. Likewise untenable is respondents' further claim that the stipulation "is not a contract in the usual sense ... (where) the parties are primarily concerned with obtaining goods or services." No authority is cited, and we know of none, which would exempt the agreement in question from controlling principles heretofore discussed. Before leaving this phase of the instant appeal, and in fairness to the lower court, the record does not reveal the ground for the denial of the relief herein sought; hence, we do not presume to state that the trial court did not entertain the same views, as does this court, respecting the matters just discussed.
[16a] Appellants' second and final contention deals with certain additions to the Education Code following the filing of the complaint herein, it being claimed that such legislation eliminated respondents' right to proceed further thereon. In 1943, section 1011, Education Code, was enacted to provide that no member of the governing board of any school district shall be interested in any contract made by that board. In 1955, following the institution of the present suit for declaratory relief, sections 1011.1, 1011.2 and 1011.3 were adopted. They restrict the circumstances under which a contract may be voided when entered into by a board composed of a member who is "interested" therein. For example, section 1011.1 provides that no such contract is void or voidable under section 1011 if (a) the fact of such interest is disclosed or known to the governing board and thereafter ratified, and (b) the transaction is just and reasonable as to the school district. To give to the 1955 legislation, supra, the interpretation claimed by appellants would be to render the provisions thereof retroactive in their operation. [17] There is nothing in the pertinent legislation to indicate that it was intended by our Legislature that the same shall have any such retroactive *755 effect; accordingly, the point is governed by the well-settled principle of statutory construction that a legislative enactment will not be construed to be retroactive in the absence of an express declaration to that effect or a very clear implication that such was the intent of the Legislature (East Bay Municipal etc. Dist. v. Garrison, 191 Cal. 680, 692 [218 P. 43], and cases cited). [16b] Also, assuming that the three members of the governing board were not "interested" under present law, there is no evidence that any of the four contracts were "just and reasonable" as to the respondents. Additionally, even when a statute has been declared unconstitutional, moneys voluntarily paid thereunder may not be recovered for mistake of law (Campbell v. Rainey, 127 Cal. App. 747 [16 P.2d 810])--here, of course, there was no compulsion. Appellants' reliance on Fenton v. Markwell & Co., 11 Cal. App. Supp. 2d 755 [52 P.2d 297] and Ewell v. Daggs, 108 U.S. 143 [2 S. Ct. 408, 27 L. Ed. 682], is misplaced. Both cases dealt with repeals of usury laws. As stated in Fenton v. Markwell & Co., supra, page 764: "While the general rule is that if a contract is void by the law in force at the time it is made, the subsequent repeal of the law will not validate such contract, statutes changing the law relating to usury are an exception to this rule" (Citing Ewell v. Daggs, supra).
For the foregoing reasons, the judgment is affirmed.
Wood, P. J., and Fourt, J., concurred.

=== CASE 2208902 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:34.475487+00 ===

177 Cal. App. 2d 649 (1960)
2 Cal. Rptr. 304
MARIE INGRAM, Appellant,
v.
COUNTY OF GLENN et al., Respondents.
Docket No. 9736.
Court of Appeals of California, Third District.
February 4, 1960.
P.M. Barceloux, Burton J. Goldstein and Goldstein, Barceloux & Goldstein for Appellant.
Price & Morony for Respondents.
WARNE, J. pro tem.[*]
This is an appeal from a judgment in favor of respondents in an action whereby appellant sought to recover damages for personal injuries alleged to have been suffered as the proximate result of the negligence of the respondents *650 while she was a patient in the hospital of respondent county. The judgment was entered after appellant elected not to amend her complaint to which a demurrer had been sustained with leave to amend.
[1] The complaint in substance alleges that the appellant was a patient in the Glenn General Hospital, which was being operated by the county of Glenn, a subdivision of the state of California; that the respondent Albert O. Pugatch was employed by, and acted as the superintendent of, said hospital; that on or about the 29th day of March, 1958, while appellant was a paying patient in said hospital, and as the result of the negligence of respondents, she was examined by a male person, whose identity is unknown, who then and there committed unlawful, indecent and lewd acts upon the person of appellant, which thereby caused the injuries and damages as alleged in her complaint. It is further alleged that said hospital was not "engaged in a purely governmental activity."
Again, as we said in Durst v. County of Colusa, 166 Cal. App. 2d 623 [333 P.2d 789] (hearing denied by the Supreme Court), at page 625: "Such a cause of action does not lie against a county. (Griffin v. County of Colusa, 44 Cal. App. 2d 915 [113 P.2d 270]; Calkins v. Newton, 36 Cal. App. 2d 262 [97 P.2d 523]; Latham v. Santa Clara County Hospital, 104 Cal. App. 2d 336 [231 P.2d 513].) Not only did the Supreme Court not see fit to grant a hearing in any of the cited cases, but it has given express approval to the rule of sovereign immunity enunciated therein. (Talley v. Northern San Diego Hospital Dist., 41 Cal. 2d 33, 39 [257 P.2d 22].)"
[2] Contrary to the rule in this state, appellant strongly urges that the imposition of a charge for service by a county hospital is inconsistent with the exercise of a governmental function and therefore the rule of governmental immunity under such circumstances does not apply. She relies upon such cases as Guidi v. State, 41 Cal. 2d 623 [262 P.2d 3] and Pianka v. State, 46 Cal. 2d 208 [293 P.2d 458]. There is no merit in this contention. The imposition of a charge is not inconsistent with the exercise of a governmental function where the activity is one for public health and safety. County hospitals fall within such classification. As said in the Talley case, supra, at page 39: "... County hospitals may charge patients for hospitalization and medical care (Welf. & Inst. Code, § 203.5); are supported by taxation (Welf. & Inst. Code, § 200); and tend to promote the public health and welfare (Welf. & Inst. Code, § 203). The cases have uniformly *651 held that county hospitals are exercising governmental functions and that the counties are not liable for the negligence of employees toward patients therein. [Citing many cases, including Griffin v. County of Colusa, supra; Calkins v. Newton, supra; and Latham v. Santa Clara County Hospital, supra.]" On the other hand, the activity in the Guidi case, supra, was not for the benefit of the public health and safety but for amusement, entertainment or gain which is not governmental in nature but proprietary and thus subject to a claim or action for personal injuries due to negligence.
[3] As to the respondent Pugatch appellant relies on Davis v. Kendrick, 52 Cal. 2d 517 [342 P.2d 261], which reiterates the rule in Appier v. Hayes, 51 Cal. App. 2d 111 [124 P.2d 125], that under common law policemen and other peace officers are not immune from liability for wrongful acts causing personal injury or death. In the instant case the complaint does not allege that Pugatch committed any wrongful act causing personal injury to appellant. It merely alleges that he negligently failed to take precautions to prevent unauthorized persons from entering the rooms of patients.
The demurrer was properly sustained. (Griffin v. County of Colusa, supra.)
The judgment is affirmed.
Van Dyke, P.J., and Schottky, J., concurred.
NOTES
[*]   Assigned by Chairman of Judicial Council.

=== CASE 2208669 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:32.308224+00 ===

399 Pa. Super. 213 (1990)
582 A.2d 21
MERITOR SAVINGS BANK f/k/a Philadelphia Savings Fund Society, Appellee,
v.
Carmen BARONE and Marian Barone, h/w and Howard McClurd and Germantown Insurance Co., Appellee.
Appeal of Carmen and Marian BARONE, Appellants.
Supreme Court of Pennsylvania.
Argued September 5, 1990.
Filed November 8, 1990.
*214 James J. DeMarco, Philadelphia, for appellants.
Paul J. Gelman, Philadelphia, for Meritor Sav., appellee.
Before OLSZEWSKI, DEL SOLE and HUDOCK, JJ.
DEL SOLE, Judge:
Appellants appeal a trial court order which granted Meritor Savings Bank's (the Bank's) motion for Summary Judgment in a mortgage foreclosure action and dismissed Appellants' New Matter/Counterclaim. Appellants contend that the trial court "properly granted summary judgment on the debt but erred when it dismissed [their] Counterclaim." Appellants' Brief at iii. We agree with Appellants' contention and reverse the trial court order dismissing their counterclaim.
Appellants executed a mortgage with the Bank in 1985 and simultaneously purchased disability insurance through the Bank. Appellant Carmen Barone became disabled in October of 1986 and his monthly payments were thereafter made by Germantown Insurance Company, who was assigned Mr. Barone's policy. When Germantown refused to provide further coverage in 1988 and Appellants' mortgage *215 payments fell into default, the Bank filed a Complaint in Mortgage Foreclosure. Appellants responded with an Answer, New Matter and Counterclaim. Therein they claimed that the Bank was negligent in obtaining the required disability insurance. Appellants also filed a Complaint naming Germantown as an additional defendant.
Upon consideration of a motions for Summary Judgment filed by the Bank, the trial court awarded judgment in its favor and dismissed Appellants' counterclaim. The trial court concluded, from the agreed upon facts, that Appellants were in default. The trial court reasoned that the counterclaim must be dismissed because the only defense offered was that the payments should have been made by Germantown and this contractual relationship is irrelevant to the action in mortgage foreclosure between Appellants and the Bank. In support of the trial court's ruling the Bank further submits that the counterclaim presented by Appellants should be stricken because the claims made therein were not part of, or incident to, the creation of the mortgage as required by Pa.R.C.P. 1148. We conclude, contrary to the Bank's position, that the counterclaim raised by Appellants was properly plead in this mortgage foreclosure action. In addition we find that the trial court neglected to note the viable negligence claim made by Appellants against the Bank.
The counterclaim at issue is not based upon Germantown's failure to pay the disability insurance; rather, Appellants claim that the Bank negligently failed to provide Appellants with the insurance for which they contracted. Attached to the counterclaim is a copy of the disclosure form required under the Truth and Lending Act which is dated the same date as mortgage document. A cost of $1,223.59 is listed for Credit Life and Disability Insurance. Disability Insurance is described as:
DISABILITY INSURANCE: Pays your monthly payment, up to $450, if you become totally disabled for 30 days while insured. Total disability means that you *216 can't perform your job. After 30 days, it pays as long as you remain disabled during your loan term.
(Emphasis added.)
Appellants allege that Carmen Barone became disabled in 1986 and that he remains totally and permanently disabled as defined in the disclosure form  he "can't perform [his] job." This fact is not contested by the Bank. The insurance carrier, Germantown, has denied coverage under the terms of its policy which refuses coverage "after the initial 12 month period of total disability unless [the insured] is unable to perform `any occupation or employment for which he is reasonable qualified by reason of education, training or experience.'" Because Mr. Barone was permitted to return to a light duty or sedentary-type of work, coverage ceased after the first 12 months.
Appellants allegations against the Bank concern the Bank's responsibility in procuring the agreed insurance. The fact that some disability insurance was acquired and paid by an insurer is not at issue. What is of import is the question of whether the Bank obtained for Appellants the insurance described in it's disclosure form. The different definitions of the disability insurance in the disclosure form and in the actual insurance contract form the basis of Appellants counterclaim. If, as Appellants suggest, the Bank failed to provide them with the insurance it agreed to provide, and if as a result of this failure Appellants have been unable to receive disability payments on their mortgage which has caused it to go into default, then Appellants may be able to recover the sum due and clear their default.
The Counterclaim made by Appellants is an appropriate response to the Bank's mortgage foreclosure complaint. Counterclaims in mortgage foreclosure actions are governed by the terms of Pa.R.C.P. 1148, which provide:
A defendant may plead a counterclaim which arises from the same transaction or occurrence or series of transactions or occurrences from which the plaintiff's cause of action arose.
*217 In Mellon Bank, N.A. v. Joseph, 267 Pa.Super. 307, 406 A.2d 1055 (1979) the court affirmed an order striking the appellants two counterclaims. The court ruled: "Here, the counterclaims appellant seeks to assert are remedial; they arose once the mortgage was in default, but were not part of, or incident to, the creation of the mortgage itself." 406 A.2d at 1060. Unlike the counterclaims in Mellon Bank, the Counterclaim in the instant case arose as part of, or incident to, the creation of the mortgage. The disclosure form, dated the same date as the mortgage document, states:
You, the Borrower, may buy Credit Life Insurance in connection with your installment loan. If you buy Credit Life Insurance, you may also buy Credit Disability Insurance if you are less than age 65.
(emphasis added.)
Appellants counterclaim, based upon the Banks' failure to provide the disability insurance for Appellants outlined in the disclosure form, met the requirements of the rule. In connection with the mortgage the Bank undertook an obligation to provide a defined form of disability insurance. The Banks' failure to meet this obligation is the proper subject of a counterclaim to the foreclosure action.
Because Appellant does not dispute that portion of the trial court order which rules in the Bank's favor and enters Summary Judgment in the mortgage foreclosure action, we affirm that portion of the trial court order. For the reasons outlined above, we reverse that portion of the trial court order which dismisses Appellants' counterclaim. Because of the our decision to reinstate the counterclaim, which may prove to be a set-off to the amount Appellants are in default, we direct the trial court to stay any action on the Bank's judgment in the mortgage foreclosure action until the counterclaim is resolved.
Order affirmed in part, reversed in part. Case remanded for proceedings consistent with this opinion. Jurisdiction relinquished.

=== CASE 2208671 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:32.326667+00 ===

804 N.E.2d 854 (2004)
April L. (Mussard) SUDVARY, Appellant-Respondent,
v.
David E. MUSSARD, Appellee-Petitioner.
No. 50A03-0310-CV-392.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
March 15, 2004.
*855 David W. Stone, Stone Law Office, Anderson, IN, Joanne M. Kolbe, Warsaw, IN, Attorney for Appellant.
Tom A. Black, June E. Bules, Plymouth, IN, Attorney for Appellee.
OPINION
NAJAM, Judge.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
April (Mussard) Sudvary ("Mother") appeals from the trial court's order which (1) granted David Mussard's ("Father") motion to modify custody of the parties' only child, and (2) reaffirmed that the court had jurisdiction over the case.[1] Mother presents a single issue for review, namely, whether the trial court had jurisdiction to modify its 2000 custody order under the Uniform Child Custody Jurisdiction Law ("UCCJL"), Indiana Code Section 31-17-3-1 et seq.
We affirm.
FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
Mother and Father were married on April 18, 1998 in Ryland, Ohio, and had one child during their marriage. On March 1, 1999, Father filed a Petition for Dissolution of Marriage in the Marshall Circuit Court. Although the parties had lived in Indiana for at least six months, Mother and the child moved to Ohio just before Father filed his petition.[2] The trial court issued its Decree of Dissolution in May 2000 and ordered in relevant part that the parties share joint legal custody of the child, with Mother having physical custody and Father having visitation.
On June 24, 2002, Father filed a motion for modification of physical custody. On July 19, 2002, the parties appeared for a pre-trial conference during which they agreed that a custody evaluation be performed. The court provided the names of three custody evaluators, and each party struck one evaluator. In late July 2002, Jill Uceny was selected as the evaluator, and the court ordered her to perform the evaluation. In late September 2002, Father moved from Indiana to Illinois because *856 of a job transfer. Mother was aware of Father's move by no later than December 2002 because Father exercised Christmas visitation with the child at that time.
On February 20, 2003, Uceny submitted her Evaluation Report to the court and recommended that Father have physical custody of the child. On February 24, 2003, the court granted Father's motion to continue the modification hearing. On March 6, 2003, Mother's counsel withdrew his appearance, and the following day, Joanne Kolb entered her appearance as Mother's counsel. Also on March 7, 2003, Mother filed her Motion to Determine Jurisdiction in which she argued that the trial court lacked jurisdiction under the UCCJL because neither parent lived in Indiana. Following a hearing, the trial court determined that it had jurisdiction over Father's petition "[b]ased upon the procedural history of [the] case ... and as reflected in the chronological case summary." Appellant's App. at 63. The court then denied Mother's request to certify that issue for interlocutory appeal. Following a hearing on Father's petition to modify custody, the court granted Father's petition, ordered that Father have physical custody of the child, and reaffirmed its prior ruling regarding jurisdiction. This appeal ensued.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
Mother asserts that the trial court erred when it determined that it had jurisdiction over Father's petition. Specifically, she contends that when Father moved from Indiana to Illinois, the court lost jurisdiction under the UCCJL. Father responds, in part, that the court properly determined that it had jurisdiction because: (1) it is undisputed that the court had jurisdiction when Father filed his petition for modification, and (2) once the petition was filed, the trial court could not thereafter be divested of jurisdiction while the petition was pending under the UCCJL. Father's argument raises an issue of first impression, namely, whether a trial court which has jurisdiction under the UCCJL at the time a petition to modify is filed can subsequently lose jurisdiction while that petition is pending because of a change in the parties' circumstances. We hold that jurisdiction under the UCCJL is established on the date that a party files a petition to modify and that a court may not lose jurisdiction while such a matter is pending.
Both parties acknowledge that an Indiana court's jurisdiction to decide custody matters having interstate dimensions is governed by the UCCJL, Indiana Code Section 31-17-3-1 et seq. Under the UCCJL, the trial court must first determine whether it has jurisdiction and, if it does, whether to exercise that jurisdiction. Pryor v. Pryor, 709 N.E.2d 374, 376 (Ind. Ct.App.1999). In determining whether a trial court has improperly exercised jurisdiction under the UCCJL, we apply an abuse of discretion standard. Id. An abuse of discretion will occur when the trial court's decision is clearly against the logic and effect of the facts and circumstances before the court, or if the court has misinterpreted the law. Id.
The UCCJL provides in relevant part:
Jurisdiction. (a) A court of this state which is competent to decide child custody matters has jurisdiction to make a child custody determination by initial or modification decree if:
(1) this state (A) is the home state of the child at the time of commencement of the proceeding, or (B) had been the child's home state within six (6) months before commencement of the proceeding and the child is absent from this state because of his removal *857 or retention by a person claiming his custody or for other reasons, and a parent or person acting as parent continues to live in this state;
(2) it is in the best interest of the child that a court of this state assume jurisdiction because (A) the child and his parents, or the child and at least one (1) contestant,[3] have a significant connection with this state, and (B) there is available in this state substantial evidence concerning the child's present or future care, protection, training, and personal relationships;
(3) the child is physically present in this state and the child has been abandoned; or
(4) (A) it appears that no other state would have jurisdiction under prerequisites substantially in accordance with paragraphs (1), (2), or (3), or another state has declined to exercise jurisdiction on the ground that this state is the more appropriate forum to determine the custody of the child, and (B) it is in the best interest of the child that this court assume jurisdiction.
(b) Except under paragraphs (3) and (4) of subsection (a) physical presence in this state of the child, or of the child and one (1) of the contestants, is not alone sufficient to confer jurisdiction on a court of this state to make a child custody determination.
(c) Physical presence of the child, while desirable, is not a prerequisite for jurisdiction to determine his custody.
Ind.Code § 31-17-3-3. In addition, Indiana Code Section 31-17-3-14 addresses modification of custody decrees and provides in relevant part:
(a) If a court of another state has made a custody decree, a court of this state shall not modify that decree unless (1) it appears to the court of this state that the court which rendered the decree does not now have jurisdiction under jurisdictional prerequisites substantially in accordance with this chapter or has declined to assume jurisdiction to modify the decree and (2) the court of this state has jurisdiction.
(b) If a court of this state is authorized under section 8(a) of this chapter to modify a custody decree of another state it shall give due consideration to the transcript of the record and other documents of all previous proceedings submitted to it in accordance with section 22 of this chapter.
Neither Indiana Code Sections 31-17-3-3 nor -14 expressly addresses the date on which jurisdiction is to be determined. Nor do those statutes address whether a trial court may lose jurisdiction while a petition to modify is pending. However, our review of the Uniform Child Custody Jurisdiction Act and cases from other states that, like Indiana, have adopted that Act, support our conclusion that jurisdiction under the UCCJL is determined on the date that a petition to modify is filed and that a court cannot lose jurisdiction while a petition is pending.
First, the Commissioner's Comment to the Uniform Child Custody Jurisdiction Act, Section 14 (which applies equally to our adopted version of that section regarding modification, Indiana Code Section 31-17-3-14), provides in part:
Courts which render a custody decree normally retain continuing jurisdiction to modify the decree under local law. Courts in other states have in the past often assumed jurisdiction to modify the *858 out-of-state decree themselves without regard to the preexisting jurisdiction of the other state. In order to achieve greater stability of custody arrangements and avoid forum shopping, subsection (a) declares that other states will defer to the continuing jurisdiction of the court of another state as long as that state has jurisdiction under the standards of this Act. In other words, all petitions for modification are to be addressed to the prior state if that state has sufficient contact with the case to satisfy section 3.
* * *
The prior court has jurisdiction to modify under this section even though its original assumption of jurisdiction did not meet the standards of this Act, as long as it would have jurisdiction now, that is, at the time of the petition for modification.
(Emphases original and added). Thus, the Comment to the Uniform Act indicates that for purposes of determining whether the trial court that issued the original custody decree has continuing jurisdiction over a subsequent petition to modify, the date the petition to modify is filed controls.
Cases from other states that have adopted the Uniform Act have determined that the date the petition to modify is filed is dispositive of jurisdiction. See Favacchia v. Favacchia, 769 A.2d 531, 538-539 (Pa.Super.Ct.2001) (stating "[j]urisdiction under the UCCJA is determined at the time of the `commencement of the proceeding,'" and holding that date petition to modify was filed was commencement of modification proceeding); see also Counts v. Bracken, 494 So. 2d 1275, 1278 (La.Ct. App.1986) (stating "[t]he UCCJA requires... that the court which rendered the prior custody decree must meet the jurisdictional requirements of the UCCJA when the modification is sought.").[4]
Further, in a similar case, the Appellate Court of Illinois determined that where the trial court had jurisdiction at the time a petition to modify was filed under the Illinois equivalent to Indiana Code Section 31-17-3-3, the court could not be divested of jurisdiction "in the midst of a custody modification proceeding based on a change in circumstances occurring after the proceeding had commenced but prior to final determination." Kelly v. Warner, 119 Ill. App. 3d 217, 77 Ill. Dec. 273, 460 N.E.2d 329, 330 (1983). In Kelly, when the petition to modify was filed, Father lived in Illinois and Mother lived in Indiana. Id. at 329. While that petition was pending, Father also moved to Indiana. Id. Mother then moved to have jurisdiction transferred to Indiana, and the trial court granted the motion on the basis that it no longer had jurisdiction under the Illinois version of the Uniform Act. Id. On appeal, the Appellate Court disagreed as follows: "Recognizing that the UCCJA now limits continuing jurisdiction, we nonetheless find that ... mere movement of the parties cannot serve to divest a court of its jurisdiction once acquired during modification *859 proceedings which are underway but not concluded." Id. at 330. The court stated further that the trial court "retained authority to make a final determination in [the] matter and it was error for the court to decline jurisdiction in the middle of unfinished business." Id.
Here, it is undisputed that the trial court had jurisdiction under Indiana Code Section 31-17-3-3 at the time Father filed his petition to modify custody because Father still lived in Indiana on that date. We hold that the date Father filed his petition to modify is dispositive in determining jurisdiction under the UCCJL. And, as in Kelly, we conclude that Father's move to Illinois while the modification proceedings were pending does not divest the Indiana trial court of jurisdiction. Thus, the trial court properly determined that it had jurisdiction.
Affirmed.
BAKER, J., and MAY, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Prior to the court's final order regarding custody modification, Mother filed a motion asking the court to determine whether it had jurisdiction. The court determined that it had jurisdiction, and Mother moved to certify that issue for interlocutory appeal. But the trial court denied Mother's motion and subsequently reaffirmed its continuing jurisdiction in its final order.
[2]  Mother and the child have lived in Ohio since that time. The parties agree that the trial court had jurisdiction over the initial dissolution and custody proceedings.
[3]  "Contestant" means a person, including a parent, who claims a right to custody or visitation rights with respect to a child. Ind. Code § 31-17-3-2(1).
[4]  The rule that jurisdiction under the UCCJL is determined on the date a petition to modify is filed is not unlike diversity jurisdiction in federal court, where the date that a complaint is filed is the relevant date for purposes of establishing federal diversity jurisdiction. See Jason's Foods, Inc. v. Peter Eckrich & Sons, Inc., 768 F.2d 189, 190 (7th Cir.1985). That rule is also consistent with the Parental Kidnapping Prevention Act of 1980, 28 U.S.C. § 1738A ("PKPA"). See Lee v. Lee, 445 So. 2d 287, 290 (Ala.Civ.App.1983) (explaining where Alabama court had to determine whether to enforce Texas judgment, Alabama court must first decide whether Texas court had jurisdiction under PKPA, and under PKPA, "critical date in ascertaining compliance with the federal act ... is the date of the filing of the custody proceedings in the Texas court....") (emphasis added).

=== CASE 9737068 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:14:40.536891+00 ===

OPINION
BAKER, Judge.
Appellant-petitioner Teresa Theobald (Teresa) appeals the trial court's ruling in the dissolution of her marriage to appellee-respondent Gregory Theobald (Gregory). *285Specifically, she argues that the trial court erred in admitting a home study report because she was not given the opportunity to cross-examine the person who prepared the report. Finding that Teresa waived her right to conduct such a cross-examination, we affirm the decision of the trial court.
FACTS
Gregory and Teresa were married on December 26, 1991. Three children were born of the marriage-Nicklaus on June 20, 1991, Nathan on August 30, 1994, and Spencer on November 6, 2000. Teresa has experienced mental health problems during the marriage. She has been diagnosed with depression and paranoid delusions as well as other mental illnesses that include paranoia. In 2000, while pregnant with Spencer, she experienced a psychotic episode for which she was hospitalized for several days.
On April 3, 2001, Teresa filed for dissolution of marriage. By agreement of the parties, Dr. Gayla Kaibel conducted a custody evaluation. Dr. Kaibel testified before the court on July 31, 2002, that Teresa's paranoia was influencing the children in that they were much more afraid of the world than they need be. Dr. Kaibel noted two concerns about Teresa being the custodial parent: first that the children may become more distrustful and worried about other people and second that Teresa's anger and distrust of Gregory could turn the children against their father. Nevertheless, Dr. Kaibel recommended that Teresa have primary custody of the children, partly because Teresa had been the primary caregiver. Gene Colina, another expert witness, testified that Teresa's mental health was "fine," "strong," "involved," and "in good shape." Tr. p. 165.
Following the presentation of evidence at the December 2, 2002 hearing, the trial court sought an additional home study of both parent's homes to be conducted by White's Residential and Family Services (White's). The trial court then asked if either party's counsel expected there to be "any need to hear any further evidence after that report's received," and Teresa's trial counsel responded, "I don't." Tr. p. 519.
On February 3, 2008, Violet Robinson, on behalf of White's, reported to the court that the children would be best placed with the father. Robinson noted that in Teresa's home Nicklaus cares for Spencer and is unable to act like a child. She also reported that the children were not allowed outside often at Teresa's home because of Teresa's fears that they would get sick. Robinson further noted that at Gregory's home, Nicklaus acted like a child and had fun. Robinson expressed concern for the children's emotional health and stated, "these children will be more emotionally healthy if they live with their father." Appellant's App. p. 13.
On February 18, 2003, Teresa moved to quash Robinson's report. Gregory filed his objection thereto the next day, but no further hearings were held. On March 26, 20083, the trial court issued its Decree of Dissolution, which overruled Teresa's objection and motion to quash, stating that, "the report is entered as part of the record for consideration by the Court in these proceedings as agreed upon by the parties." Appellant's Br. p. 5. The trial court granted custody of the minor children to Gregory, and Teresa now appeals.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
This case involves statutory interpretation. Our standard of review for the interpretation of statutes is de novo. We review legal determinations to ascertain *286whether the trial court erred in application of the law. Clark v. Madden, 725 N.E.2d 100, 104 (Ind.Ct.App.2000). Thus, we review the trial court's decision to deny Teresa's motion to quash without a hearing, which requires interpretation of an Indiana statute, de novo.
The trial court's order does not specify whether the home study was to be made pursuant to Indiana Code section 31-17-2-10 or to Indiana Code section 31-17-2-12. However, section 12 requires that a parent or the child's custodian request such a study. Because that did not occur in this case, we can only assume that the trial court entered its order pursuant to Indiana Code section 81-17-2-10, which states:
(a) The Court may seek the advice of professional personnel even if the professional personnel are not employed on a regular basis by the court. The advice shall be given in writing and made available by the court to counsel upon request. (b) Counsel may call for cross-examination of any professional personnel consulted by the court.
(Emphasis added). The right to eross-examine witnesses under oath is a fundamental right which cannot be denied unless waived. Courter v. Fugitt, 714 N.E.2d 1129, 1132 (Ind.Ct.App.1999).
Here, at the conclusion of the final hearing, the trial court discussed the matter with both Teresa and Gregory's attorneys in chambers. On the record, the trial court stated its intention to seek input from White's. Tr. p. 518. After the trial court asked the parties if any additional evidence needed to be presented after the report was prepared, Teresa's counsel specifically acknowledged that no further evidence would be offered. Tr. p. 519. As a result, Teresa waived her right to cross-examine Robinson. See Archem, Inc. v. Simo, 549 N.E.2d 1054, 1060 (Ind.Ct.App.1990) (finding right to cross-examination waived by mere failure to object when trial court did not provide opportunity to cross-examine the witness). Simply put, it would be inequitable to the opposing party and a waste of judicial resources to allow a litigant who has previously waived the right to cross-examination to rekindle this right through a motion to the trial court only after she discovers that the report is unfavorable to her position. In the context of Indiana Code section 81-17-2-10, once a party has waived the right to cross-examination, it remains waived.
The judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
BAILEY, J., concurs.
MAY, J., dissents with opinion.

=== CASE 9737069 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:14:40.541657+00 ===

MAY, Judge,
dissenting.
As the majority notes, the trial court requested a home study pursuant to Indiana Code § 31-17-2-10, which also permits counsel to "call for cross-examination of any professional personnel consulted by the court." Ind.Code § 81-17-2-10(b). The majority holds Teresa waived her right to cross-examine the preparer of the report. Because I.do not believe her statement at the hearing amounted to a waiver of that right, I respectfully dissent.
First, I disagree with the majority about the inference that should be drawn from the facts herein. After the trial court heard all evidence offered by the parties, it decided it wanted White's to conduct a home study. It asked the parties: "Do you think there's going to be any need to hear any further evidence after that report's received?" (Tr. at 519.) Teresa's counsel responded, "I don't." (Id.) The court indicated White's would "conduct an additional home study in both homes, report back to the Court, and we'll provide *287copies to both of you Counsel, and this matter will be taken under advisement pending receipt of this additional report." (Id. at 519-20.)
Teresa's counsel agreed that she did not think there would be any need to hear "any further evidence after that report's received." (Id. at 519.) The majority interprets "any further evidence" to include cross-examination of the preparer of the report, but I would not interpret that phrase so broadly. While I believe counsel waived the right to present rebuttal evidence from additional witnesses,1 I do not believe she waived the right to cross-examine2 the preparer of the report from White's.
Moreover, I do not think a party can implicitly waive the right to cross-examine the preparer of a report under Ind.Code § 31-17-2-10 when the report has not yet been drafted and the parties thus cannot know its contents.3 The statutory mechanism allowing parties to cross-examine preparers of court-ordered reports was provided by the legislature "[tlo obviate concerns over hearsay when a court utilizes" this procedure for obtaining evidence. Owensby v. Lepper, 666 N.E.2d 1251, 1255 (Ind.Ct.App.1996) (discussing Ind.Code § 31-1-11.5-2l(e) (West Supp.1995),4 which contained language nearly identical to today's Ind.Code § 81-17-2-10), reh'g denied. Given that we cannot expect parties to know what evidence will appear in a report that has not be submitted, I do not believe Teresa was obliged to inform the court she thought she would need to cross-examine the preparer of the report. See Jendreas v. Jendreas, 664 N.E.2d 367 (Ind.Ct.App.1996), trans. denied.
In Jendreas, a divorcing couple was disputing who would have custody of their son. The parties agreed to be evaluated by Dr. Gary Durak. However, Durak ultimately was unavailable to testify at the hearing. At the end of the hearing, the trial court "indicated that it would rule on all pending issues except the custody matter, and ordered Durak to submit a report." Id. After Durak filed his report, the mother filed a motion "to conduct a hearing for the purpose of cross-examining Durak."5 Id. The trial court denied that motion in an order that provided:
*288The Court has reviewed the file and the pleadings, and finds that on August 9, 1994, evidence was concluded and both parties rested. The Court then asked Dr. Durak to issue a report.... Said report was requested by the Court to better evaluate the testimony of the parties at the August 9 hearing. This was the sole reason for requesting Dr. Durak to prepare a supplemental report. Accordingly, the Court finds that this case is concluded, and should not be reopened.
Id. at 869 n. 1.
Mother appealed claiming the trial court violated her right to due process when it refused to allow her to cross-examine Du-rak. We explained:
Procedural due process must be provided to protect the substantive rights of the parties in child custody proceedings, and an opportunity to be heard is essential before a parent can be deprived of custody. Even where the technical requirements of the [statute] are not met, when reports are considered by the trial court in making its determination, the parties should have the opportunity to examine their veracity and the probity of their conclusions. Onee the court decides to order a study to aid in the custody determination, the court is obligated by due process to hold a further hearing.
In Van Etta [v. Van Etta, 583 N.E.2d 767, 768 (Ind.Ct.App.1991)], the father filed a petition to modify custody and after a hearing, the court sua sponte ordered a home study by the county welfare department. The report was filed with the court and without another hearing, the court granted custody to the father. Mother appealed, arguing that the trial court erred in considering the home study report without a hearing. This court reversed, noting that even though the court ordered the report sua sponte and the technical requirements of IC 31-1-11.5-22 were not met, it could not tell to what extent the court based its judgment on the unchallenged report, making a hearing essential in order to protect the mother's due process rights.
Similarly, although the technical requirements of IC 831-1-11.5-22 are not met here, its legislative intent remains clear; parties should have the opportunity to examine into the veracity and the support for any conclusions reached in investigative reports. Here, Durak submitted two reports subsequent to the hearing which made different recommendations regarding the custody of [son]. The court then awarded [father] custody. In its findings, the trial court relied upon the September 14, 1994 letter, noting that Durak recommended [son] live with his father on a full-time basis and that Durak "has established a pattern of consistently moving closer to the position of Mr. Jendreas on the custody issue." Yet, by denying [mother]'s request for a hearing, the trial court precluded her from examining the veracity and probity of Durak's recommendations which the trial court expressly relied upon in reaching its conclusion. *289Due process requires otherwise. Accordingly, we determine that a hearing subsequent to the submission of Durak's reports was essential to protect [moth-erl's due process rights and remand for further proceedings.
Id. at 370 (internal citations omitted).
I acknowledge the language of the controlling statute has changed since this court decided Jendreas and Van Hita. Nevertheless, the current statute still evidences the legislature's intent that "parties should have the opportunity to examine into the veracity and the support for any conclusions reached in investigative reports," id., see also Ind.Code § 81-17-2-10(b), and due process still requires us to provide parents an opportunity to be heard before we remove their children from their custody. Therefore, I believe we should follow the reasoning of Jendreas and Van Eitte and require the trial court to hold another hearing when requested by a party after the trial court sua sponte ordered a study at the end of the custody hearing.
Teresa's agreement that she did not "think there's going to be any need to hear any further evidence after that report's received" (Appellant's App. at 19) did not constitute waiver of her right to cross-examine under Ind.Code § 31-17-2-10. In her motion to quash the report, Teresa requested a hearing and noted she "did not have the opportunity to impeach this witness." (Id. at 16.) That language was a sufficient request for the hearing permitted by Ind.Code § 31-17-2-10, and upon Teresa's request, due process required the trial court to conduct a hearing. Any difference between the terms "cross-examine" and "opportunity to impeach" is wholly trivial given the statutory language.
Because the trial court specifically indicated it needed an additional home study to help it determine who should have custody and because the trial court followed the recommendation of White's home study when placing the children with Gregory, I am unable to hold that the denial of Teresa's right to cross-examine the reporter was harmless error. Accordingly, I would reverse the trial court's judgment and remand for a hearing at which Teresa is provided an opportunity to cross-examine Violet Robinson, preparer of the court-ordered home study report.
. Rebuttal evidence is evidence "offered to disprove or contradict the evidence presented by an opposing party." Black's Law Dictionary 579 (7th ed. 1999).
. Cross-examination is "[the questioning of a witness at a trial or hearing by the party opposed to the party who called the witness to testify." Black's Law Dictionary 383 (7th ed. 1999). "The purpose of cross-examination is to discredit a witness before the fact finder in any of several ways, as by bringing out contradictions and improbabilities in earlier testimony, by suggesting doubts to the witness, and by trapping the witness into admissions that weaken the testimony." Id.
. My position might not be the same if the trial court had explicitly asked the parties if they wanted to schedule an additional hearing to cross-examine the preparer of the report. However, as that scenario is not before me today, I need not decide that more difficult question.
. Ind.Code § 31-1-11.5-21(e) (West Supp. 1995) provided:
The court may seek the advice of professional personnel whether or not they are employed on a regular basis by the court. The advice given shall be in writing and shall be made available by the court to counsel upon request. Counsel may call for cross-examination of any professional personnel consulted by the court.
. Mother claimed she had a right to cross-examine pursuant to Ind.Code § 31-1-11.5-22 (West Supp.1995), which provided in pertinent part:
(a) In custody proceedings after evidence is submitted upon the petition, if a parent, or the child's custodian so requests, the court *288may order an investigation and report concerning custodial arrangements for the child....
(b) ... If the requirements of subsection (c) are fulfilled, the investigator's report may be received in evidence at the hearing, ...
(c) The court shall mail the investigator's report to counsel and to any party not represented by counsel at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing.... Any party to the proceeding may call the investigator and any person whom he has consulted for cross-examination. No party may waive his right of cross-examination prior to the hearing.

=== CASE 9737070 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:14:41.242456+00 ===

STRUTZ, Judge.
This is an action for the wrongful death of Charles Kelmis, the plaintiff’s husband, brought by the plaintiff as the surviving wife, for herself and for the use and benefit of the five surviving minor children of the plaintiff and the deceased.
Pursuant to a written motion by the plaintiff, the trial court ordered the issues of liability and damages tried separately, and thereafter proceeded to try the issue of liability. After hearing on this issue, the court ordered that the plaintiff’s action be dismissed. From judgment entered pursuant to such order, the plaintiff has appealed to this court, demanding trial de no-vo.
There is not much dispute as to the facts. At the time of the accident, the plaintiff’s husband was employed by The Boeing Company. On the morning of the accident he, with three other employees of that company, was en route to a missile site designated as “Mike-One,” with one of such employees, Andrew Freed, driving a 1965 Plymouth sedan which Boeing had leased from National Car Rentals. Plaintiff’s decedent was riding as a passenger in the left rear of the car. The supervisor of ’ the crew was riding as a passenger in the right front seat. The driver and the other employees, including the plaintiff’s decedent, were mechanics employed by Boeing.
This crew left Minot on the morning of the accident at approximately 7:05, en route to Missile Site Mike-One. They proceeded north on U. S. Highway No. 83 to the Lansford intersection and turned west on county highway No. 16, which is a graveled road. Freed, the driver, testified that as he drove west on county highway No. 16 he was traveling between fifty and fifty-five miles an hour, while the defendant’s driver testified that defendant’s vehicle was traveling about 40 miles an hour.
The driver of the car was the only survivor of the Boeing crew involved in the accident. He evidently suffered amnesia as a result of injuries received, for he cannot remember anything after passing a point on highway No. 16 some twelve miles east of the scene of the collision.
The other vehicle involved in the accident was the defendant’s 1964 Mack tractor and trailer, weighing 37,000 pounds, which had an over-all length of fifty-four feet. It was being driven by an employee of the defendant, Cardinal Petroleum Company, who admittedly was operating the vehicle at the time of the accident in the course of his employment. This vehicle was en route to an oil well being drilled north of Carpió. ' The vehicles collided at the intersection of county highway No. 28 and county highway No. 16. At the point of the accident, county highway No. 28 runs north and south, while county highway No. 16 runs in an easterly and westerly direction.
It is undisputed that traffic on county highway No. 16, as it approaches the intersection with county highway No. 28, is controlled by a “yield right of way” sign. It is also conceded that as county highway No. 28 approaches the intersection with county highway No. 16, there is a sign approximately 500 feet from the intersection giving notice of the approaching junction.
*714From the record in this case, it is apparent that the intersection of the two highways is a wide-open intersection. There are no buildings, no trees, no hills, nor vegetation which could have obstructed the visibility of either driver for a distance of at least one-half mile from the intersection, with the exception of a slight knoll about 100 feet in length on highway No. 16, approximately 1,000 feet east of the intersection. It is contended by the defendant that if a car should happen to be behind the knoll when a driver approaches the intersection from the north on highway No. 28, the car on highway No. 16 would be hidden from view for a distance of about 100 feet. This knoll, however, ends 1,000 feet east of the intersection, and for the last thousand feet a vehicle approaching from the east on highway No. 16 would be in plain view from highway No. 28.
The record also discloses that the weather on the morning of the accident was clear, and that the highways were in good winter driving condition. There was some snow in the ditches, but the highways were clear.
The only eyewitness to the accident who was able to testify was the driver of the truck, since the only survivor of the crew traveling in the Boeing car does not remember anything concerning the accident. The truck driver does not remember whether he looked to the east for traffic approaching the intersection on county highway No. 16, but he believes that he did so because he always looked for oncoming traffic when approaching an intersection. He did not, however, observe the Boeing car until it was at the intersection, directly in front of him. He then slammed on his brakes, but collision at that time was unavoidable and he collided with the Boeing car with great force and violence, killing three of its occupants. The collision occurred in approximately the center of the intersection. There were no tire marks on highway No. 16 to indicate that the Boeing car’s brakes had been applied at all. There were, however, tire marks of approximately fourteen feet in length left by the defendant’s vehicle.
The driver of the defendant’s truck stated that there were no other cars, no machinery, nor any other circumstances which might have diverted his attention from the intersection.
On the above facts, the trial court found for the defendant and dismissed the plaintiff’s complaint. The court found that the driver of the defendant’s vehicle was under no obligation to sense danger until the Boeing vehicle had reached a point on highway No'. 16 after which it could not brake to a stop before entering the intersection. The court found that, at the speed of travel of the Boeing vehicle, it could have stopped if its brakes had been applied approximately 128 feet from the intersection. The court further found that when the Boeing vehicle had reached that point, the defendant’s vehicle was at a point on the highway where it could 'not' 'Ijave stopped in time to avoid the collision. The court further found that the driver of the defendant’s vehicle was not under a duty to constantly look for approaching traffic from the left; that the driver did not, in fact, observe the Boeing Vehicle because his vision was obstructed by either the lefthand exterior rear-view mirror or the left corner post of the windshield.
The court also found that the defendant’s driver is not held to the duty of the most careful driver but to the duty of a reasonably prudent driver, and that there is no evidence that such driver acted unreasonably; that the defendant’s driver had a right to assume that the driver of the Boeing vehicle would respect his right of way, until he became aware that the plaintiff’s driver was not going to do so; that the negligence of the driver of the plaintiff’s vehicle was the sole, proximate cause of the collision; and that there was no actual negligence on the part of the driver of the defendant’s truck.
On appeal from a judgment in an action tried without a jury, where the appellant demands a trial de novo, the appellate court tries the entire case anew, giving apprecia*715ble weight to the findings of the trial court. Braaten v. Grabinski, 77 N.D. 422, 43 N.W.2d 381; Gust v. Wilson, 79 N.D. 865, 60 N.W.2d 202, 38 A.L.R.2d 1371; C.I.T. Corporation v. Hetland (N.D.), 143 N.W.2d 94.
This court will not apply the principle that in reviewing a case tried without a jury it will give appreciable weight to the findings of the trial court, in order to relieve it of the necessity of trying anew all questions of fact in the entire case. On trial de novo, the appellate court will find the facts for itself.
We agree with the trial court that the driver of the Boeing car was negligent in the operation of the vehicle in which the deceased was riding, and that his negligence was a proximate cause of the collision. However, that fact does not bar the plaintiff from recovering for the death of her husband if the driver of the defendant’s vehicle also was negligent and if such negligence proximately contributed to the happening of the collision. Ordinarily, negligence on the part of the driver of a vehicle cannot be imputed to a passenger riding with him. Anderson v. Stokkeland (N.D.), 125 N.W.2d 665. Only the passenger’s own negligence would bar his recovering. Fisher v. Suko (N.D.), 111 N.W.2d 360.
In this case, the trial court found that there was no negligence or contributory negligence, either actual or imputed, on the part of the plaintiff’s decedent. On a careful review of the record, we find no evidence of negligence or contributory negligence on the part of the deceased which would bar the plaintiff’s recovery in this action.
The defendant’s employee was driving on a highway whose approaches were protected by signs requiring those entering from a side road to yield to traffic on such favored highway. However, a driver on such favored highway does not have an exclusive privilege which requires those who enter upon it to do so at their risk. The fact that a driver on approaching an intersection on a highway protected by “yield” signs knows that he has the right of way, does not give him the right to proceed without due care by failing to keep a proper lookout for others who may operate their vehicles in a negligent manner while entering the favored highway. Anderson v. Schreiner (N.D.), 94 N.W.2d 294. It is true that a driver on such favored highway has the right to assume that others will honor his right of way. But that does not allow him, because of such right, to drive without due care. Kuntz v. Stelmachuk (N.D.), 136 N.W.2d 810.
In the case before us, the driver of the defendant’s vehicle admitted that he did not see the Boeing vehicle until it was just in front of him. He does not even know whether he looked to the east for approaching vehicles, although he thinks he might have because he usually did so on approaching an intersection. While defendant’s driver had the right to assume that other vehicles would honor his right of way, he must, in the exercise of ordinary care, look for approaching vehicles on intersecting highways and his lookout must be such that he will see what a person in the exercise of ordinary care would see under like circumstances. Anderson v. Schreiner, supra. Here, it is undisputed that, except for approximately 100 feet, at a point 1,000 feet from the intersection, the driver on highway No. 28 had an unobstructed view of traffic approaching on highway No. 16 for more than half a mile. Had the driver of defendant’s vehicle been exercising due care, he would have observed the Boeing vehicle aproaching the intersection in time to have avoided the collision. The mere fact that the defendant’s driver had the right of way did not give him the right to proceed without due care by failing to keep a lookout for vehicles approaching on an intersecting road.
We find that the fact that the driver of defendant’s vehicle did not actually see the Boeing vehicle approaching *716the intersection, under the circumstances, although it was in plain sight and could have been seen had he looked, was negligence on his part. The record clearly establishes that there were no distracting circumstances which might excusably have diverted his attention.
As we said in Anderson v. Schreiner, supra, the question to be determined in this case is whether the conduct of the defendant’s driver on the favored highway was reasonable in the light of what he saw, or should have seen, had he looked. It is true that the law required the driver of the Boeing car to slow down, and to stop if hecessary, to yield the right of way to defendant’s vehicle on the favored highway. But, had the defendant’s driver looked, he would have seen that the Boeing vehicle was not going to do this. He would have seen the Boeing car for half a mile as it approached the intersection, except for a space of not more than 100 feet when it was partially hidden behind a knoll; but for the last 1,000 feet of the Boeing vehicle’s approach to the intersection, he would have had it in constant view, and he would have known that it was not slowing for a yield. There is no evidence of any skid or brake marks in the gravel to indicate a slowing down of the Boeing car as it approached the intersection. Was it reasonable, in the light of ■yvhat he saw or should have seen had he maintained a proper lookout, for him to continue driving his heavy vehicle toward the intersection without decreasing his speed in order to avoid a possible collision, in view of the fact that there was a warning sign advising defendant’s driver of the approaching yield intersection, when he saw, or should have seen, that the Boeing car was failing to slow down for a yield?
We find from this evidence that defendant driver’s failure to decrease his speed when he saw or should have seen that the Boeing driver was not slowing for the purpose of yielding, was negligence, and that such negligence was a proximate cause of the collision that followed. Where the driver on a favored highway sees, or in the exercise of due care should see, that the other vehicle is failing to yield as required by law, he, himself, is under a duty of slowing down to avoid a collision. We find that the failure of defendant’s driver to do so was negligence and that his negligence under the circumstances of this case proximately contributed to the accident.
The judgment of the district court is reversed, and the case is remanded for determination of the issue of damages.
ERICKSTAD and PAULSON, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9737071 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:14:41.247619+00 ===

TEIGEN, Chief Justice
(dissenting).
I dissent. The majority have cited applicable law but unless it is intended to find that the favored driver’s duty to stop or slow his vehicle attached at a distance of a thousand feet or a half mile before the inferior vehicle reached the intersection they have not found at what point his duty to take steps to avoid a collision arose, nor have they measured his action after this point.
Section 39-10-24, N.D.C.C., and pocket parts, provides a preferential right of way at intersections may be indicated by stop or yield signs. Subsection 3 thereof provides that the driver of the vehicle approaching the yield sign shall in obedience thereto slow down to a speed reasonable for existing conditions and shall stop if necessary to yield the right of way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard. This section also provides that if such driver is involved in a collision with a vehicle after having driven past the yield sign such collision “shall be deemed prima-facie evidence of his failure to yield the right of way.”
It is conceded that the driver of the automobile in which the deceased was riding was negligent and that his negligence was *717a proximate cause of the collision which directly resulted in decedent’s death. However, the plaintiff suing for the wrongful death did not elect to bring action against the driver of that vehicle, but has elected to sue the owner of the truck with which the vehicle the deceased was riding in collided. The owner’s truck being driven by its employee at the time of the collision was upon a preferred highway to which access was controlled by yield signs, as authorized by § 39-10-24, N.D.C.C.
A driver upon a preferred highway, usually called an arterial or through highway, does not have an exclusive privilege which would require those crossing it to do so at their own risk but he must look for approaching vehicles upon an intersecting highway and his lookout must be such that he will see what a person in the exercise of ordinary care would see in like circumstances. Anderson v. Schreiner, N.D., 94 N.W.2d 294. Subject to this qualification, that he exercise reasonable care, he has the right to anticipate that a driver approaching upon an inferior highway will heed the yield sign by slowing down and stopping if necessary to yield the right of way to the favored vehicle in the intersection or approaching on the favored highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard. We have so held several times relative to stop signs. See Austinson v. Kilpatrick, N.D., 105 N.W.2d 258; Satterland v. Fieber, N.D., 91 N.W.2d 623; Marsden v. O’Callaghan, N.D., 77 N.W.2d 522. The same law is applicable to yield signs.
Neither driver was speeding. The truck was traveling at about 40 m. p. h., the Boeing vehicle from 50 to 60 m. p. h. These were permissible speeds. The Boeing vehicle, however, did not yield to the truck which was traveling upon the favored highway. Upon the record in this case I have no doubt that the defendant’s driver was negligent in failing to have kept a proper lookout. He testified he did not see the subordinate vehicle until it was too late to avoid the collision. The question remains, however, whether it can be said that the negligence of the defendant’s driver in failing to .keep a proper lookout contributed proximately to the collision resulting in decedent’s death.
In Anderson v. Schreiner, supra, where a similar factual situation existed, we said:
Whether an observing driver has been negligent, and whether his. negligence was a proximate cause, depend on what he does after he has observed the circumstances and reached a judgment with respect thereto. The negligence of the non-observing driver is in not maintaining a lookout. In a sense this negligence is remote, because whether the 'failure to look proximately causes an injury depends, not upon the lack of observation, but upon what the driver does as a result of not looking. Therefore it is reasonable to say that if a jury may find that the conduct of an observing driver, who was aware of an approaching car and the possible danger at an intersection, was reasonable in the circumstances, they may also find that the conduct of a non-observing driver, who was unaware of the danger, was reasonable in identical circumstances, even though his ignorance of possible danger was due to his own negligence. The ultimate jury question is whether the' conduct of the driver on the arterial highway was reasonable in the light of what he saw or should have seen. Because óf his qualified right to rely on his preferred status there is no inescapable inference that a driver upon an arterial highway, who hadn’t looked for cars approaching on an intersecting highway would have behaved any differently if he had looked. It follows that whether his negligence in not looking was a proximate cause, was a question for the jury. * * ⅝*
In the instant case a jury was waived and the case was tried on the question of liability to the court. On a de novo appeal from the judgment it becomes the duty of this court, as finders of the facts, to deter*718mine whether an observing driver would have been reasonably prudent in proceeding through the intersection under the circumstances. To say that the conduct of an observing driver in the circumstances was reasonable but that the conduct of a non-observing driver was not reasonable in identical circumstances would be logically inconsistent. It is therefore the duty of this court to find at what point the driver of the favored vehicle (the truck) if he had observed the approach of the inferior vehicle should take action to avoid collision in the intersection. The Supreme Court of Michigan discussed this question in a similar case in McGuire v. Rabaut, 354 Mich. 230, 92 N.W.2d 299, at page 301 thereof, wherein they state:
The difficulties in this case, as in other arterial highway versus subordinate street cases, arise from an apparent conflict between 2 equally sound and equally applicable principles of law. The first is that a driver on an arterial highway is entitled to assume that subordinate drivers will yield him the right of way. He is not bound to anticipate unlawful or negligent acts on their part. At the same time, however, the favored driver must conform to the standard of due care imposed upon him as well as the rest of mankind, namely, that he shall exercise reasonable care for his own protection. But what does this actually mean in terms of arterial travel ? Therein lies our problem. Its importance to the motoring public may justify its comprehensive re-examination.
It is clear, at the one extreme, that the favored driver is not permitted to lower his head, close his eyes, and charge blindly through intersections on the theory that such is his “right” simply because he is the favored driver. It was Justice Holmes who said that “such words as ‘right’ are a constant solicitation to fallacy.” The favored driver’s rights are not so broad. It remains his duty to exercise reasonable care under the circumstances. We explored this matter in Krause v. Ryan, 344 Mich. 428, 74 N.W.2d 20, 22, holding that:
“It is not necessary in approaching an intersection, as we said in Arnold v. Krug, supra, [279 Mich. 702] 707 [273 N.W. 322] that he ‘have his car under such control * * * that he may stop at once and avoid collision with persons who may illegally come into his path.’ Lacking notice otherwise, he may assume that others using the highways will comply with the rules of the road and properly posted signs and he is not guilty of contributory negligence in acting upon such assumption. It should not, however, be assumed from the foregoing that he may proceed blindly upon the' arterial, secure in the supposition that he can do no wrong. He must remain alert to the hazards surrounding him and with which he is confronting others. We do not propose to attempt an enumeration of the various actions required of him. So far as the question in this case is concerned, he is undoubtedly required to make observation of the traffic apparently to cross his path from intersecting streets and to act reasonably in the light of such observation.”
The favored driver is thus not required to have his car under such control as to be able to avoid collision with a subordinate driver coming illegally into his path. At what point, then, does the second principle (that of exercising reasonable care for his own protection) come into operation, requiring him to take steps to avoid collision with a subordinate driver? Only at that point when his continuing observations (which he must make, despite the fact that he is on an arterial highway) reveal, or should reveal to the reasonably prudent man, an impending danger. It is at this time that his duty of care with respect to the subordinate driver arises, and his post-observation negligence, or lack thereof, is measured by his actions after this *719point. Consequently, in the case before us the favored driver was entitled to assume, as he approached the Hastings intersection, that his right of way would not be contested by a subordinate driver. He was entitled to rely upon this assumption until it became clear to him (or, until, as a reasonable man, considering pertinent surrounding circumstances of traffic and terrain, it should have been clear to him) that a subordinate driver was going to challenge or obstruct his right of way. At this point his duty to attempt to avoid the impending collision began. It is from this point onward, and not before, with respect to a crossing subordinate driver appearing in his path, that we scrutinize his acts to determine whether or not he is guilty of negligence for failure to act as a reasonably prudent person, and, in all fairness to him, we must measure his conduct in the light of the emergency then presented, if not of his making.
In determining the degree of care required of a motorist who proceeds into an intersection protected by electric signals, we held as follows in Kuntz v. Stelmachuk, N.D., 136 N.W.2d 810, 816:
Whether a driver’s conduct, on reaching an intersection protected by electric signals, measures up to the standard of care required under the circumstances must be determined by the facts of the case which exist at the time of such conduct. While the presence of traffic signals at the intersection lessens the danger and thus lessens the degree of care required of a motorist who proceeds on a proper light, the existence of such lights does not do away with the necessity of some care and caution on the part of such motorist. He still must use care commensurate with the danger that continues to exist. He cannot place blind reliance upon the light, or upon conditions which he observes prior to entering the intersection. * * *
In Henke v. Peyerl, N.D., 89 N.W.2d 1, we held, at Syllabus 4, as follows:
A driver upon a through highway is entitled to assume that those approaching it will obey the law and stop. He is not obliged to have his car under such control at each intersecting road that he may stop at once and avoid a collision with persons who may illegally come into his path.
And in the text thereof, at page 7, we said:
The operator of a vehicle on an arterial highway has a right to assume that one approaching on an intersecting highway or crossroad will drive at a proper speed, and will respect the former’s right-of-way and stop before entering or crossing the arterial highway. Though it is not negligence for a favored driver to act on assumptions of this nature until he has or reasonably should have knowledge to the contrary, he is bound, after acquiring such knowledge, to exercise the care of an ordinarily prudent person. * * *
The above are reasonable and practical applications of the law. An exhaustive annotation on this and other similar questions is found in 3 A.L.R.3rd 180. Many cases are set forth in this annotation which hold that failure to stop at a stop sign or signal was the sole proximate cause of the ensuing collision with a vehicle on a favored highway. See § 47, page 450. A favored driver is not required to have his car under such control that he may bring it to a stop at each intersection he approaches upon the theory that some reckless driver will dispute his passage. This would bring traffic on arterial highways for all practical purposes to a complete stop. At each successive intersection the arterial driver would have to slow down and at blind corners he would be required literally to ease his vehicle forward into the intersection until he crosses the threshold of vision for the subordinate highway lest he be unable to stop if sufficient danger threatened. The purpose of through highways is to move volumes of *720traffic at relatively high speeds. Such purpose cannot be accomplished if our application of the standard of due care does not take into account the function of the arterial or through highway. Due care, for the driver on a through highway, includes the right that he will be afforded the right of way. This assumption may be relied upon by him until he is aware, or as a reasonably prudent driver should be aware, that his right of way is being challenged. Under the law as discussed above, which I think should be applied in this case, I feel the judgment of the trial court dismissing the action should be affirmed.
The trial court found that the driver of the defendant’s truck was under no obligation to sense danger until the vehicle in which the deceased was riding had reached a point distant from the intersection within which the vehicle in which the deceased was riding could brake to a stop, which point was 128 feet from the intersection, and that the driver of the defendant’s truck was entitled to assume, had he seen the other vehicle, that the driver of that vehicle would respect his right of way until he became aware the latter was not going to do so. The trial court also found that had the driver of the defendant’s truck seen the vehicle in which the deceased was riding before he reached a point 128 feet east of the intersection he still would have been unable to avoid the collision. These findings by the trial court have support in the evidence. Giving appreciable weight to the trial court’s findings, I adopt its findings as correct.
I find that when the subordinate vehicle was at a point about 128 feet distant from the intersection a reasonably prudent person driving the defendant’s truck upon the through highway would sense impending danger. At this point a duty of care arose with respect to the subordinate vehicle. The post-observance negligence — or lack thereof —must be measured by defendant’s driver’s actions after this point. Taking into consideration the respective speeds and all other circumstances the defendant’s vehicle was then too close to the intersection to avoid a collision. I therefore conclude that similar conduct of an observing driver, who was aware of the approaching vehicle, in which the deceased was riding and the possible danger at the intersection, would have been reasonable in the circumstances and that, therefore, the conduct of the defendant’s non-observing driver, who was unaware of the danger, was also reasonable even though his ignorance of possible danger was due to his own negligence. For these reasons, I find the negligence of the defendant’s driver in not keeping a lookout was not a proximate cause of the collision resulting in the death of plaintiff’s deceased. I would affirm the judgment.
KNUDSON, J., concurs in the dissent of the Chief Justice.

=== CASE 9737072 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:14:41.252194+00 ===

On Rehearing.
STRUTZ, Judge.
The respondent has filed a petition for rehearing. First, it contends that the opinion of the majority in this case reverses the principle that the findings of a trial court, in a case tried to the court without a jury, will be given appreciable weight. It also inquires if the decision of the trial court was clearly against the evidence — as respondent contends it must be in order for this court to reverse — just where the evidence was contrary to the trial court’s decision.
We believe that respondent is laboring under a misapprehension of the scope of an appeal in a case tried to the court without a jury, in which a demand for a trial de novo is made. In North Dakota, when demand is made for trial de novo and properly included in the statement of the case, as was done in this case, this court is required to find the facts anew. We have held that, in finding the facts anew, we will give appreciable weight to the findings of the trial court. But the principle of giving appreciable weight to findings of the trial court will not relieve us of the *721duty and responsibility of finding the facts anew and of applying the law to those facts. Our statute specifically provides that on demand for trial de novo in a case tried without a jury “the supreme court shall try anew the questions of fact.” Sec. 28-27-32, N.D.C.C.
Thus it is the duty of this court on appeal, in any action tried by the court without a jury, to try anew the questions of fact if the appellant demands a retrial of the entire case. And, in applying the principle that in reviewing a case tried without a jury, appreciable weight will be given to the findings of the trial court, this court will not avoid its lawful duty of trying anew all questions of fact in the entire case. Spielman v. Weber (N.D.), 118 N.W.2d 727.
The cases cited by the respondent in support of its contention that if there is any evidence to support the findings of the trial court, this court must affirm, are cases from States that do not have a trial de novo statute similar to that of North Dakota. The rule it would have us apply is quite similar to the rule we apply in appeals from a judgment based upon a verdict of a jury. Under the so-called Newman law, Section 28-27-32, North Dakota Century Code, on an appeal from a judgment based upon the findings of a trial court we are prohibited from applying that rule. Instead, we must find the facts anew. This conclusion is supported by a long line of decisions.
The next point raised by the respondent relates to a statement in the dissenting opinion in this case that it is the duty of this court to determine “at what point the driver of the favored vehicle (the truck) if he had observed the approach of the inferior vehicle should take action to avoid collision in the intersection.”
Respondent concedes that the driver of the defendant’s vehicle was negligent in failing to keep a proper lookout, for it says: “For the purposes of this petition no exception to the court’s ruling that there was negligence on the part of the Cardinal Petroleum Company driver for failure to keep a proper lookout will be taken.” But respondent then asks just where a driver on a favored highway stands in relation to a vehicle on a servient highway, and at what point in his approach to the intersection he becomes negligent in proceeding without due care.
The highway upon which the defendant’s vehicle was being operated was not a controlled access highway. It was merely a county highway, as was the intersecting highway on which the Boeing vehicle was being driven. While the defendant’s equipment was being driven on a highway which was made the favored roadway by the placing of “yield” signs on highways which crossed it, that fact did not give to the operator of the defendant’s equipment the right to proceed down that highway without due care and without maintaining a proper lookout for other vehicles entering it from side roads. This is clearly evidenced by the fact that a sign placed on such favored highway 500 feet from the intersection notified drivers on the favored highway that there was a junction ahead. Thus the defendant did not have an absolute right of way over vehicles approaching from a side road. Under the rules of the road, the Boeing vehicle in which the plaintiff’s intestate was riding was required to yield, and the primary duty to avoid collision with a vehicle on the favored highway rested upon the Boeing driver. However, the driver on the favored highway also 'was required to exercise due care and to maintain a proper lookout for traffic approaching the intersection from inferior highways.
The defendant’s driver had the duty of exercising due care in approaching the intersection. We find that when he was warned by a sign 500 feet from the junction that he was approaching an intersection, it became his duty to determine whether there was any traffic approaching. As we said in Anderson v. Schreiner *722(N.D.), 94 N.W.2d 294, the negligence of a nonobserving driver is in not maintaining a lookout. Whether such negligence is remote or is a proximate cause of the collision which occurred in the intersection depends upon what he does as a result of not maintaining a lookout. Here, the defendant’s driver continued into the intersection without slowing his speed in the slightest. Had he looked, he would have seen that the driver of the Boeing car was negligently failing to yield. Thus the question is whether the conduct of the defendant’s driver was reasonable in the light of what he would have seen had he maintained a proper lookout. When he saw — or should have seen— the other driver negligently failing to yield, as a reasonable person he would have taken steps to avoid the collision. Under these circumstances, his negligence in failing to observe resulted in his failure to take steps to avoid the collision, as he reasonably would have done had he seen the Boeing vehicle.
The duty of the driver of the Boeing vehicle to yield the right of way did not give the defendant’s driver the right to drive without exercising due care. A motorist driving on a highway protected by “yield” signs cannot proceed on the assumption that he has the absolute right of way under all circumstances, and that every other driver who is about to epter the intersection from an inferior highway will, without question, yield the right of way to him. In other words, the driver of the defendant’s vehicle,, who had the right of way, could not exercise that right in an arbitrary manner and without paying some attention to whether there was any other vehicle approaching the intersection because an approaching vehicle might be operated in a negligent manner. The superior privilege of having the right of way did not give the driver of the defendant’s vehicle the right to wholly disregard the rules which required him to drive with due care and to keep a reasonable lookout for other traffic. The duty to avoid an accident rested upon both of the drivers, even though one of such drivers was required to exercise a greater degree of care in the exercise of due care than was the driver on the favored highway.
The petition for rehearing is denied.
ERICKSTAD and PAULSON, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9737073 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:14:41.256319+00 ===

TEIGEN, Chief Judge
(on petition for rehearing).
Again, the majority has correctly stated the question before the court but has failed to answer it. They state the question in their opinion on petition for rehearing, as follows:
“Thus the question is whether the conduct of the defendant’s driver was reasonable in the light of what he would have seen had he maintained a proper lookout.”
They then attempt to answer it by stating:
“When he saw — or should have seen — the other driver negligently failing to yield, as a reasonable person he would have taken steps to avoid the collision.”
However, they have found no facts from which to conclude that an observing driver could have taken effective steps to avoid the collision after the point where he would have seen the other driver was “negligently failing to yield.” Nor, have they found at what point an observing driver would have seen that the other driver was “negligently failing to yield.”
The majority has alluded to two additional facts as additional reasons for their holding, (1) that there was a “junction” sign 500 feet from the intersection; and (2) the highway upon which the defendant’s vehicle was being operated was not a “controlled access” highway, but that it was merely a county highway. Neither of these facts has any bearing on the questions before the court in this case. The record clearly establishes that defendant’s driver was familiar with the highway; he knew the *723intersection, its location, and that it was controlled by “yield” signs and the rights and duties of drivers upon either classification of highway, county or “controlled access” are the same, where “yield” signs are lawfully in place.
This appeal is here'for trial de novo. We are to find the facts. The burden of proof is upon the plaintiff to prove her cause of action. If the record does not establish by a preponderance of the evidence that it was not reasonable for an observing driver to have driven the truck under these circumstances as the defendant’s driver drove it, and that such negligence was a proximate cause of the injury, the plaintiff has failed to sustain the burden of proof and cannot recover. In my opinion the majority has not found from the evidence facts that establish liability.
In the additional syllabus, numbered 6, added on the opinion on petition for rehearing, the majority says:
“ * * * it is reasonable to assume that * * * he would have slowed * * * when he saw * * * ”
I think this is a fair assumption. However, the syllabus does not establish that such action would have avoided the collision. I think the record in this case establishes it was then too late.
I would grant the rehearing.
KNUDSON, J., concurs.

=== CASE 2208677 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:32.391706+00 ===

582 A.2d 247 (1990)
Tanya R. SMITH, et al.
v.
SCHOOL ADMINISTRATIVE DISTRICT NO. 58.
Supreme Judicial Court of Maine.
Submitted on Briefs September 6, 1990.
Decided October 29, 1990.
Justin Leary, Robert A. Laskoff, P.A., Lewiston, for plaintiffs.
John S. Whitman, Richardson & Troubh, Portland, for defendant.
Before McKUSICK, C.J., and ROBERTS, WATHEN, GLASSMAN, CLIFFORD, COLLINS and BRODY, JJ.
GLASSMAN, Justice.
The plaintiffs, Tanya R. Smith and Joseph and Donna Smith, individually and as the parents of Tanya, appeal from a summary judgment for the defendant, School Administrative District No. 58 (the School), granted by the Superior Court (Franklin County, Perkins, J.) on the ground that the Smiths had not complied with the notice requirements of section 8107 of the Maine Tort Claims Act, 14 M.R.S.A. §§ 8101-8118 (1980 & Supp.1989) (the Act).[1] The Smiths *248 also contend that their proposed amended complaint sufficiently set forth their claim of a promissory estoppel as a bar to the School's defense of the Smith's noncompliance with section 8107 and that the court erred in denying their motion to amend their original complaint. We affirm the judgment.
On April 16, 1987, Tanya while on the school playground, which was under the supervision of Cindy Cole, was hit in the eye by a rock thrown by another student. This information was placed on an accident claim form of the School's medical insurer in the portion of the form designated "PART A: SCHOOL OR PARENT," signed by the Superintendent on May 19, 1987, and forwarded to Joseph and Donna Smith for completion and return of that portion of the form designated "PART B: PARENT STATEMENT." This portion of the form was signed by Donna on July 29, 1987. It set forth Joseph's full name, as the father of Tanya, gave the home address, his occupation, Donna's occupation, home and business telephone numbers, and the name and policy number of the Smiths' own insurance company. Before returning the form, Donna had a telephone conversation with Ann Stinchfield, the School's bookkeeper. Although the substance of that conversation is disputed, Donna apparently understood that the School's insurance would cover all Tanya's medical expenses. In fact, the School's medical insurer paid Tanya's medical bills for only one year. On March 24, 1989, after these payments ceased, a notice of claim signed by the attorney for the Smiths, reciting that the notice was given pursuant to section 8107 of the Act and setting forth the information required by that section, was sent to and received by the Superintendent of the School. In its answer to the complaint against the School filed by the Smiths on April 5, 1989, the School claimed as an affirmative defense that the complaint was barred by the Smiths' failure to comply with the notice requirements of section 8107 and filed a motion for summary judgment on that ground. The Smiths filed a motion to amend their complaint to include a count alleging promissory estoppel as a bar to any claim by the School that the Smiths had not complied with the notice requirements of section 8107. The motions were consolidated for hearing, after which the court denied the Smiths' motion to amend their complaint and granted the School's motion for summary judgment, and the Smiths appeal.
The Smiths contend that because the accident claim form returned to Stinchfield on July 29, 1987, substantially complied with the notice requirements of section 8107(1)(A)-(E) of the Act, it was error for the trial court to grant summary judgment to the School. We disagree. We will affirm a summary judgment when there is no genuine issue of material fact and the movant is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law. M.R.Civ.P. 56(c); Saltonstall v. Cumming, 538 A.2d 289, 290 (Me.1988). Here the facts are not in dispute as they relate to the contents of the accident claim form or to its return by the Smiths to the School's bookkeeper within 180 days after the claimed injury to Tanya occurred. We have previously stated that we will not examine a notice of claim to determine if it is in substantial compliance with section 8107 until we have first determined that a timely notice has been filed or such filing has been excused because of good cause. Bruno v. City of Lewiston, 570 A.2d 1221, 1222 (Me.1990); Erickson v. State, 444 A.2d 345, 350 (Me.1982). Accordingly, we must determine whether the accident claim form was filed with the School in a timely fashion. Section 8107(3)(B) requires that a notice of claim against any political subdivision "be addressed to and filed with one of the persons upon whom a summons and complaint could be served under the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 4, in a civil action against a political subdivision." Section 8102(3) defines a political subdivision *249 as including a "school district of any type." Further, 20-A M.R.S.A. § 1201 (1964 & Supp.1989) provides that when a school administrative district is formed, it "shall be a body politic and corporate." An administrative school district is administered by a board of directors with the superintendent serving as the secretary and treasurer of the board. See 20-A M.R.S.A. § 1251. M.R.Civ.P. 4(d)(7) provides that the service of a summons and complaint on a public corporation shall be made on an officer, director, or manager of the corporation. M.R.Civ.P. 4(d)(1) provides that service on an individual shall be made by serving the individual personally, leaving a copy at the individual's house or usual place of abode with some person of suitable age and discretion residing there, or by delivering a copy to an agent authorized by appointment or by law to receive service of process. It is clear from this record that Ann Stinchfield was not any of the designees for service provided in Rule 4(d)(7), nor was there any evidence in this record that she was an agent of any designees "authorized by appointment or by law" to receive such service of process as provided in Rule 4(d)(1). The trial court properly determined that the record before it disclosed no genuine issue of material fact and the School was entitled to summary judgment as a matter of law on the ground that the Smiths had not filed a timely notice of claim with the School. Accordingly, we need not address the claim of the Smiths that the contents of the accident claim form returned to Ann Stinchfield on July 29, 1987, substantially complied with section 8107(1)(A)-(E).
The Smiths also contend that their proposed amended complaint contained sufficient allegations to support a claim that the School was equitably estopped from asserting its defense of inadequate statutory notice and it was error for the court to deny the Smiths' motion to amend their original complaint accordingly. By their proposed amended complaint, the Smiths alleged that they would have obtained legal assistance and filed a timely notice of claim but for their reliance on the alleged statement by the School's bookkeeper that the School's insurer would pay for all medical bills incurred by the Smiths as a result of the injury to Tanya and the statement on the accident claim form reciting that "[i]f the bills are over $100 and you do have other insurance, the benefits will be paid for those eligible expenses unpaid by other insurance." The trial court denied the Smith's motion to amend the complaint on the ground that "the allegations of the amended complaint were not sufficient to support a claim for promissory estoppel barring the defense of timely notice."
Generally, in the absence of undue delay, bad faith, dilatory tactics, or unfair prejudice, courts should freely allow an amendment to a complaint. See 1 Field, McKusick & Wroth, Maine Civil Practice § 15.3, at 302-03 (2d ed. 1981). We review the denial of a motion to amend to determine if the movant has demonstrated "`a clear and manifest' abuse of discretion and that the amendment was necessary to prevent injustice." Id. § 15.4, at 127. Here we hold there was no manifest abuse of the court's discretion because the claim of equitable estoppel as a bar to the defense of filing an untimely notice of claim is precluded under the provisions of section 8107 of the Act.
We have previously stated that the Act constitutes a limited relaxation of the common law doctrine of sovereign immunity, see Faucher v. City of Auburn, 465 A.2d 1120, 1124 (Me.1983), and as a part of that statutory scheme, noncompliance with the requirement that notice be filed within 180 days after the cause of action accrues will be excused only on a showing of good cause why notice could not reasonably have been filed within that time limit. See 14 M.R.S.A. §§ 8103(1), 8107(1) (exception to governmental immunity only as expressly provided by the Act, and when immunity so removed, any claim for damages "shall be brought in accordance with the terms of [the Act]"). We have consistently interpreted the "good cause" exception to pertain only to physical inability to file the claim within the statutorily prescribed time limit. See, e.g., Gardner v. City of Biddeford, 565 A.2d 329, 330 (Me.1989); Erickson *250 v. State, 444 A.2d 345, 350 (Me.1982). We reaffirm that interpretation. In the instant case the proposed amended complaint did not even suggest that the Smiths suffered from such inability to file their claim. Although equitable estoppel appropriately may be applied against a governmental entity in a limited number of cases, cf. City of Auburn v. Desgrosseiliers, 578 A.2d 712, 714 (Me.1990) (city equitably estopped by its own acts and declarations from bringing a land-use enforcement action against defendants who reasonably relied on those acts and declarations to their detriment), the precise language of section 8107(1) precludes its application here. Accordingly, although we hold that the trial court properly found that the Smiths' proposed amended complaint would not bar the School's defense of failure to file a timely notice of their claim and denied their motion to amend, we do so on the ground that there is no suggestion in the amended complaint that the Smiths had good cause for such failure within the purview of section 8107(1). See Trautvetter v. Town of Old Orchard Beach, 566 A.2d 82, 83 (Me. 1989) (trial court's dismissal of complaint will be sustained on appeal if any legal ground, even one not considered by the trial court, justifies such dismissal).
The entry is:
Judgment affirmed.
All concurring.
NOTES
[1]  Section 8107 provides in pertinent part:
1. Notice requirements for filing. Within 180 days after any claim or cause of action permitted by this chapter accrues, or at a later time within the limits of section 8110, when a claimant shows good cause why notice could not have reasonably been filed within the 180-day limit, a claimant or a claimant's personal representative or attorney shall file a written notice containing:
A. The name and address of the claimant, and the name and address of the claimant's attorney or other representative, if any;
B. A concise statement of the basis of the claim, including the date, time, place and circumstances of the act, omission or occurrence complained of;
C. The name and address of any governmental employee involved, if known;
D. A concise statement of the nature and extent of the injury claimed to have been suffered; and
E. A statement of the amount of monetary damages claimed.
. . . .
4. Substantial notice compliance required. No claim or action shall be commenced against a governmental entity or employee in the Superior Court unless the foregoing notice provisions are substantially complied with. A claim filed under this section shall not be held invalid or insufficient by reason of an inaccuracy in stating the time, place, nature or cause of the claim, or otherwise, unless it is shown that the governmental entity was in fact prejudiced thereby.
. . . . .

=== CASE 2208678 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:32.394757+00 ===

1 Cal. App. 2d 514 (1934)
FLORENCE WILSON, Respondent,
v.
LEE J. MILLER, Appellant.
Civ. No. 9293.
California Court of Appeals. First Appellate District, Division Two.
October 22, 1934.
Leslie C. Gillen, Milton J. Coghlan, Leo J. McEnerney and McEnerney, Morris, Gillen & McEnerney for Appellant.
Harry J. Bias for Respondent.
Nourse, P. J.
Plaintiff sued for damages resulting from an automobile collision. The defendant defaulted and plaintiff had judgment after trial for $1250. The defendant has appealed on the judgment-roll.
[1] The sole point raised by appellant is that the complaint fails to state a cause of action. The complaint alleges that the defendant was the owner of and was operating a certain automobile, and that "the said plaintiff was riding in said automobile as a passenger therein". Appropriate allegations covering defendant's negligence and plaintiff's injuries followed. The appellant argues that the allegation that plaintiff was a "passenger" is insufficient to charge him with wilful misconduct under the "Guest Law", section 141 3/4 of the California Vehicle Act. (Deering's Gen. Laws, Act No. 5128.)
It may be conceded that the complaint is not a model of good pleading, but no demurrer was interposed, and no appearance was made by the appellant, either by answer or by motion to set aside the default. The appeal comes to us without any record of the evidence and, of course, without findings. We are forced to assume that the trial court heard evidence sufficient to support the judgment, and this may well have been done under the allegation that plaintiff was a "passenger", because, if a passenger for hire, the plaintiff was entitled to recover without a charge of wilful misconduct. (10 C.J. 1000.)
The appellant argues that, under these allegations of the complaint, the plaintiff may have been a passenger for hire or a "guest" passenger; and that, if the latter, she should have charged wilful misconduct in express terms. There is no support for appellant's assumption that the complaint attempted to plead the guest relation under the California Vehicle Act. It is a fair assumption that, as a "passenger" plaintiff had either paid her fare or had obligated herself to do so. If we give the complaint the most favorable interpretation, we have a charge of negligence in general terms directed to one who was carrying a "passenger", *516 and, if it is necessary to find that the passage was for hire, that finding must be implied in support of the judgment. (Garrison v. Hogan, 112 Cal. App. 525, 532 [297 P. 87]; Alexander v. McDow, 108 Cal. 25, 29 [41 P. 24]; People v. McDonald, 200 Cal. 716, 717 [255 P. 180].)
The judgment is affirmed.
Sturtevant, J., and Spence, J., concurred.

=== CASE 2208679 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:32.403583+00 ===

804 N.E.2d 833 (2004)
Jason L. INLOW, Heather N. Johnson, Jeremy H. Inlow and Sarah C. Inlow, Appellants-Plaintiffs,
v.
HENDERSON, DAILY, WITHROW & DEVOE, a Partnership, Great-West Life & Annuity Insurance Company, Whitney B. Grayson, Grayson & Associates, Paul M. Harrington and The Heartland Insurance Group, Appellees-Defendants.
No. 49A02-0305-CV-432.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
March 11, 2004.
*835 Stephen B. Caplin, Caplin Park Tousley & McCoy, Marvin J. Frank, Robert M. Hamlett, Frank & Kraft, Indianapolis, IN, Attorneys for Appellants.
Nelson Nettles, John M. Choplin, Norris Choplin & Schroeder, Mary Jane Lapointe, McMains Foster & Morse, Indianapolis, IN, Attorneys for Appellees.
*834 OPINION
NAJAM, Judge.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
Jason L. Inlow, Heather N. Inlow, Jeremy H. Inlow, and Sarah C. Inlow (collectively "Inlow Children") appeal from the trial court's denial of their motion to correct error[1] regarding attorney's fee awards granted to The Heartland Insurance Group ("Insurance Brokers") and Great-West Life and Annuity Insurance Company ("Great-West") (collectively "the Appellees"). The Inlow Children present the following issues for our review:
1. Whether the trial court had jurisdiction to award attorney's fees.
2. Whether the Appellees presented sufficient evidence to support the attorney's fee awards.
3. Whether the trial court abused its discretion when it awarded the Appellees attorney's fees.
We affirm and remand.[2]
FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
The attorney's fee awards the Inlow Children challenge in this appeal followed the dismissal of their complaint against the Appellees and other parties. We affirmed the trial court's dismissal of the complaint in Inlow v. Henderson, Daily, Withrow & DeVoe, et al., 787 N.E.2d 385 (Ind.Ct.App. 2003) ("Inlow I"), trans. denied. In Inlow I, this court explained the facts and procedural history underlying this appeal as follows:
... [The Inlow Children] appeal the trial court's dismissal of their amended complaint bringing suit against a law firm, attorneys working for that firm, insurance companies, and agents of those insurance companies. The Inlow Children brought claims against the law firm of Henderson, Daily, Withrow & DeVoe and eighteen attorneys of *836 Henderson, Daily, Withrow & DeVoe in their individual capacities (collectively, "Henderson Daily"). They also asserted claims against Whitney B. Grayson, Grayson & Associates, Paul M. Harrington, The Heartland Insurance Group, and Great-West Life and Annuity Insurance Company.... These claims were brought because of harms allegedly caused to Lawrence W. Inlow and his estate, which diminished the value of the estate.
The Inlow Children argue that in a number of capacities they: (1) have standing to maintain their claims, (2) are real parties in interest, and (3) have stated claims that avoid dismissal under Indiana Trial Rule 12(B)(6). The Inlow Children also complain that the trial court erroneously struck Counts IV through VIII of their motion for leave to file amended complaint and erroneously denied their motion to amend the amended complaint by interlineation. They contend that even if the dismissal of their claims, the striking of Counts IV through VIII of their motion for leave to file amended complaint, and the denial of their motion to amend the amended complaint by interlineation were proper, they are still entitled to reasonable time to seek the ratification, joinder, or substitution of the successor trustee and successor personal representative according to Indiana Trial Rule 17(A)(2).
Aside from their claims brought as assignees of the successor personal representative and attempted claims as assignees of the successor trustee, each claim the Inlow Children assert ultimately arises from their status as heirs. The Probate Code carefully limits the intrusion of heirs and other interested persons into the personal representative's administration of an estate. As heirs, the Inlow Children have not followed the procedures outlined in the Probate Code for intervening in the administration to sue alleged tortfeasors of the decedent and his estate. Moreover, the Inlow Children may not claim capacity to sue as assignees of the successor trustee for harms befalling the estate. A successor trustee has no authority to sue for harms resulting to an estate and, therefore, has no authority to assign such claims. Finally, the assignments made by the personal representative and the successor personal representative were invalid and are no basis for suit against Henderson Daily and the Insurers.
We, therefore, affirm the trial court's: (1) dismissal of each count of the amended complaint, (2) denial of stricken Counts IV through VIII of the motion for leave to file amended complaint, and (3) denial of the motion to amend the amended complaint by interlineation. We deny the Inlow Children's request to remand this cause to the Marion Superior Court for the ratification, joinder, or substitution of the successor personal representative through Trial Rule 17(A). Any further action they take must be within the bounds of the Probate Code as we will explain more fully below.
FACTS
Lawrence W. Inlow created the Lawrence W. Inlow Irrevocable Children Trust (Inlow Trust) for the benefit of his children and named himself trustee. As trustee of the trust, he purchased an insurance policy from Great-West Life and Annuity Insurance Company (Great-West Life) on July 8, 1996. The policy designated the trustee of the Inlow Trust as the beneficiary of the policy. In the event of Lawrence's death, Great-West Life was obligated to pay ten million dollars to the successor trustee who was yet unnamed.
*837 On May 21, 1997, Lawrence Inlow died intestate, leaving six heirs: Anita Inlow, his second wife; Jesse Inlow, Lawrence and Anita's minor child; and the four plaintiffs to this action who are children of Lawrence's first marriage. After Lawrence's death, Karl Kindig was appointed personal representative of the Inlow Estate. Henderson Daily provided legal services to Kindig in his capacity as personal representative. Kindig later executed an assignment in favor of the Inlow Children of all claims belonging to the personal representative against all other persons, including any claims against Henderson Daily. With the consent of the Inlow Children, the successor personal representative agreed to pay Kindig $200,000 allegedly for his services to the Inlow Estate. The probate of the Inlow Estate is still pending in the Hamilton Superior Court as of the filing of the appellate briefs in this action.
On October 10, 2001, the Inlow Children filed an amended complaint for damages. In their amended complaint, the Inlow Children asserted claims of negligence, "intermeddling," and legal malpractice against Henderson Daily. They asserted these claims for harms allegedly caused to the Inlow Estate to the detriment of their intestate shares of the property. Though the trial court permitted the three claims against Henderson Daily, it struck five others the Inlow Children attempted to assert.
As for the insurance companies and agents, the Inlow Children brought claims of negligence and breach of contract, despite the fact that Great-West Life had paid the policy proceeds in full. In addition to claims brought in the amended complaint, the Inlow Children contend that they were entitled to assert claims assigned by the successor trustee of the Inlow Trust. They attempted to assert these assigned claims, not as part of their amended complaint, but in a motion to amend the amended complaint by interlineation. The trial court denied their motion to amend the amended complaint by interlineation.
In response to the amended complaint, Henderson Daily and the Insurers filed separate motions to dismiss. Among other arguments, they contended that the Inlow Children lacked standing to bring claims, the probate court had exclusive jurisdiction over certain claims, the Inlow Children were not real parties in interest, and the Inlow Children failed to state claims upon which relief could be granted. The trial court granted the motions to dismiss with prejudice in favor of all the defendants. The Inlow Children now appeal.
Id. at 388-89.
In May 2002, the Appellees filed their motions for attorney's fees with the trial court. And on June 6, 2002, the trial court clerk filed a notice of completion of the record for appeal in Inlow I. On July 10, 2002, the trial court denied the Appellees' motions for attorney's fees. The trial court did not believe that it had jurisdiction to consider those motions under Indiana Appellate Rule 8, which provides that this court acquires jurisdiction when the trial court clerk issues the notice of completion of the record.
The Appellees then filed motions to correct error alleging that the trial court did retain jurisdiction to award attorney's fees. The trial court granted those motions and scheduled a hearing on the Appellees' motions for attorney's fees. Following the hearing, the trial court awarded $71,343.58 in attorney's fees to the Insurance Brokers and $283,744.12 in attorney's fees to Great-West.[3] The Inlow Children filed a *838 motion to correct error, which the trial court denied. This appeal ensued.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
Issue One: Jurisdiction
The Inlow Children first contend that the trial court did not have jurisdiction to award attorney's fees since this court acquired jurisdiction before those awards were granted. Indiana Appellate Rule 8 provides in relevant part that this court acquires jurisdiction "on the date the trial court clerk issues its Notice of Completion of Clerk's Record." But our case law makes clear that the trial court retains some jurisdiction to consider certain matters which are unrelated to the judgment being appealed. Indeed, this court has explained that the purpose of the rule is to "prevent[ ] the confusing and awkward situation of having the trial and appellate courts simultaneously reviewing the correctness of the judgment." Southwood v. Carlson, 704 N.E.2d 163, 165 (Ind.Ct.App. 1999) (citation omitted). And this court has noted that a trial court may retain jurisdiction to reassess costs or "preside over matters which are independent of and do not interfere with the subject matter of the appeal." Clark v. State, 727 N.E.2d 18, 21 (Ind.Ct.App.2000), trans. denied; see also, Schaefer v. Kumar, 804 N.E.2d 184, 191, 2004 WL 385746 *8 (Ind.Ct.App. March 3, 2004) (holding after appellate court acquires jurisdiction, "`there remains in the trial court no power to ... reopen the issues and extend the litigation between the parties affecting the subject-matter of the appeal[.])'" (quoting Westfall v. Wait, 161 Ind. 449, 68 N.E. 1009, 1010 (1903)).
Here, had the Inlow Children prevailed against the Appellees in Inlow I, then the Appellees would no longer have been "prevailing parties" and would not be entitled to attorney's fees. See Ind.Code § 34-52-1-1. Thus, the trial court's awards were premature under the circumstances.[4] And we cannot say that the attorney's fee awards, which are based on the alleged frivolousness and unreasonableness of the Inlow Children's action, are "independent of" the subject matter of Inlow I. See Clark, 727 N.E.2d at 21. But because this court ultimately affirmed the trial court's decision to grant the Appellees' motions to dismiss in Inlow I, the principles of judicial economy dictate that we address the merits of this appeal.
Issue Two: Evidence
The Inlow Children next contend that the Appellees did not present any evidence to support the trial court's attorney's fee awards. The Appellees respond that, at the hearing, they asked the trial court to incorporate into the record the designated evidence they had previously submitted in support of their motions for attorney's fees. The Inlow Children maintain that that was insufficient. We cannot agree.
The Inlow Children do not cite to any direct authority in support of their contention. And we know of nothing prohibiting the method used here to incorporate designated evidence into the record. Indeed, the Inlow Children did not object to the Appellees' requests to incorporate the evidence into the record during the hearing. Moreover, the Inlow Children did not present any evidence at the hearing, but asked the court to refer to "the affidavits tendered by [counsel] on September 20th... attesting to [the Inlow Children's] good faith in pursuing the action and continuing *839 to pursue it after the course of discovery."
The Appellees' designated evidence incorporated into the record consists of affidavits and relevant portions of the pleadings. Thus, the Appellees did submit evidence to support the trial court's attorney's fee awards. See, e.g., Childress v. Buckler, 779 N.E.2d 546, 553 (Ind.Ct.App.2002) (holding trial court did not abuse discretion in attorney's fee award where defendant attached affidavit to motion for attorney's fees); see also Fox v. Galvin, 177 Ind.App. 654, 381 N.E.2d 103, 108 (1978) (holding "what transpires from beginning to end of a lawsuit is indirect evidence of what constitutes reasonable attorney's fees.").
Issue Three: Attorney's Fee Awards
The Inlow Children's final contention is that the trial court abused its discretion when it granted the Appellees' motions for attorney's fees. Indiana Code Section 34-52-1-1 provides in relevant part:
(a) In all civil actions, the party recovering judgment shall recover costs, except in those cases in which a different provision is made by law.
(b) In any civil action, the court may award attorney's fees as part of the cost to the prevailing party, if the court finds that either party:
(1) brought the action or defense on a claim or defense that is frivolous, unreasonable, or groundless;
(2) continued to litigate the action or defense after the party's claim or defense clearly became frivolous, unreasonable, or groundless; or
(3) litigated the action in bad faith.
A claim is "frivolous" if it is made primarily to harass or maliciously injure another; if counsel is unable to make a good faith and rational argument on the merits of the action; or if counsel is unable to support the action by a good faith and rational argument for extension, modification, or reversal of existing law. Commercial Coin Laundry Systems v. Enneking, 766 N.E.2d 433, 441 (Ind.Ct. App.2002). A claim is "unreasonable" if, based upon the totality of the circumstances, including the law and facts known at the time, no reasonable attorney would consider the claim justified or worthy of litigation. Id. A claim is "groundless" if no facts exist which support the claim relied upon and supported by the losing party. Id. Here, the trial court concluded that the Inlow Children's complaint was frivolous, unreasonable, and groundless.
An award of attorney's fees under this statute is afforded a multi-step review. Id. First, we review the trial court's findings of fact under the clearly erroneous standard, and then we review the trial court's legal conclusions de novo. Id. Finally, we review the trial court's decision to award attorney's fees and the amount thereof under an abuse of discretion standard. Id.
Here, the trial court found in relevant part as follows:
9. On September 25, 1997, Great-West paid over $10 million in death benefits to Mr. Withrow ["Trustee"] on behalf of the Children's Trust....
10. Plaintiffs filed this action on July 14, 1998, claiming breach of contract by Great-West in allegedly failing to include the Direction for Settlement, which contained certain restrictive language, in the Policy.
11. Throughout the entire time this litigation was pending, the plaintiffs and their counsel knew or reasonably should have known that the Estate continued to take the position with the *840 IRS that the Policy proceeds were not taxable to the Estate....[5]
12. In the Fourth Discussion Draft of a settlement proposed by the IRS, the Policy proceeds still were not deemed taxable....
13. In the same Discussion Draft the IRS valued certain stock options [Conseco] held by Mr. Inlow at the time of his death at more than twelve million dollars more than the original value on the estate tax return....
14. On January 23, 2001, despite the "strong case" that the proceeds of the Policy were not taxable, and the apparent intention of the IRS not to tax those Proceeds, counsel for the Inlow children agreed to a settlement that would include the proceeds of the Policy as taxable to the estate....
15. In return for volunteering to pay taxes on the Policy proceeds, the IRS reduced the value of the Conseco stock options discussed above by over twelve million dollars to the amount originally set forth on the federal estate tax return.
* * *
17. In addition to having the Conseco options revalued, the Estate also avoided interest and penalties on the under-reported assets by way of its settlement agreement with the IRS.
18. Plaintiffs were included in the discussion about this settlement and trade with the IRS and did not oppose it....
And the trial court concluded in relevant part as follows:
29. At the time the action was filed it was frivolous, unreasonable and groundless because:
(a) Plaintiffs knew or should have known that the Trustee had already made his claim to the Policy Proceeds on the basis of the very same document (the Direction for Settlement) that they belatedly alleged was not made a part of the Policy;
(b) Plaintiffs had no standing to bring a breach of contract claim against Great-West. They were not the owners of the Policy. They could not have inherited any rights by survival or otherwise from their father, since he owned the Policy as trustee, not personally. It is instructive to note that in plaintiffs' supplemental memorandum, they never assert that they ever had standing to pursue this action.
(c) Plaintiffs had no damages. While they now complain that the Estate has had to pay certain taxes with respect to the Policy proceeds (amounts they volunteered to pay), those taxes had not been imposed or paid when they filed suit. They certainly had suffered no damages as trust beneficiaries, since Great-West promptly and fully paid the Policy proceeds with interest when they were claimed by the designated trustee/beneficiary.
(d) Plaintiffs' claim had no basis in fact because the direction for settlement and "restrictive provision" that they claim were not included in the Policy obviously were a part of the Policy. [Emphasis original]. See Application p. 1 (G 463) (incorporating, by reference, the direction *841 for settlement into the application, and the application into the insurance contract).
(e) Plaintiffs and their counsel knew or reasonably should have known that the Estate had not reported the Policy proceeds as taxable to it when it filed its return with the IRS under the affirmations and potential penalties normally applicable to tax returns. See Discussion Draft, (reflecting initial amounts reported by Estate). Plaintiffs and their counsel likewise knew or reasonably should have known when they filed this action that the Estate continued to take the position that the Policy proceeds were not taxable to the Estate even after the filing of the initial return. Id. (reflecting the areas of dispute between the IRS and the Estate, but not reflecting any intent to tax Policy proceeds or any admission by the Estate that such proceeds were taxable).
(f) Under Ind.Code §§ 27-1-12-16(c) and 27-1-12-14(g), any claim with respect to the Policy proceeds was already barred when this suit was filed, by Great-West's payment to Mr. Withrow, the named beneficiary.
* * *
Plaintiffs had ample time to discover that the insurance policy in question actually contained the requested language, and that payment was made pursuant to that language being in the policy.
* * *
Secondly and independently, plaintiffs voluntarily agreed to incur the damages alleged through the settlement they negotiated with the Internal Revenue Service. Plaintiffs' continued pursuit of this action against the insurer and brokers was also groundless because they voluntarily agreed to pay the very taxes they claim constitute their damages. They could have litigated that issue with the IRS but did not.
(Emphases added unless otherwise noted).
On appeal, the Inlow Children contend that two of the trial court's findings are clearly erroneous and that three of the court's conclusions are erroneous as a matter of law. Each of those challenged findings and conclusions relates to a single issue, namely, whether the "Direction for Settlement," which designated the trustee of the Inlow Trust as the beneficiary ("the Direction"), was a part of the policy when the policy was issued. The trial court found and concluded that the Direction was a part of the policy at all times. The Inlow Children maintain that the evidence shows otherwise or, in the alternative, that the existence of a factual dispute on this issue undermines the trial court's conclusion that their action was frivolous, unreasonable, and groundless. We cannot agree.
There is ample evidence in the record to support the trial court's findings and conclusions that the Direction was a part of the policy from its inception. Thus, the Inlow Children cannot demonstrate that those findings are clearly erroneous or that those conclusions are erroneous as a matter of law. As the trial court found, the Inlow Children have never demonstrated that they sustained any damages as a result of the Appellees' alleged breaches of contract. The evidence shows that Great-West timely paid the policy proceeds to the Trustee before the Inlow Children filed their complaint. And there is no evidence that the Inlow Children's *842 decision to pay taxes on those proceeds was anything other than voluntary. Thus, even if the Inlow Children rightfully relied on the scant evidence they claim supports their contention that the Direction was not a part of the policy when it was issued, they cannot demonstrate how they sustained damages thereby. See, e.g., Fowler v. Campbell, 612 N.E.2d 596, 600 (Ind.Ct. App.1993) (noting essential elements of breach of contract claim include damages).
More importantly, this court has previously determined that the Inlow Children brought this action in the wrong forum, and the trial court could have awarded attorney's fees on that basis alone. See Inlow I, 787 N.E.2d at 390-91 (noting "text, structure, history, and purpose of Indiana probate law" dictated bringing action in probate court); see also St. Mary Med. Ctr. v. Baker, 611 N.E.2d 135, 138 (Ind.Ct.App.1993) (holding failure to bring action in proper forum rendered action frivolous and justified attorney's fee award), trans. denied.
In sum, the Inlow Children have not demonstrated that any of the trial court's findings are clearly erroneous or that any of the court's conclusions are erroneous as a matter of law. We cannot say that the trial court abused its discretion when it awarded the Appellees attorney's fees.[6] Further, we conclude that appellate attorney's fees are appropriate in this case. As such, we remand to the trial court for a hearing to determine appellate attorney's fees.
Affirmed and remanded.
BAKER, J., and MAY, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  This cause was initially brought in Judge Gerald S. Zore's court, but it was transferred to Judge Thomas J. Carroll's court, pursuant to Trial Rule 79(H), after Judge Zore ruled on the motions for attorney's fees. After the transfer, Judge Carroll ruled on the Inlow Children's motion to correct error, which is the final judgment appealed from. See Ind. Appellate Rules 2(H)(4), 9(A)(1).
[2]  We hereby deny the Insurance Brokers' motion to strike certain portions of the Inlow Children's brief on appeal.
[3]  This litigation began in 1998.
[4]  Of course, had the trial court awarded attorney's fees prior to this court's acquiring jurisdiction, that would have been proper, and the Inlow Children could have appealed those awards in Inlow I.
[5]  The Inlow Children assert that this finding is clearly erroneous. But the evidence they cite in support of that contention does not contradict the trial court's finding. As such, their contention is without merit.
[6]  We note that the Inlow Children do not challenge the amounts awarded.

=== CASE 2208687 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:32.49899+00 ===

399 Pa. Super. 477 (1990)
582 A.2d 879
COMMONWEALTH of Pennsylvania
v.
Daniel W. GOWAN, Appellant.
COMMONWEALTH of Pennsylvania
v.
Ronnie M. McRAE, Appellants.
Supreme Court of Pennsylvania.
Argued June 26, 1990.
Filed September 25, 1990.
Reargument Denied December 4, 1990.
*478 Ronnie M. McRae, pro se.
Patrick T. Kiniry, Asst. Dist. Atty., Johnstown, for Com.
Before McEWEN, TAMILIA and BROSKY, JJ.
TAMILIA, Judge:
The appellants, Ronnie M. McRae and Daniel W. Gowen, appeal pro se to this Court from judgments of sentence entered on July 5, 1988 following their convictions of disorderly conduct in violation of 18 Pa.C.S. § 5503(a)(2).
*479 § 5503. Disorderly conduct
(a) Offense defined.  A person is guilty of disorderly conduct if, with intent to cause public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, or recklessly creating a risk thereof, he:
.....
(2) makes unreasonable noise;
. . . .
On November 2, 1987, the appellants, preachers of the Anabaptists' faith, were preaching and distributing religious literature to lunchtime passersby in Central Park, Johnstown, Pennsylvania. Appellants were arrested for disorderly conduct when they allegedly refused police officers' warnings to lower their voices (H.T., 4/19/88, pp. 20-21). McRae and Gowen waived their rights to counsel and to jury trials (H.T. at 3-4). Accordingly, on April 19, 1988 the appellants' consolidated cases were presented at a non-jury bench trial with appellants acting pro se.[1] The court found the appellants guilty of disorderly conduct as a summary offense. Appellants' motions for new trial and in arrest of judgment were denied by Order of June 7, 1988. Sentence was entered as to both appellants on July 5, 1988, ordering each to pay the costs of prosecution and a fifty dollar ($50) fine.
On appeal to this Court, McRae and Gowen argue three points of law: 1) their arrest was in violation of their first amendment right to exercise free speech; 2) the statute pursuant to which they were arrested and convicted is unconstitutionally vague and overbroad and 3) they were denied a fair and impartial trial.
Appellants' first amendment argument has the greatest viability, and upon resolution of this issue, in conjunction with a determination of whether appellants' exercise of their freedom of speech under the circumstances constitutes unreasonable noise, it becomes unnecessary to *480 consider the other two issues on their merits. In passing, however, we must find that the statute is sufficiently specific to cover cases where the action of preachers is such as to create unreasonable noise, despite the first amendment right to freedom of speech. As to the third issue, our review of the record convinces us the appellants received a fair trial and that Judge Thomas Swope, throughout, was extremely solicitous of the appellants' rights, particularly in view of the fact they refused proffered representation by counsel. Their allegation that they were not permitted argument or the right to present witnesses is totally unsupported by the record. Appellants waived their right to present witnesses as they offered no witnesses other than Mr. McRae, who testified extensively on his own behalf (Mr. Gowen declining to make a statement) and further advanced his position during cross-examination.
The focus of this case centers on the sufficiency of evidence to find, beyond a reasonable doubt, pursuant to section 5503(a)(2), the conduct engaged in by appellants constituted unreasonable noise. What constitutes unreasonable noise for purposes of the statute is related to the factual circumstances in each case. Standing on a sidewalk or in a public place reading from the bible and expressing dissatisfaction with the status quo are constitutionally protected exercises of free speech. Commonwealth v. Roth, 366 Pa.Super. 575, 531 A.2d 1133 (1987), appeal denied 518 Pa. 625, 541 A.2d 1137 (1988). Since the issue in this case turns on the unreasonableness of noise appellants created in exercising their first amendment right, we must carefully balance the fundamental right to free speech against the annoyance or inconvenience to other persons. The constitutionality of this statute has been considered by our Supreme Court in Commonwealth v. Mastrangelo, 489 Pa. 254, 414 A.2d 54 (1980), appl. dismissed 449 U.S. 894, 101 S. Ct. 259, 66 L. Ed. 2d 124. Mastrangelo held that this section may not be used to punish anyone exercising protected first amendment rights. Thus it is incumbent upon the courts to differentiate between activity which is the exercise of free *481 speech and unreasonable noise. It is incontrovertible that the exercise of free speech can go beyond constitutionally protected boundaries to the realm of prohibited and criminal behavior. "The most stringent protection of free speech would not protect a man in falsely shouting fire in a theatre and causing a panic." Schenck v. United States, 249 U.S. 47, 39 S. Ct. 247, 63 L. Ed. 470 (1919).
The narrow issue in this case may be stated as whether preaching by appellants as part of their ministry, in a loud manner, in a public park, under the facts of this case, constitutes unreasonable noise prohibited by the statute.
The evidence considered by the court consisted of testimony by two police officers and a store owner. Officer Layton testified he was directed to the park during the noon hour by a superior and upon arrival found a crowd gathering across the street and traffic stopping to find out what was going on. Other persons in the park were moving to the other end of the park. The reason for the activity was the hollering and loud noise being made by the appellant, Gowan. Captain Petro directed him to lower his voice four times, and upon his failure to do so, he was placed under arrest (T.T. at 18-20). As to appellant McRae, he too began preaching in a loud manner and after being directed to lower his voice, he too was arrested when he refused to comply (T.T. at 20-21).
Officer Moran testified they had received complaints at the police station about loud noise and people waving their arms at Central Park. He was directed by Captain Petro to investigate and upon approaching the park, he heard and observed Mr. Gowan yelling at the top of his voice. There were people standing around watching and looking. Captain Petro, after warning Gowan, instructed officers to arrest him. According to Officer Moran, people were saying "aren't you going to do anything about that" and "[i]t is about time somebody came over here" (T.T. at 29).
*482 The testimony of William Felix, a store owner adjacent to the park, was that a customer remarked about the preaching. He could hear the voice inside the store  the door being open. The store was 150 to 200 feet away from appellants. He heard one preaching for about ten minutes, the other spoke for less than two minutes. Mr. Felix said the preaching was disturbing because it reduced the number of people who come to the park which, in turn, reduced his sale of ice cream cones. He observed some people moving away to the other side of the park while others watched and some laughed (T.T. at 33-35).
From the testimony presented, we cannot say the activity of the appellants, in the exercise of their right to free speech, created more than an annoyance to the people in and around the park. Other than the police, who went to the park in response to an unspecific complaint, only one person testified to being directly affected by the activity of appellants. The description of the activity of the people in and around the park is consistent with people exhibiting a range of reactions to the preaching, some being annoyed and moving away from it, others remaining to watch and listen, others laughing because of it. Based on all of the testimony, the conclusion reached by the trial court that the preaching constituted unreasonable noise cannot be supported beyond a reasonable doubt.
In assessing the effect of constitutionally protected activity such as preaching, it is clear that the same level of loudness or "noise," in conducting an activity which must be tolerated or accepted, would be unacceptable if the party were conducting unprotected activity such as inciting to riot or harassing the police in their law enforcement function. Appellants make the point in their brief and arguments that preaching has been a historic and traditional exercise of religious freedom. We are accustomed to more sedate practices in confined areas for the most part and less accepting or tolerant of the mode of preaching practiced by appellants. The great speech to hundreds of thousands of people at the Elipse in Washington, D.C., by Martin Luther *483 King, under electronic amplification, may have and did annoy many persons, but it could not have been treated as unreasonable noise for that reason. In this area, there is clearly a wide range of subjective acceptance or rejection of the message which colors the degree of tolerance people will have of the volume of delivery. When engaged in a constitutionally protected activity of the fundamental nature of freedom of speech, we must exercise restraint in prohibiting the activity lest we destroy the right. Unreasonable noise has been defined as "not fitting or proper in respect to the conventional standards of organized society." Mastrangelo, supra, citing Commonwealth v. Greene, 410 Pa. 111, 113, 189 A.2d 141, 143 (1963). Mastrangelo further held that one is guilty of disorderly conduct if, with the intent of breaching the public peace, he makes unreasonable noise. Thus, in the context of this case, when a protected first amendment right to free speech is implicated, it is necessary that the actor intend to breach the public peace by making unreasonable noise. We believe the Commonwealth has failed to establish by sufficient evidence that appellants are guilty of the offense. Mere annoyance to the public may not suffice. In International Society for Krishna Consciousness, Inc. v. Griffin, (W.D.Pa.) 437 F. Supp. 666 (1977), a county ordinance regulating distribution of religious literature and solicitation of contributions for religious purposes at airports was held to be unconstitutional. However, a city ordinance prohibiting use of any loud or offensive device or performance as means of advertising or attracting a crowd did not violate constitutional guarantees when applied to ministers preaching on streets through loud speakers. Hamilton v. Montrose, 109 Colo. 228, 124 P.2d 757 (1942).
Religious liberty as recognized and secured under constitutional provisions does not mean a license to engage in acts having a tendency to disturb the public peace under the form of religious worship, nor does it include the right to disregard those regulations which the legislature had deemed reasonably necessary for the security of *484 public order.[1] The right of an individual to propagate his religious views is not to be denied, but the right does not go so far as to permit one to commit a breach of the peace under the guise of preaching the gospel.[2]
12 Am Jur2d, Breach of Peace and Disorderly Conduct, § 13.
Unquestionably, the municipality can regulate the degree to which appellants can use the park and the manner in which they can preach, so long as it is uniform and equally applicable to all similar use. From the testimony, it appears the park has been used for other religious, secular, political and entertainment purposes with varying degrees of loudness presented by the participants. It appears that treatment of the sound emanating as "unreasonable noise," depends more upon the acceptance of the participants than on the actual noise produced. The very appearance of appellants, who wear beards and dress in the manner of Amish males, could have been the instigating factor, aside from their preaching, for unspecified complaints. Under these circumstances, we cannot assume that loudness in *485 preaching, in the absence of definitive regulations concerning all similar activity, per se, amounted to a breach of the peace.
The evidence itself as detailed above established annoying behavior (to some) for a limited period of time, when the surrounding volume of noise from traffic and other activities was at the noon time peak. Since preaching itself was not proscribed, the testimony by the single witness and the police called to quell the preaching failed to establish the noise was unreasonable to the degree it constituted a crime.
Judgment of sentence vacated and appellants discharged.
Jurisdiction relinquished.
NOTES
[1]  It should be noted the court, sua sponte, appointed counsel to sit in at trial to assist appellants should they so desire (H.T., 4/19/88, p. 10).
[1]  State v. White, 64 NH 48, 5 A 828, affirming conviction under a statute prohibiting the beating of a drum within a town despite the defense that the act was committed in performance of religious worship.
A man may believe in what kind of religion he pleases or in no religion, and as long as he practices his belief without a breach of the peace, he will not be disturbed. State v. Langston, 195 SC 190, 11 SE2d 1, cert den 311 U.S. 685, 85 L ed 442, 61 S. Ct. 59.
[2]  Delk v. Commonwealth, 166 Ky 39, 178 S.W. 1129, holding minister properly charged with breach of peace for using obscene and foul language in the pulpit.
See also Louisiana v. Bottoms (Mo App) 300 S.W. 316, recognizing the rule, but holding that conduct amounting at most to overzealous religious worship, in that a pastor during religious services shouted at intervals "Amen," "Praise God," and "Glory hallelujah" in a tone of voice heard several blocks away, did not violate a city ordinance prescribing punishment for disturbing the peace by shouting in the nighttime.