=== CASE 2210817 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:58.498069+00 ===

260 Cal. App. 2d 923 (1968)
67 Cal. Rptr. 505
MISSION HILLS DEVELOPMENT CORP. et al., Plaintiffs and Respondents,
v.
WESTERN SMALL BUSINESS INVESTMENT CO. et al., Defendants and Appellants.
Docket No. 24523.
Court of Appeals of California, First District, Division One.
April 11, 1968.
*925 Rea, Frasse, Anastasi, Clark & Lewis, William G. Clark, Eleanor M. Kraft and Kraft & Kraft for Defendants and Appellants.
Faber L. Johnston and Faber L. Johnston, Jr., for Plaintiffs and Respondents.
ELKINGTON, J.
Defendants appeal from a judgment declaring certain promissory notes to be usurious with no interest due thereon, and adjudging that they repay to plaintiffs such interest as had theretofore been paid.
Plaintiff owned approximately 182 acres of land of which 120 acres had been developed into a golf course. The remaining 62 acres had a fair market value of $6,000 per acre and were being held for future residential development. The golf course was in financial trouble with some $200,000 of past due loans outstanding. Additional funds were needed for its completion. A teamsters' union pension fund had agreed to lend $500,000 on the security of the 182 acres, but unfortunately the loan could not be made for two years.
Seeking sorely needed interim financing, plaintiffs contacted defendants and commenced negotiations for a loan. A loan of $500,000 was granted. Plaintiffs gave defendants two 5-year promissory notes totaling $500,000 and bearing interest at 9 1/2 percent per annum. Additionally, plaintiffs gave defendants an option to purchase the 62 acres reserved for residential development at a price of $3,000 per acre after the loan was repaid. At the same time defendants executed and delivered to plaintiffs an option which, as material here, stated: "[Defendants] for a valuable consideration, receipt of which is hereby acknowledged, hereby grant to [plaintiffs] the option to purchase from [defendants] the option to purchase the said approximately 62 acres.... This option may be exercised by [plaintiffs] at any time after all loans have been paid in full. The purchase price of said option, to be paid by [plaintiffs], shall be as follows: If option purchased within 1 year from execution hereof @ $800/acre. If option purchased within 2 years from execution hereof @ $1,600-acre. If option purchased within 3 years from execution hereof @ $3,200/acre. If option purchased within 4 years from execution hereof @ $4,000/acre. If option purchased within 5 years from execution hereof @ $4,800/acre."
The trial court found, among other things, to the effect that the parties intended and agreed that the two options were a *926 device to hide an agreement to pay an additional 10 percent interest per year over and above the 9 1/2 percent called for under the terms of the notes.
It is from the judgment thereafter entered that this appeal is taken.
[1a] Defendants' principal contention is that the findings and judgment are not reasonably supported by the evidence.
California Constitution, article XX, section 22,[1] provides that no person "shall by charging any fee, bonus, commission, discount or other compensation receive from a borrower more than 10 percent per annum upon any loan...." There are certain exceptions, admittedly not applicable here.
[2] Where, as in the instant case, the transaction is not usurious on its face, the trial court may look beyond the form of the transaction and ascertain its substance. (Milana v. Credit Discount Co., 27 Cal. 2d 335, 340 [163 P.2d 869, 165 A.L.R. 621]; Mong v. Bass, 248 Cal. App. 2d 377, 381 [56 Cal. Rptr. 579]; Batchelor v. Mandigo, 95 Cal. App. 2d 816, 820 [213 P.2d 762].) [3] The courts will not permit an evasion of the usury law by a subterfuge, and it is always permissible to show that a transaction ostensibly lawful is in fact a usurious loan. [4] The test is whether there was an intent to evade the law, and the circumstances and negotiations which attended the transaction are material and should be considered in determining such intent. (Terry Trading Corp. v. Barsky, 210 Cal. 428, 432 [292 P. 474]; Simmons v. Patrick, 211 Cal. App. 2d 383, 388 [27 Cal. Rptr. 347]; Abbot v. Stevens, 133 Cal. App. 2d 242, 249 [284 P.2d 159].) [5] It is immaterial whether the borrower or the lender takes the initiative in a usurious transaction. (Williams v. Reed, 48 Cal. 2d 57, 68 [307 P.2d 353].)
[6] In determining whether the findings and judgment are supported by the evidence, our inquiry ends if there is any substantial evidence, contradicted or uncontradicted, which will support the conclusion reached by the trial judge. (Crawford v. Southern Pac. Co., 3 Cal. 2d 427, 429 [45 P.2d 183]; Simmons v. Patrick, supra, 211 Cal. App. 2d 383, 388.) Accordingly, we now look to the record before us.
[1b] Upon their request for the loan in question plaintiffs were told they would "have to do something to sweeten the deal." Plaintiffs suggested 10 percent interest and 10 *927 points.[2] The parties then talked about 10 points for each year of the loan but defendants suggested 9 1/2 percent as the interest figure since they "wouldn't be so apt to get into technical violations of usury." They "discussed the fact that the point structure or the additional moneys that we were going to pay would have to be very well hidden so that they would not show on any document."
The following testimony indicates how the "point structure" was worked out. "THE COURT: Excuse me. I realize he stated this before, but can you repeat it once again as to how the ten per cent was arrived at? THE WITNESS: Yes, Your Honor. Ten points would be $50,000 a year on the $500,000 loan. We had 62 acres and we were seeking a figure, when multiplied by 62 acres, would equal $50,000 a year. Now, $800 an acre was a rounded figure; and when we multiply $800 per acre per year times 62 acres, we get, I believe, $49,600, very close to $50,000. And, as in this type of thing it looks much better if you have a rounded, even figure than if you had an odd figure of $806.73 or something like that." This option jumped from $1,600 per acre for the second year to $3,200 per acre in the third year in order to insure that plaintiffs would take up the teamsters' loan commitment for the permanent financing in two years and pay off defendants. To make doubly sure that the loan was paid within two years defendants' attorney was to be appointed plaintiffs' agent "to negotiate the take-out commitment with the teamsters' union." Defendants' option to buy the 62 acres was fixed at $3,000 per acre (one-half of market value) because it was a figure that "would not look too unusual in a document and at the same time would create a virtual certainty" that plaintiffs would have to buy back the property.
A witness for defendants who had been their principal negotiator of the loan testified that their business could not be operated profitably at 9 1/2 percent interest. He said that they did not expect to exercise their option; they thought it would be purchased back by plaintiffs. He agreed that the subject of usury was discussed and that the $800 option repurchase price was arrived at by dividing $50,000 (10 percent of the face value of the loan) by 62 acres. And without objection by defendants he admitted authorship of a letter written to the *928 defendants after the loan was made which among other things stated: "We understand that the golf course has now been endorsed by Lockheed and enthusiasm from other sources, so that [one of the plaintiffs] contemplates the sale of golf memberships in a large dollar volume. The only effect these developments would have on our position is the possibility of pre-payment of our note before July, 1964, since there may be sufficient funds to save him another ten points during the second year of our loan." (Italics added.)
The evidence which we have related is substantial and furnishes abundant support for the trial court's findings and judgment. That which we have set forth is but a portion of the evidence which tends to show usurious intent.
[7] Defendants also urge that the usury law as applied in this action unfairly discriminated against them. This discrimination results, they say, from the exemption of certain classes, including finance companies, banks, credit unions and small loan companies. Although no direct assertion of unconstitutionality is made we shall consider this contention. No claim of unconstitutionality as to California's Constitution can be valid, for the criticized exemptions derive directly from that document. The United States Supreme Court has held that a state may properly establish classes which are exempt from the operation of its usury laws. (See Mutual Loan Co. v. Martell, 222 U.S. 225 [56 L. Ed. 175, 32 S. Ct. 74]; Griffith v. Connecticut, 218 U.S. 563 [54 L. Ed. 1151, 31 S. Ct. 132].)
The judgment is affirmed.
Molinari, P.J., and Sims, J., concurred.
NOTES
[1]  There are two sections numbered article XX, section 22. That with which we are concerned is the second in order.
[2]  The term "points" was defined at the trial as "that over and above the interest payments there will be an obligation in some fashion to pay a certain percentage of the face amount of the loan." Ten points meant 10 percent of the face amount of the loan, or $50,000.

=== CASE 2210818 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:58.508386+00 ===

13 Ill. App. 3d 935 (1973)
301 N.E.2d 339
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
DAVID JAMES HUNDLEY, Defendant-Appellee.
No. 11863.
Illinois Appellate Court  Fourth District.
September 5, 1973.
*936 John G. Satter, Jr., State's Attorney, of Pontiac, (George S. Dzielak, Assistant State's Attorney, of counsel,) for the People.
John F. McNichols, Deputy Defender, of Springfield, (J. Daniel Stewart, Assistant Appellate Defender, of counsel,) for appellee.
Reversed and remanded.
Mr. PRESIDING JUSTICE CRAVEN delivered the opinion of the court:
This is an appeal by the State from a judgment discharging the defendant for the State's failure to bring him to trial within 120 days.
On July 24, 1971, the defendant, along with two others, attempted to escape from the Illinois State Penitentiary at Pontiac, wherein they were lawfully imprisoned. The defendant was indicted on August 31, 1971, and arraigned on September 7, 1971, on the charge of attempted escape. At the arraignment defendant was found to be indigent and counsel was appointed. A recess was called to permit the defendant to confer with his appointed counsel concerning his plea. After the recess defendant's *937 counsel informed the court that defendant desired to address it concerning his need for psychiatric care. The defendant essentially stated that he was suffering adversely from being incarcerated in his cell with nothing to do and that he felt a great deal of pressure to his brain. He stated that he had told the prison officials of his need for psychiatric care but that they had done nothing.
The court ordered that counsel prepare a formal motion supporting defendant's request. The judge noted that he was concerned and stated that defendant should consult his attorney on this matter, and that the court would consider the matter "in connection with these charges". In the same proceedings, the defendant pleaded not guilty and the cause was continued for a trial.
On September 14, 1971, defendant submitted a motion with supporting affidavits requesting psychiatric care. The motion states in full:
"Comes the defendant, David James Hundley, by his attorney, Chester Crabtree, Public Defender of Livingston County, Illinois, and moves the court to appoint a psychiatrist to examine and treat him, for the reason that there are times when he has mental lapses, has dizzy spells, when the floor on which he stands appears to move, and when he is often unable to think clearly.
The defendant, in support of his motion, submits his affidavit hereto attached and made a part of this motion as if set out in full."
The defendant's supporting affidavit states in full:
"David James Hundley, being first duly sworn, on oath deposes and says that he needs to be treated by a psychiatrist for the reason that he often suffers mental lapses when he cannot think clearly, has dizzy spells, when the floor on which he stands appears to move, when objects in his room appear to move round and round, and when he seems to be floating through the air."
The motion was granted.
On January 12, 1972, defendant's attorney filed a motion to dismiss the cause on the grounds that defendant had been in custody for more than 120 days without being brought to trial on the charges pending. At the hearing on the motion, defendant submitted that he had caused no delays that resulted in tolling the 120-day time limitation. On January 18, 1972, the trial court granted said motion. The State appealed.
The limited issue is whether the trial court erred in discharging the defendant under the mandate of the 120-day rule of section 103-5(a) of the Code of Criminal Procedure. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1971, ch. 38, par. 103-5(a)). Defendant contends that his original request for general psychiatric care was unrelated to his competency to stand trial on the *938 charges, and, therefore, did not constitute a delay. The State submits that defendant's request was for an examination for competency which tolled the 120-day limitation.
 1 The right to a speedy trial is an absolute right emanating from the federal and state constitutions and is implemented by the 120-day rule. The statutory 120-day limitation commences to run from the time defendant is incarcerated on charges, or, as in this case, from the time defendant was arraigned while incarcerated on unrelated charges. People v. Vaughn, 4 Ill. App. 3d 51, 280 N.E.2d 253.
 2 In People v. Nunnery, 54 Ill. 2d 372, 375, 297 N.E.2d 129, 130, the supreme court has stated:
"The controlling question in determining if the defendant was entitled to discharge under the 120-day rule is whether the delay of the trial beyond 120 days was `occasioned by the defendant,' and if answered affirmatively, he was not entitled to discharge. * * *"
A request for a competency examination and hearing by defendant is a delay chargeable to him and will toll the 120-day statute People v. Siglar, 49 Ill. 2d 491, 274 N.E.2d 65.
 3 A defendant can request a competency examination or the court may so order such an examination on its own motion. In either case, if a competency examination is ordered, section 104-2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Ill. Rev. Stat., ch. 38, par. 104-2) requires that the trial court suspend the proceedings until the defendant's status is finally determined. After a competency examination is completed, a competency hearing is then held at which time defendant's competency is adjudicated. The suspended proceedings are not reinstated until defendant is again found to be competent.
 4 In the case at bar, we are unable to glean from the record the nature of defendant's request and how the trial court interpreted it. Defendant made a broad request for psychiatric care at his arraignment. After his request was made, the court did not suspend the proceedings. Rather, the court accepted defendant's plea of not guilty and refused to consider defendant's request until a formal motion was submitted to the court. Yet, the trial court stated it was concerned with the defendant's request as it related to these charges; then the court continued the proceedings until trial. Even after defendant's formal motion was submitted to the court and granted, the proceedings were not suspended. It is unclear what the trial court meant by its statement in connection with its conduct.
The State cannot be held accountable for the delays caused by a defendant, but it is responsible for the ultimate disposition of a case when *939 not attended by delays occasioned by defendant's conduct. (Strunk v. United States, (U.S.), 93 S. Ct. 2260, 37 L. Ed. 2d 56.
We reverse and remand for an evidentiary hearing so the trial court can enter an appropriate order based on the evidence presented, either granting or denying the defendant's motion requesting a discharge under the 120-day rule. If defendant's request was for a competency examination, the 120-day limitation was tolled and he cannot be discharged; but if his request was for general psychiatric care, the 120-day limitation was not tolled and he must be discharged. The judgment of the trial court is reversed and remanded for further proceedings.
Reversed and remanded with directions.
SMITH and TRAPP, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2210825 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:58.584658+00 ===

301 N.E.2d 205 (1973)
Lyman JOHNSON, Defendant-Appellant,
v.
John L. MILLS, Plaintiff-Appellee.
No. 1-173A16.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, First District.
September 20, 1973.
James J. Stewart, Harold E. Atherly, Stewart, Irwin, Gilliom, Fuller & Meyer, Indianapolis, for defendant-appellant.
John F. Townsend, Jr., W. Scott Montross, Townsend, Hovde & Townsend, Indianapolis, for plaintiff-appellee.
*206 ROBERTSON, Presiding Judge.
Defendant-appellant (Johnson hereafter) is appealing a jury verdict of $36,000 rendered against him and in favor of plaintiff-appellee (Mills) in a personal injury suit. The action was commenced by the filing of Mills' complaint which alleged, inter alia, that on May 6, 1968, Johnson was operating a 1951 Chevrolet truck south on North Madison Avenue in Greenwood, Indiana, which struck and thereby permanently injured Mills who was laying sod along the west side of Madison Avenue at the time. The complaint further alleged that at the time Mills was struck he was working immediately to the west of the curb and that Johnson was negligent in the following respects:
"(a) Failed to keep a reasonable lookout so as to observe plaintiff.
(b) Failed to keep his vehicle under control by turning the wheel and steering same so as to avoid running into and striking plaintiff.
(c) Failed to reduce his acceleration and apply his brakes to avoid running into and striking plaintiff.
(d) Failed to restrict his speed to avoid colliding with plaintiff.
(e) Drove his vehicle off of the east [west] edge of the highway and directly into plaintiff.
(f) Failed to blow his horn or give plaintiff any other warning that he was about to run into and strike him when he knew or should have known that plaintiff was close to the highway and that defendant was driving dangerously close to plaintiff."
The issues as raised by Johnson's Motion to Correct Errors, which was overruled, and argued on appeal, are threefold: was there sufficient evidence to support the jury's verdict; did the trial court err in overruling Johnson's motion for partial judgment on the evidence at the close of plaintiff's evidence; and did the trial court err in giving certain plaintiff's instructions.
Before determining the sufficiency of the evidence it should be pointed out that in so doing we are bound by the well established rule that only the evidence most favorable to the appellee may be considered and we can neither weigh the evidence nor determine the credibility of witnesses. Nugent v. Smith (1972), Ind. App., 287 N.E.2d 899; Engelbrecht v. Tri-State Franchisers, Incorporated (1972), Ind. App., 287 N.E.2d 365; Wm. J. & M.S. Vesey, Inc. v. Hillman (1972), Ind. App., 280 N.E.2d 88.
Due to the fact that there were no eyewitnesses, other than the defendant Johnson himself, to the actual striking of Mills, much of the circumstances of this incident must be constructed from the testimony of witnesses who made observations immediately prior to or after Mills was struck. It would appear that a great deal of the factual dispute between the parties turns on the question of whether Mills was located to the west of the curb or in the street at the time he was struck. One witness for plaintiff who was employed on the same work crew placed Mills approximately a foot or more west of the curb of the southbound lane of Madison Avenue immediately prior to being struck. Mills, according to the witness, was rolling out sod with his back to the road and facing south or southwest. The witness could not make a definitive statement as to whether or not the wheels of Johnson's vehicle came over the curb. The witness did, however, state that he saw the truck fender come over the curb. A second witness for plaintiff, who was also a member of the work crew, testified that immediately prior to the accident Mills was standing to the west of the curb but he did not know the exact location of Mills when he was struck. The same witness testified that he observed a black tire mark on the curb after Mills was struck which was not there before. The plaintiff *207 Mills testified that prior to the accident he was unrolling a strip of sod next to the curb with his body facing to the south. Mills stated that he was leaning over and backing up as he unrolled the sod and while so doing he was struck without warning in the buttocks by the Johnson vehicle. Mills further testified that he was not in the street but was standing next to the curb in the area in which he was laying sod.
In conflict with Mills' testimony was that of the defendant Johnson, who testified that as he approached the scene of the accident he observed Mills in the street. Johnson stated that he slowed down and when the front end of his truck came even with Mills, Mills started backing up. Johnson further testified that he was never closer than three to four feet away from the curb and that it was the right hand door of his truck which struck Mills.
In an effort to prove that Johnson's truck did not go over the curb, an accident reconstruction expert testified on behalf of Johnson that the force of a vehicle going up and over a curb, under circumstances similar to this accident, would cause identifiable damage to the wheel rim, the tire, the curb, and to the area in which the vehicle would come down beyond the curb. The witness stated that he inspected the curb, the truck, and photographs of the truck and he found no damage to any of the vehicle's wheel rims. Johnson's expert witness also testified that his inspection of the truck revealed damage to the right front fender which appeared to be quite old by virtue of the presence of rust and damage to the passenger side door which was not rusty and appeared to be recent. In his opinion the damage to the right front fender was not caused by striking a human body, but the damage to the door could have been caused by a human body. The police officer who investigated the accident testified that immediately subsequent to the accident he observed no tire marks on the curb or in the area beyond the curb.
The substance of Johnson's argument regarding the insufficiency of the evidence is that there was no substantial evidence offered by Mills during the trial on any of the allegations of negligence other than the allegation in which Mills averred that Johnson drove his vehicle off the west edge of the highway and directly into plaintiff. Johnson argues that a verdict based on that allegation is not supported by sufficient evidence in that such a finding would be contrary to the physical facts of the accident as constructed by the testimony of his expert witness and the investigating police officer. The jury's verdict, Johnson contends, could have only been based on a supposition that the truck jumped the curb. Johnson argues that such a supposition is contrary to the physical facts and could only be based on the unsupported testimony of Mills that he was not in the street when he was struck. Because Mills' testimony on this question was contrary to the physical facts, Johnson urges, it was of no probative value and the jury should not have been allowed to rest its verdict thereon. We do not agree with Johnson's contention.
In the case of Connor v. Jones (1945), 115 Ind. App. 660, 59 N.E.2d 577, where the jury's verdict was assailed because it was contrary to the physical facts, the court stated the following rule of law:
"... the testimony of a witness which is opposed to the laws of nature, or which is clearly in conflict with principles established by the laws of science, is of no probative value and a jury is not permitted to rest its verdict thereon. [Citing authorities.] This rule is frequently applied to the testimony of one who says he looked but did not see an object, which, if he had looked, in the very nature of things, he must have seen. However, where a court cannot say as a matter of law that the testimony of a witness is contrary to scientific principles, the law of nature or the physical *208 facts, the question of whether such testimony does so conflict is one of fact for the jury to determine. [Citing authorities.]" Connor v. Jones, supra, 115 Ind. App., at p. 670, 59 N.E.2d, at p. 581.
See also Gibson Coal Company v. Kriebs (1971), Ind. App., 275 N.E.2d 821.
There is evidence from which the jury could have concluded that a portion of Johnson's truck extended over the curb striking Mills while he was standing near the curb.
The second issue raised by Johnson is closely related to the first. Johnson maintains that because Mills failed to offer any evidence of a substantive nature on allegations (a), (b), (c), (d), and (f) of his complaint the trial court should have granted Johnson's motion for partial judgment on the evidence at the close of plaintiff's evidence. We cannot agree with Johnson's position. The validity of a directed verdict on a certain issue depends upon a total absence of evidence or reasonable inference therefrom on an essential element of the plaintiff's case. The evidence must be without conflict and susceptible of but one inference in favor of the moving party. Mamula v. Ford Motor Company (1971), Ind. App., 275 N.E.2d 849. In this case, as in Mamula, supra, there was evidence in some amount on the respective allegations of negligence to allow the issue through "the door of the jury room."
Johnson's final argument is directed to certain plaintiff's instructions which were given over his objection. It is alleged that there was no evidence to warrant giving an instruction on assessment of damages; Johnson's duty to exercise reasonable care to avoid colliding with a person near the highway; and Johnson's duty to maintain a reasonable lookout. Since we have previously approved submission to the jury of the issues formed by Mills' allegations of negligence, we likewise hold that there was evidence to justify the instructions regarding avoiding collision and maintaining a lookout. In a similar manner there was evidence from Mills and his physician which would warrant the damages instruction.
Johnson's final argument is that the following instruction is mandatory:
"You are instructed that it is not necessary for John Mills to have introduced evidence as to the monetary value of any pain, suffering, mental anguish or disability suffered by him, but it is only necessary that he has proved to you by a fair preponderance of the evidence the nature and extent of such injury, pain, suffering, mental anguish or disability, and it is your duty as jurors to fix the monetary value of such pain, suffering, mental anguish or disability."
The case of Perry v. Goss (1970), 253 Ind. 603, 255 N.E.2d 923, defines a mandatory instruction as one which directs the jury to a certain result. General statements of the law and its applicability to the case are necessary to properly instruct the jury. We are of the opinion that the quoted instruction falls into the latter category and does not possess the qualities of an erroneous mandatory instruction. See Perry v. Goss, supra.
Judgment affirmed.
LOWDERMILK and LYBROOK, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9737504 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:27:26.590374+00 ===

OPINION
HUSPENI, Judge.
The City of Luverne appeals from an injunction which prohibits implementation of a quadrennial physical examination policy and requires the City to meet and negotiate the implementation of the policy with respondent Law Enforcement Labor Services, Inc. Appellant denies any obligation to meet and negotiate claiming that the policy constitutes an inherent managerial right. We affirm.
FACTS
Appellant City of Luverne (City) is a Minnesota municipal corporation located in Rock County, Minnesota. Respondent Law Enforcement Labor Services, Inc. (LELS) is the certified exclusive bargaining representative for the four police officers employed by the City.
In January 1987, the Luverne city council (the council) adopted a policy requiring all full-time employees to undergo a physical examination once every four years. The council directed the city administrator to implement the policy.
The City left all details of implementation, including the scope of the examination and the contents of the releases and medical reports, to the discretion of the city administrator. The council reserved the right to discipline the police officers for noncompliance and provided that the policy was subject to change at the discretion of the City.
Pursuant to the council’s directives, the city administrator sent a memorandum directed to “AFSCME MEMBERS AND OTHER FULD-TIME EMPLOYEES” that notified the employees of the policy and provided a schedule outlining the times when the employees were expected to undergo the physical examination. The examination schedule included the names of the four LELS members and stated that all four were scheduled to be examined in 1988. LELS did not object to the policy at the time the memorandum circulated.
Over the years, LELS and the City have negotiated a number of collective bargaining agreements. The parties did not raise the policy as an issue when negotiating the 1988-89 agreement in the fall of 1987.
Before the promulgation of the policy at issue in this case, the City negotiated the implementation of a physical examination policy with the American Federation of *548State, County and Municipal Employees (AFSCME) applicable to nonessential, nonadministrative and confidential city employees, The collective bargaining agreement did not provide for mandatory binding arbitration.
On June 30, 1988, one of the LELS members questioned the applicability of the policy to the police officers. In response to the inquiry, the city administrator wrote the officer a letter explaining the City’s position. In December 1988, LELS and its members sent two letters to the City protesting the policy and reserving their rights to pursue civil remedies under the labor agreement and applicable state law. The union took the position that the policy and its implementation were terms and conditions of employment subject to mandatory bargaining. After registering their objections and reserving their rights, three of the four1 officers took the physical in December 1988.
In October 1989, LELS informed the City of its intention to include implementation of the physical examination policy in negotiation of the 1990-91 collective bargaining agreement. The City refused to meet and negotiate this policy in the successor agreement, arguing that it was a matter of inherent managerial right. The 1988-89 agreement expired on December 31, 1989.
LELS brought action seeking a temporary and permanent injunction prohibiting the City from implementing the physical exam policy and requiring the City to meet and negotiate implementation of the policy.
The trial court granted the injunction, finding that although the formulation of the policy was a managerial right, and some aspects were non-negotiable, certain other aspects of the policy affected terms and conditions of employment and, therefore, were subject to negotiation. Further, the trial court found that the implementation of the policy was not so intrinsically interwoven with the adoption of the policy as to rend * the implementation non-negotiable.
ISSUE
Did the trial court err by finding an unfair labor practice, enjoining implementation of the physical examination policy, and ordering negotiation?
1. Does the physical examination policy affect terms and conditions of employment?
2. Is the implementation of the policy “intrinsically interwoven” with the policy itself?
3. Did LELS waive its right to negotiate the physical examination policy?
ANALYSIS
When reviewing decisions made under the Public Employees Labor Relations Act (PELRA), Minn.Stat. §§ 179A.01-.30 (1988), this court is not bound by the trial court’s conclusions of law. Hill v. City of Winona, 454 N.W.2d 659, 661 (Minn.App.1990), pet. for rev. denied (Minn. July 6, 1990).
A public employer commits an unfair labor practice by “refusing to meet and negotiate * * * with the exclusive representative of its employees,” Minn.Stat. § 179A.13, subd. 2(5), regarding “terms and conditions of employment.” Minn.Stat. § 179A.07, subd. 2. PELRA • defines “terms and conditions of employment” as
the hours of employment, the compensation therefor including fringe benefits * * * and the employer’s personnel policies affecting the working conditions of the employees.
Minn.Stat. § 179A.03, subd. 19. A public employer has no obligation to meet and negotiate “matters of inherent managerial policy.” Minn.Stat. § 179A.07, subd. 1.
At the outset, respondent does not challenge the determination of the trial court that the formulation of the physical examination policy is a matter of inherent managerial right. The parties disagree, however, on whether implementation of the policy is negotiable. Often, “areas of ‘inherent managerial policy’ and ‘terms and conditions of employment’ * * * overlap.” *549St. Paul Fire Fighters, Local 21 v. City of St. Paul, 336 N.W.2d 301, 302 (Minn.1983).
Minnesota courts apply a two-step analysis in deciding whether negotiation is required:
(1) does the public employer’s management decision have an impact on “terms and condition of employment” and if so,
(2) is the establishment of the policy distinct and separable from its implementation.
Law Enforcement Labor Services, Inc. v. Hennepin County, 449 N.W.2d 725, 728 (Minn.1990) (citing Univ. Educ. Ass’n v. Regents, 353 N.W.2d 534, 539 (Minn.1984)). In cases where a policy decision
is so intrinsically interwoven with its implementation that to require the public employer to negotiate its implementation would also force it to negotiate the underlying policy decision, no negotiation is required.
Id. at 727.
First, appellant argues that the implementation of the policy does not affect terms and conditions of employment. We cannot agree. Not unlike the departmental grooming policy in Law Enforcement, 449 N.W.2d at 729, or the psychological examination requirement in Hill, 454 N.W.2d at 661, a mandatory quadrennial physical examination policy materially “affect[s] the working conditions of the employees.” Minn.Stat. § 179A.03, subd. 19. Job security, wages and fringe benefits all may be affected by the results of the examination. An adverse result could lead to significant duty changes and ultimately could result in termination of employment. This policy clearly affects “terms and conditions of employment.”
Next, appellant contends that all aspects of the policy and its implementation were “intrinsically interwoven” and that to negotiate the implementation would be to negotiate the policy itself. Again, we disagree. The distinctions drawn by the trial court between negotiable and non-negotiable aspects of the policy are valid and are consistent with St. Paul Fire Fighters, in which the supreme court ruled:
[t]o require the City to negotiate either the form and content of the [officer’s training] program or criteria for exempting some [employees] would be to require negotiation of the basic policy decision, which we hold is a nonnegotiable matter of inherent managerial policy * * * [but that] certain aspects of the implementation * * * [and] the manner in which the participation requirement is to be fulfilled,
are severable and, therefore, negotiable. St. Paul Fire Fighters, 336 N.W.2d at 303.
Similarly, the supreme court ruled in Int’l Union of Operating Eng’rs Local No. 49 v. City of Minneapolis, 305 Minn. 364, 233 N.W.2d 748 (1975), that although the decision to give competitive examinations was a matter of inherent managerial policy, the form of the examination was negotiable. Id. at 373, 233 N.W.2d at 754.
Conversely, in Law Enforcement, 449 N.W.2d at 730, the supreme court found that the implementation of a departmental grooming policy at the Hennepin County Sheriff’s Department was intertwined with the policy itself and, therefore, was not negotiable. We believe Law Enforcement is distinguishable from the situation here. The implementation of the grooming policy 2 in Law Enforcement was highly subjective. A decision whether nail color is “gaudy, pretentious, or unusual” is subject to individual taste or opinion. Negotiating the subjective implementation of the grooming policy in Law Enforcement would be tantamount to negotiating the basic policy itself. Implementation of the examination policy in this case is similar to that in St. Paul Fire Fighters and Int’l Union of Operating Engr’s, and is more objective than in Law Enforcement. Negotiation of such issues as whether second opinions are authorized and who should bear their cost does not undermine the *550basic policy of requiring a physical examination once every four years. Accordingly, we agree with the trial court that certain aspects of the implementation of the policy are severable and therefore negotiable.3 We also note that the fact that the City has successfully negotiated the implementation of a physical examination policy with AFSCME somewhat weakens the City’s argument that to negotiate the implementation of the policy would require negotiating the policy itself.4
Finally, appellant argues that by failing to object to the physical examination policy in the negotiation of the 1988-89 collective bargaining agreement in late 1987, LELS waived the right to subsequently raise that issue. We disagree.
In order to waive a statutory right to negotiate on a mandatory subject of bargaining, a union must express its intention to waive in “clear and unmistakable language.” Gen. Drivers Union Local 346 v. Indep. School Dist. No. 704, 283 N.W.2d 524, 527 (Minn.1979). Moreover, the employer must give the employee “notice that a decision has been made, or that one is imminent, before that decision is implemented.” Id. at 528.
[A] union’s failure to demand bargaining regarding a change in a term or condition of employment will not constitute waiver of the right to negotiate unless the record shows that the employer gave both adequate and timely notice of its intended action.
Foley Educ. Ass’n v. Ind. School Dist. No. 51, 353 N.W.2d 917, 922 (Minn.1984).
The record shows that on January 28, 1987, the city administrator circulated a memorandum directed to “AFSCME MEMBERS AND OTHER FULL-TIME EMPLOYEES” outlining the policy and providing an examination schedule for each police officer. Each of the officers conceded that they were full-time employees and had received the memorandum. The officers, however, contend that the memorandum was not clear because it mentioned AFSCME but did not specifically mention LELS. We conclude that this fact, coupled with the fact that an established policy with AFSCME was already in place, reasonably led LELS members to believe that the policy did not apply to them. Moreover, the apparent confusion is evidenced by the officer’s correspondence with the City in June 1988 requesting clarification of the applicability of the policy to LELS members.
We find-no expression by LELS in “clear and unmistakable language” of its intention to waive its objection to the mandatory physical examination policy. On the facts of this case, LELS’ failure to raise the issue in late 1987 is not sufficient to constitute waiver.
Moreover, we find the facts of Foley, wherein the supreme court found waiver, to be distinguishable. There, the employees received at least three separate notices of the policy change several months before negotiations of the successor agreement were set to begin.5 Id., 353 N.W.2d at 922. In this case, the City announced the examination policy in January 1987 by distributing a single memorandum. The LELS members could not experience the practical implementation of the policy until 1988, when each member was scheduled to be examined; this was substantially after the parties’ fall 1987 negotiation of the agreement under which the City would have us find waiver.
DECISION
Appellant committed an unfair labor practice by refusing to meet and negotiate *551the implementation of the physical examination policy. The trial court properly enjoined implementation of the policy and ordered negotiation. LELS did not waive its right to bargain on the issue.
Affirmed.
. One of the officers had recently been examined.
. The policy prohibited fingernails extending more than one-eighth inch from the tip of the finger and provided "[n]o nail color may be worn if the appearance that results is so gaudy, pretentious or unusual as to attract undue attention." Law Enforcement, 449 N.W.2d at 726 (emphasis added).
. We decline to hold the parties to the specific areas identified by the trial judge as either negotiable or non-negotiable. Rather, the parties must be free to explore a variety of avenues in negotiating the implementation of the policy.
. We recognize, of course, that the AFSCME collective bargaining agreement does not provide for binding arbitration upon failure to negotiate successfully, while the LELS agreement requires binding arbitration.
.The notices included (1) findings of fact issued by a hearing officer, (2) a notice of change sent to employees, and (3) actual notice to employees attending a board meeting where the policy change was discussed.

=== CASE 2211990 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:14.314075+00 ===

11 Cal.App.2d 320 (1936)
MOTION PICTURE MAKE-UP ARTISTS ASSOCIATION (a Corporation), Respondent,
v.
ASSOCIATED MOTION PICTURE MAKE-UP ARTISTS, INC., LTD., (a Corporation), et al., Appellants.
Civ. No. 9560.
California Court of Appeals. Second Appellate District, Division One.
January 20, 1936.
Sparling & Teel and Courtney A. Teel for Appellants.
No appearance for Respondent.
York, J.
The plaintiff, a nonprofit corporation composed of fifty-five members engaged in the art of making up moving picture actors and actresses to prepare them for the taking of moving pictures and appearances on the stage, brought action against the defendant corporation to enjoin and restrain it from using the name of Associated Motion Picture Make-Up Artists, Inc., Ltd., and also to enjoin it from doing business under said name or using the name in any manner whatsoever. The defendant corporation is a commercial enterprise engaged in the manufacture and sale of all kinds of cosmetics, and in connection therewith has *321 been accustomed to demonstrate the use of its cosmetics upon the persons of motion picture actors and actresses and the public generally.
The cause went to trial upon plaintiff's second amended complaint and the defendants' answer thereto. The material allegations of the complaint were generally and specifically denied, and in addition a separate equitable defense was set up by the answer. Evidence consisting of the articles of incorporation of the plaintiff was introduced and the findings recite--but without any basis therefor shown in the record-- that "the cause submitted for decision on the pleadings and statements of counsel".
From a judgment by which the defendants were enjoined and restrained from the use of the name Associated Motion Picture Make-Up Artists, Inc., Ltd., this appeal is prosecuted.
Appellants contend that the judgment rendered is without any basis in law for the reason that the findings are not supported by any evidence; that the complaint did not state facts sufficient to constitute a cause of action, and that the trial court erred in overruling the general demurrer to the second amended complaint; and that the decision is against law because the findings are not substantially coextensive with the issues joined by the pleadings, and particularly are there no findings upon the equitable matters set up in defendants' answer by way of separate defense.
[1] The record before us shows that no evidence was adduced upon the trial, except the articles of incorporation of the plaintiff, and the findings show that the cause was submitted by the trial court "on the pleadings and statements of counsel". As heretofore stated in this opinion, the material allegations of the complaint were denied generally and specifically by the answer. No admissions of any material facts were made, nor were any stipulations entered into by the parties. The statements of counsel herein referred to appear to be in the form of arguments made by the attorneys for both parties before the trial court.
There is a total lack of evidence or stipulation to support the findings made by the trial court. We deem it unnecessary to consider the other points raised by appellants.
The judgment is reversed.
Houser, P. J., and Doran, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9737786 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:34:33.189644+00 ===

SULLIVAN, Judge.
Defendant Michael Harrington appeals his conviction on four counts of Unlawful Dealing in a Controlled Substance. He alleges several errors. Because we reverse on the basis of two instructions concerning the defense of entrapment, we address only that issue and those matters which are likely to arise upon retrial.
I.
Harrington presented no evidence. Any evidence of entrapment must then be found within the testimony of the police officer and the female informant involved. Both stated that they had gone to Harrington’s garage on August 29, September 5, September 12, and September 19, 1975. The first and third times the informant asked Defendant if he had any “speed”, an amphetamine, Harrington said yes. The second time a purchase took place at Harrington’s trailer. The fourth time, Defendant said that he had none and told them to return later. Subsequently a purchase was made. In each instance Harrington gave amphetamine capsules to the police officer and was paid by the officer.
On cross-examination the informant testified that Defendant had never mentioned selling amphetamines, that she had never seen him sell to anyone else, that he would not sell the drugs at first, and that she did not think he would have sold the drugs to the police officer if she had not been a close friend. The informant and the officer stated that she was paid twenty-five dollars per transaction. The State then introduced a written statement by the informant indicating that she had bought drugs from Harrington more than twenty times. On recross she said she had purchased drugs from Defendant a few times, but not as many as twenty.
A defendant is entitled to an instruction on any defense which has some foundation in the evidence, even if the evidence is weak and inconsistent. United States v. Hillsman (7th Cir. 1975) 522 F.2d 454, 459, cert. denied, 423 U.S. 1035, 96 S.Ct. 570, 46 L.Ed.2d 410, see Cyrus v. State (1978) 269 Ind. 461, 464, 381 N.E.2d 472, 474, cert. denied, (1979) 441 U.S. 935, 99 S.Ct. 2058, 60 L.Ed.2d 664. Obviously, the instruction to which a defendant is entitled must be a correct statement of the law.
Harrington'objected to the following instruction:
“If the defendant raises evidence that he was persuaded or induced by a public officer or employee to sell drugs and that such inducement was of such nature that normal law-abiding citizens would have been persuaded, then he has raised the defense of entrapment. You must determine whether there was such persuasion as would entrap an innocent person.
Even if this defense is raised by the evidence, the State may nevertheless prove that this defendant had the criminal intent to sell drugs. A person is entrapped where the State implants into an innocent mind the criminal intent to sell drugs. However, a person is not entrapped if he was predisposed to deliver drugs and if delivering drugs was not solely the idea of the police. It is not entrapment for the police to purchase drugs from a person who is ready and willing to sell and where the State merely affords him an opportunity to sell.”
The instruction set out above was taken from the Comments to the then-proposed *625Indiana Penal Code quoted in Hardin v. State (1976) 265 Ind. 635, 639, 358 N.E.2d 134, 136: “ ‘[T]he defendant will raise the issue of entrapment through some evidence showing his conduct was induced by a public officer or employee and that inducement was of such nature that normal law-abiding citizens would have been persuaded to commit the offense.’ ” (Emphasis supplied.) The Comments continue: “The burden is then upon the state to demonstrate beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant was predisposed to commit the offense.” Annot., I.C. 35-41-3-9 (West Code Ed. 1978).
In Hardin the Supreme Court stated:
“When the question of entrapment is raised, the court must make a two-part inquiry: (1) Did police officers or their informants initiate and actively participate in the criminal activity; and (2) is there evidence that the accused was predisposed to commit the crime so that the proscribed activity was not solely the idea of police officials?” 265 Ind. at 639, 358 N.E.2d at 136 (citing Gray v. State (1967) 249 Ind. 629, 231 N.E.2d 793) (emphasis supplied).
To give effect to the literal language of the Comments is to make the raising of the defense more difficult than proof of the defense. If the defendant establishes police inducement, whether by direct involvement of officers or by participation of paid informants, and the State fails to prove predisposition, the defendant is entitled to an acquittal. See Hardin v. State, supra, 358 N.E.2d 134; Fischer v. State (3d Dist. 1974) 160 Ind.App. 641, 312 N.E.2d 904. That is the total extent of the proof requirement for establishment of the defense.
We have found no cases which require an inducement of such nature that a “normal law-abiding citizen” would have been persuaded to commit the crime. Some cases have referred to police implanting criminal design in an “otherwise innocent mind”. E. g., United States v. Russell (1973) 411 U.S. 423, 93 S.Ct. 1637, 36 L.Ed.2d 366. That language, however, is different from “normal law-abiding citizen” and relates to the lack of predisposition, not the nature of the inducement.
Case law indicates that an entrapment defense is raised by a showing of police involvement. E. g., Hardin v. State, supra; Fischer v. State, supra. The efficacy of the defense is determined by whether the defendant was induced to commit the crime by police activity or whether he was already predisposed to do so. Walker v. State (1970) 255 Ind. 65, 262 N.E.2d 135, overruled in part on other grounds, Hardin v. State, supra; see May v. State (3d Dist. 1972) 154 Ind.App. 75, 289 N.E.2d 135; Ervin v. State (3d Dist. 1972) 154 Ind.App. 89, 289 N.E.2d 131. This determination is based upon the defendant’s state of mind. Davila v. State (3d Dist. 1977) Ind.App., 360 N.E.2d 283, 286. If the criminal design was implanted in Harrington’s mind by the police informant, he was entrapped. If the design originated in his own mind, he was not. May v. State, supra.
Furthermore, if a defendant has not raised the issue of entrapment, he is not entitled to an instruction on that defense. See Cyrus v. State, supra, 265 Ind. 461, 381 N.E.2d 472. Thus, the determination of whether the defense was raised is within the province of the trial court, not the jury.
The State’s instruction was not an accurate statement of the law as it concerns the raising of the defense, and as such, was erroneous.
Harrington offered the following instruction which was given by the trial court:
“It is the duty of conscientious and efficient law enforcement officers to make efforts to catch persons engaged in illegal activity; however, law enforcement officers may not incite or create crime for the sole purpose of punishing individuals. The idea must not be planted in the mind of the defendant by a law enforcement officer to violate the law. The idea must already be there and the law enforcement officer merely reveal it *626by his strategy. There must be, in such instances, evidence which will rebut that the illegal transaction was induced solely by the plan of the law enforcement officer since the burden of proof is on the State and does not shift to the defendant. The evidence must show that the illegal transaction was actually that of the defendant and not that of the law enforcement officials or informer who was acting at the instigation of the law enforcement officials. The criminal design must originate in the mind of the defendant.”
Defendant’s entrapment instruction is an adequate statement of the law as indicated by the discussion above.
Although jury instructions must be read as a whole, an erroneous instruction is not cured by a correct one. Mundy v. State (1966) 247 Ind. 224, 214 N.E.2d 389. A conviction must be reversed if instructions are inconsistent and calculated to mislead the jury or leave it in doubt as to the law. Brewer v. State (1969) 253 Ind. 154, 252 N.E.2d 429. Reversal is required if the jury’s decision may have been based upon an erroneous instruction. Summers v. Weyer (1967) 141 Ind.App. 176, 226 N.E.2d 904, transfer denied, Oct. 31, 1967. In light of the above and the fact that the jury requested re-reading of the entrapment instructions, we cannot say that Harrington was not harmed by the error.
We now turn to those appellate issues likely to arise upon retrial.
II.
Harrington argues that the four count indictment was defective because it was signed by a special prosecutor without authority. Harrington’s arguments are identical to those advanced by the defendant in King v. State (2d Dist. 1979) Ind.App., 397 N.E.2d 1260, 1264-68. For the reasons stated in King, we hold that the special prosecutor had the required authority, and, thus, the indictment was not defective.
III.
Because the admissibility of certain evidence is likely to be questioned upon retrial, we deem it advisable to address that issue also.
At trial Harrington unsuccessfully tried to question the informant about an intimate relationship between her and the undercover officer. Evidence relating to drug use by the officer was also excluded.
We will first consider the admissibility of evidence concerning the relationship. Specific acts, other than those represented by convictions for certain crimes, cannot be used to impeach a witness’ general moral character. Hensley v. State (1971) 256 Ind. 258, 268 N.E.2d 90. Prior misconduct, however, can be admitted to show bias. See United States v. Harris (7th Cir.1976) 542 F.2d 1283, 1302.
Evidence of an intimate relationship between a witness and one other than a party is often excluded, but full disclosure is the better rule. 3A J.H. Wigmore, Evidence in Trials at Common Law § 949 & n.3 (1970). The Indiana Supreme Court has held that a witness’ feelings about other witnesses is a proper subject for cross-examination. Pickett v. Kolb (1968) 250 Ind. 449, 237 N.E.2d 105.
Nevertheless, a defendant does not have license to discredit a State’s witness through baseless questioning and innuendo. Limitation of cross-examination is still within the discretion of the trial court. Brooks v. State (1973) 259 Ind. 678, 680, 291 N.E.2d 559, 560.
Furthermore, we agree with the Seventh Circuit’s statement: “We do not find that a sexual relationship will per se give rise to bias, either favorable or unfavorable.” United States v. Harris, supra, 542 F.2d at 1302. As stated in Clark v. State (1976) 264 Ind. 524, 534, 348 N.E.2d 27, 34, cert. denied, (1978) 439 U.S. 1050, 99 S.Ct. 731, 58 L.Ed.2d 711: “[I]n order to legitimate a subject matter for cross examination for bias, the questioning party .. . [must show] that there exists a reasonable degree of probability that the witness is *627biased or prejudiced because of this evidence.”
Based on the record before us, we cannot say whether the evidence is or is not admissible. We merely offer our observations as guidance for the trial court.
At trial Defendant made an offer to prove indicating that, if called, two witnesses would have testified that the police officer had on one occasion ingested two capsules which contained amphetamine.
Harrington contends that the State opened the door to such evidence by eliciting testimony from the officer that he simulated smoking marijuana during one of the transactions with Defendant, and that the proffered evidence of actual drug use would have reflected adversely on the officer’s claim that he had only simulated marijuana use on this occasion.
In this case the subject matter of the involved testimony was clearly collateral to the matters in issue and its rejection was not improper. Bryant v. State (1973) 261 Ind. 172, 181, 301 N.E.2d 179, 184; Keel v. State (3d Dist. 1975) 165 Ind.App. 579, 588, 333 N.E.2d 328, 333.
The judgment of the trial court is reversed, and this case is remanded for a new trial.
SHIELDS, J., concurs.
BUCHANAN, C. J., dissents and files separate opinion.

=== CASE 9737787 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:34:33.19394+00 ===

BUCHANAN, Chief Judge,
dissenting.
In my opinion, the state’s instruction truly reflects Indiana law as to the raising of the entrapment defense. My authority for so concluding is Hardin v. State (1976), 265 Ind. 635, 358 N.E.2d 134, in which the Indiana Supreme Court discussed the defense of entrapment under the Indiana Penal Code,1 quoting the following language of the drafters:
“Under [the section covering the entrapment defense] the defendant will raise the issue through some evidence showing his conduct was induced by a public officer or employee and that inducement ivas of such nature that normal law-abiding citizens would have been persuaded to commit the offense.”
Id. at 639, 358 N.E.2d at 136 (quoting Indiana Penal Code, Proposed Final Draft, 1974) (emphasis supplied).
The state’s instruction, with emphasis placed upon that portion which the majority finds erroneous, states:
If the defendant raises evidence that he was persuaded or induced by a public officer or employee to sell drugs and that such inducement was of such nature that normal law-abiding citizens would have been persuaded, then he has raised the defense of entrapment. You must determine whether there was such persuasion as would entrap an innocent person.
The state cited Hardin at the foot of the page on which the instruction appears. Indeed, comparison confirms that the instruction was patterned after the above-quoted language of Hardin. To date, the Indiana Supreme Court has not overruled Hardin.
It is true that a few pre-Hardin decisions may be construed as indicating that the entrapment defense is raised by a showing of police participation. See, e. g., Gray v. State (1967), 249 Ind. 629, 231 N.E.2d 793; Fischer v. State (1974), 160 Ind.App. 641, 312 N.E.2d 904 (citing Gray, supra). However, any contention that demonstrating police involvement is the exclusive or even the standard method for raising the entrapment defense is unsupported by our case law, and Cyrus v. State (1978), 269 Ind. 461, 381 N.E.2d 472, cert. denied, 441 U.S. 935, is not to the contrary.
In Cyrus, our supreme court said that
[s]ince Hardin v. State [265 Ind. 635, 358 N.E.2d 134], ... the defense of entrapment has involved a two-part inquiry: (1) did the police officers or their informant initiate or actively participate *628in the criminal activity; and (2) is there evidence that the accused was predisposed to commit the crime so that the proscribed activity was not solely the idea of the police officials?
Id. at 463, 381 N.E.2d at 473.
A close examination of Hardin reveals that the two-pronged inquiry referred to in Cyrus is to be conducted only after the entrapment defense has been properly raised. Thus, the Cyrus line of cases focuses on proving the entrapment defense, not raising it. See, e. g., Stewart v. State (1979), Ind., 390 N.E.2d 1018; Hutcherson v. State (1978), Ind., 380 N.E.2d 1219; Couch v. State (1980), Ind.App., 402 N.E.2d 10.
So Indiana case law neither proscribes the language of the instruction nor supports the view that a proper instruction must refer only to police involvement and must not mention the nature of the inducement. Moreover, the trial court gave several instructions emphasizing to the jurors that they must determine whether the defendant himself was entrapped. Defendant’s instruction 2, quoted in full by the majority, explicitly mentioned the defendant, as did defendant’s instruction 5, which specified that
[Of, after consideration of all the evidence, you have reasonable doubt regarding whether the Defendant was entrapped with respect to a criminal offense or offenses, you must find the Defendant not guilty of that offense or offenses.
In another instruction, the court directed the jurors, in accordance with a well-established rule of law, to “consider these instructions as a whole and construe them in harmony with each other.” See, e. g., Porter v. State (1979), Ind., 391 N.E.2d 801; Johnson v. State (1979), Ind., 387 N.E.2d 1328. Viewing the instructions as a whole, the reference to the inducement was at worst an inconsequential inaccuracy casting a barely perceptible shadow on the proceedings.
. The Code went into effect some six months after the supreme court handed down its decision in Hardin.

=== CASE 2211993 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:14.35061+00 ===

11 Cal.App.2d 56 (1935)
PACIFIC STATES SAVINGS AND LOAN COMPANY (a Corporation), Appellant,
v.
HOLLYWOOD KNICKERBOCKER, INC. (a Corporation), et al., Defendants and Respondents; FRANK D. McGREGOR et al., Interveners and Respondents.
Civ. No. 10000.
California Court of Appeals. First Appellate District, Division Two.
December 27, 1935.
John L. Mace for Appellant.
Heaney, Price, Postel & Parma, Norman W. Ambrose, O'Melveny, Tuller & Myers and Pierce Works, as Amici Curiae on Behalf of Appellant.
Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher, H. F. Prince and Frederic H. Sturdy for Interveners and Respondents.
Freston & Files and Ralph E. Lewis for Defendants and Respondents.
Cosgrove & O'Neil, as Amici Curiae on Behalf of Respondents.
Sturtevant, J.
Hollywood Knickerbocker, Inc., a corporation, on July 1, 1929, executed its first closed mortgage 6 1/2 per cent sinking fund gold bonds in the sum of $750,000 to the Bank of America. That bank has since changed its name to Bank of America National Trust and Savings Association. Seven hundred of the bonds were of the denomination of $1,000 each and one hundred of the bonds were of the denomination of $500 each. To each bond there were attached thirty interest coupons. To secure the payment of the bonds Hollywood Knickerbocker, Inc., executed to the Bank of America a trust deed. Thereafter this plaintiff became the owner and holder of a number of said bonds aggregating $204,000. The intervening defendants thereafter became the owners of bonds in the aggregate sum of $426,500. That is, the plaintiff became the owner of more than 25 per cent of *58 said bonds and the interveners became the owners of 36 per cent of the outstanding bonds. Defaults in the payment of interest on all of said bonds were made on July 1, 1932, and January 1, 1933. Defaults in the payment of taxes and other defaults also occurred. On July 29, 1932, the plaintiff gave notice in writing to the trustee and made a demand upon it that it declare the principal of said bonds to be due. Pursuant to said demand, on July 30, 1932, the trustee did so declare. Later the plaintiff demanded that the trustee pursuant to the power of sale conferred upon it exercise the power of sale, but the trustee failed and refused to do so. On the 22d day of November, 1932, the plaintiff demanded that the trustee commence a suit to foreclose, but the trustee neglected and refused to do so. Its reason for nonaction rested on the fact that on the 27th day of August, 1932, the interveners served on the trustee a demand that the trustee should cease and desist from any further proceedings for the exercise of the power of sale, foreclosure of said bonds, or sale of said property.
The plaintiff thereafter commenced this action to obtain a decree in foreclosure. Its complaint was very full and complete. Bank of America National Trust and Savings Association, as trustee, was made one of the parties defendant. It appeared and filed an answer which, among other things, showed the conflicting demands made upon it. The Hollywood Knickerbocker, Inc., was made a defendant and appeared and filed an answer denying the allegations of the complaint. After obtaining permission so to do the interveners appeared and filed an answer in which they denied many of the allegations of the complaint and in which they set forth certain affirmative defenses. A trial was had before the trial court sitting without a jury. Evidence on all of the issues made by the pleadings was introduced. Thereafter the trial court made findings in favor of the defendants and from the judgment entered thereon the plaintiff has appealed. The findings so made by the trial court were to the general effect that the plaintiff was not entitled to maintain the action because of certain covenants contained in the bonds and the deed of trust executed to secure the payment of the bonds. All of the bonds recited they would be paid on July 1, 1944, together with interest at 6 1/2 per cent per annum payable on the first days of January and July in each year. Other provisions contained *59 in the bonds material to a consideration of this case include the following:
"For a description of the properties mortgaged, the nature and extent of the security, the rights of the holders of the bonds, and the terms and conditions upon which the bonds are issued and secured, reference is made to said mortgage or deed of trust, to all the provisions of which the holder hereof, by accepting this bond, assents."
"... In case an event of default, as defined in said mortgage or deed of trust, shall occur, the principal of this bond, if it be then outstanding, may be declared and become due and payable, as provided in said mortgage or deed of trust."
Provisions of the trust deed material to the questions presented to us are as follows:
"ARTICLE IX."
"... Section 3. If one or more of the events of default shall happen, the Trustee may, and upon the written request of the holders of twenty-five per cent (25%) in amount of the bonds secured hereby and then outstanding, shall, by notice in writing delivered to the Company, declare the principal of all bonds secured hereby then outstanding to be due and payable immediately, and upon any such declaration the same shall become and be immediately due and payable, anything in this indenture or in said bonds contained to the contrary notwithstanding. ..."
"Section 4. If one or more of the events of default shall happen, the Trustee in its discretion may, and upon the written request of the holders of twenty-five per cent (25%) in amount of the bonds secured hereby and then outstanding, shall proceed to protect or enforce its right or rights of the bondholders under this indenture by a suit in equity or action at law, either for the specific performance of any covenant or agreement contained herein, or in aid of the execution of any power herein granted, or for the foreclosure of this indenture, or for the enforcement of any other appropriate legal or equitable remedy as the Trustee shall deem most effectual in support of any of its rights or duties hereunder; and upon instituting such proceedings or in order to take possession as hereinbefore provided, the Trustee shall be entitled to the appointment of a receiver of the trust estate and to the sale of the trust estate as an entirety, if the Court in its discretion shall so order. ... *60"
"ARTICLE X."
"... Section 2. No holder of any bond or coupon secured hereby shall have any right to institute any suit, action or proceeding at law or in equity for the foreclosure of this indenture or for the execution of any trust or power hereof or for the appointment of a receiver or for any other remedy under or upon this indenture, unless such holder previously shall have given to the Trustee written notice of an event of default; and unless also the holders of twenty-five per cent (25%) in amount of the bonds secured hereby then outstanding shall have made written request upon the Trustee and shall have furnished the Trustee reasonable indemnity against all costs, attorney's fees and expenses, and shall have afforded to it a reasonable opportunity either to proceed to exercise the powers hereinbefore granted, or to institute such action, suit or proceedings in its own name; and such notification, and request hereby are declared in every such case, at the option of the Trustee, to be conditions precedent to the execution of the powers and trusts of this indenture, and to any action or cause of action for foreclosure, or for the appointment of a receiver, or for any other remedy hereunder; it being understood, intended and hereby provided that no one or more holders of bonds or coupons secured hereby shall have any right in any manner whatever by his or their action to affect, disturb, or prejudice the lien of this indenture, or to enforce any right hereunder, except in the manner herein provided, and that all proceedings hereunder shall be instituted, had and maintained in the manner herein provided, for the equal benefit of all holders of such outstanding bonds and coupons. ..."
"ARTICLE XI."
"... Section 16. (a) In the event that the Trustee, upon the happening of an event of default, is served with two or more written requests each signed by the holders of twenty-five per cent (25%) in amount or more of the outstanding bonds, which shall request that the Trustee shall do different things, the Trustee shall follow the direction contained in the written request signed by the holder or holders of the largest principal amount of the bonds. (b) In the event that the Trustee, upon the happening of an event of default, shall have taken some action pursuant to its duties hereunder, whether upon its own discretion or upon the *61 request of the holders of twenty-five per cent (25%) in amount of the bonds secured hereby, it shall be controlled in the matter of continuance or discontinuance of such action by the written request or direction of a majority in amount of the bonds secured hereby, (c) except, however, that such control shall not be exercised to stay or suspend a foreclosure suit instituted by the Trustee, nor to prevent such foreclosure from being filed, nor to waive or stay any proceedings to be taken by the Trustee in case of an event of default unless the principal of all bonds secured hereby, which have matured according to their terms, has been paid." (Parentheses ours.)
In its opening brief the plaintiff states that the sole question in the case at bar is what construction is to be placed upon the terms of the trust indenture. With that statement defendants agree. [1] "In the absence of any provision to the contrary, default may be taken advantage of by the holder of a single bond or coupon. (Citing authorities.)" (California Safe Deposit & Trust Co. v. Sierra Valleys R. Co., 158 Cal. 690, 694 [112 P. 274, Ann. Cas. 1912A, 729].) But there are many valid provisions that can be inserted in the trust agreement which will limit the rights of the bondholders in such matters and which, in the absence of a charge of fraud, will have that effect. That such is the rule and for some of those provisions see Rodman v. Richfield Oil Co. of California et al., 66 Fed.2d 244, and Munch v. Central West Public Service Co., 128 Neb. 645 [259 N.W. 736], and cases there cited. [2] In the indenture of trust before us some provisions limiting the rights of the bondholders were inserted. We have hereinabove set forth those provisions which are to be construed. The construction deemed necessary involves the provisions of section 16, article XI, supra. Division (a) as marked by us speaks of "different things". The plaintiff asserts that it demanded that the trustee should foreclose and that the interveners demanded that the trustee should stay his hand--should do nothing, and therefore the trustee was not served with notices to do "different things". The point is without merit. Manifestly in such matters as here involved nonaction is "thing" as material as affirmative action. Moreover it was one of the identical things, if not the identical thing, about which the parties were contracting. Both the bond and the indenture of trust contained provisions accelerating the date of payment of the principal. Pointing *62 to those provisions the plaintiff makes two different contentions. It asserts that such provisions are self-sufficient and that section 16, article XI, neither adds to nor subtracts from the plaintiff's rights. [3] In the next place it contends that so much of section 16, article XI, as we have marked division (c), should be read as follows: "... except, however, that such control shall not be exercised to stay or suspend a foreclosure suit instituted by the trustee, nor to prevent such foreclosure from being filed nor to waive or stay any proceedings to be taken by the trustee in case of an event of default unless the principal of all bonds secured hereby which have matured according to the specific pay date written thereon or by acceleration of payment (sec. 4, art. IX) has been paid". As all bonds contained the same pay date, and as the acceleration of the pay date operated on every bond, the construction contended for works an absurdity. If in any given contingency all bonds have been paid, there will be no occasion for the commencement of foreclosure proceedings. If the instrument is given such a construction no force or effect is given to divisions (b) and (c) which we have marked and which are the gravamen of the instrument. The word "maturity" is used many times in the indenture of trust. In every place we have noticed it was used as meaning July 1, 1944. In the last edition of Webster's Unabridged Dictionary one of the ordinary meanings of the word is stated as "termination of the period a note or other obligation has to run". Such ordinary meaning should be adopted (Civ. Code, sec. 1644). [4] As the plaintiff contends, we are bound to construe the indenture of trust within its four corners. From a casual inspection the document is an attempt to place in the hands of a majority of the bondholders the power to control and direct the policy which will best protect and serve the interests of all of the bondholders. That being the clear intention of the parties, the contract should be so construed. (Civ. Code, sec. 1636.) There is also that other cardinal rule that the whole of a contract is to be taken together, so as to give effect to every part, if reasonably practicable, each clause helping to interpret the other. That rule we think is peculiarly applicable in the instant case. The plaintiff cites and relies on Burrill v. Robert Marsh & Co., 138 Cal.App. 101 [31 PaCal.2d 823], and San Francisco Theological Seminary v. Monterey County Gas & Elec. Co., 179 Cal. 166 [175 Pac. *63 693]. Neither case is opposed to anything we have said regarding the particular facts in this case.
We find no error in the record. The judgment is affirmed.
Nourse, P. J., and Spence, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9737505 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:27:26.594474+00 ===

RANDALL, Judge
(dissenting).
I agree with the majority where it concludes formulation of a physical examination policy is a matter of inherent managerial policy and not subject to mandatory bargaining. I disagree with the conclusion that the implementation is so distinct that it is severable and thus has to be negotiated independently when the decision to institute mandatory physical examination does not.
Here, the policy decision to establish physical examinations for police officers is non-negotiable. That policy promotes one of the essential reasons that cities have taxing power and exist at all, namely, the protection and the health and welfare of its citizens. This policy serves that purpose by helping to ensure the ability of officers to perform their duties. I believe separating implementation from the policy decision is a round about way of defeating the conceded power of the City to manage its police force. See Law Enforcement Labor Services, Inc. v. Hennepin County, 449 N.W.2d 725, 729-30 (Minn.1990).

=== CASE 2210836 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:58.717495+00 ===

301 N.E.2d 372 (1973)
Zarko SEKEREZ, Taxpayer, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
GARY REDEVELOPMENT COMMISSION, Defendant-Appellee.
No. 3-473A44.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, Third District.
September 26, 1973.
*373 Zarko Sekerez, pro se.
Nick Katich, Robert J. Addison, Addison, Stiles, Greenwald & Kinney, Gary, for appellee.
HOFFMAN, Chief Judge.
This is an appeal by plaintiff-appellant Zarko Sekerez, an Indiana taxpayer, from an order requiring a bond in an action brought pursuant to the public lawsuit statutes. IC 1971, XX-X-XX-X to XX-X-XX-X, Ind. Ann. Stat. §§ 3-3301 to 3-3308 (Burns 1968), as amended.
Sekerez, in a complaint filed on January 2, 1973, alleged, among other things, that the plans, specifications and estimates of contracts pertaining to two urban renewal projects in which the Gary Redevelopment Commission (Commission) was involved did not carry the signature and seal of a registered professional engineer. The complaint further alleged that the approval of such plans, etc., by Commission for public improvements known specifically as the Small Farms Urban Renewal Project and Midtown West Phase I of the Urban Renewal Area Project was illegal and that any contract entered into by Commission in which such plans, etc., were utilized was null and void.
By reason of the aforestated allegations, Sekerez's prayer for relief asked that the plans, specifications and estimates of contracts in question, together with any contracts entered into pursuant thereto, be declared null and void; and that Commission be enjoined from proceeding with such contracts.
Following the filing of Commission's answer on January 17, 1973, an amended complaint was filed on January 26, 1973. Upon motion of defendant such amended complaint was stricken from the files.
On February 5, 1973, Commission filed a petition for an order that the cause be dismissed unless bond be posted.
On February 8, 1973, a hearing was held on Commission's petition and on March 20, 1973, the court granted the petition. The order further decreed that bond be posted in the amount of $300,000 as petitioned for, "to cover all damages and costs which may accrue to the defendant by reason of the pendency of the public lawsuit in the event the defendant prevails, and that if said bond is not filed within ten (10) days from the date hereof, the complaint shall be dismissed without further order of the court, subject to the right of appeal."
Sekerez failed to post the required bond within the ten-day period and dismissal followed.
*374 The principal issue presented in the instant appeal is whether the trial court erred in requiring Sekerez to post bond.
Sekerez contends that the requirement that bond be posted in a public lawsuit is proper only when the plaintiff fails to establish a substantial claim and show facts which would entitle him to a temporary injunction. He further asserts that he met his burden of proof and that the judgment of the trial court is contrary to law.
In response, Commission contends that an application of the proper standard of review will disclose that the plans, specifications and estimates were properly prepared, sealed and certified by a registered professional engineer and that the trial court correctly found that Sekerez had not presented a substantial claim proper for investigation by a court of equity.
In the case at bar, we are reviewing a negative judgment. The proper standards for review under such circumstances were expounded in Gariup v. Stern (1970), 254 Ind. 563, at 568, 261 N.E.2d 578, at 582-583, wherein it is stated:
"In reviewing the trial court finding that appellants failed to introduce sufficient evidence to sustain their burden of showing that their claim was a substantial one, proper for investigation by a court of equity, we are reviewing a negative finding of fact. We will find that the trial court abused its discretion in making this negative finding if, looking to the evidence and all reasonable inferences therefrom which tend to support the ruling of the trial court, that evidence leads to but one conclusion and the trial court reached a different one."
Thus, our consideration is whether, in denying the relief which Sekerez sought, the trial court abused its discretion. Gariup v. Stern, supra; Johnson v. Tipton Comm. School Corp. (1970), 253 Ind. 460, 255 N.E.2d 92; Green v. Bd. of Commissioners (1969), 251 Ind. 535, 242 N.E.2d 844.
It has also been stated that in a hearing of the nature contemplated under IC 1971, XX-X-XX-X, Ind. Ann. Stat. § 3-3305 (Burns Cum.Supp. 1972), the plaintiff is not required to establish such a case as would entitle him to judgment after trial on the merits. Gariup v. Stern, supra; Johnson v. Tipton Comm. School Corp., supra.
With these standards in mind, we proceed to an examination of the evidence adduced at the hearing on Commission's petition.
Steve W. Manich, under direct examination by Mr. Sekerez, testified that he was a registered professional engineer and that the plans, specifications and estimates in question were prepared by his office under his direct supervision. He further stated, under cross-examination, that he had signed and sealed the cover sheets when they were originally prepared but that such cover sheets bearing his signature and seal were later replaced by new cover sheets which had been revised to reflect a change in membership of the Board of Commissioners. Manich failed to affix his seal and signature to these revised cover sheets; however, the plans and specifications remained substantially the same.
IC 1971, XX-XX-X-XX, Ind. Ann. Stat. § 63-1535(a) (Burns Cum.Supp. 1972), provides as follows:
"Political subdivisions  Public works  Plans and specifications  Engineer required.  (a) Except as hereinafter otherwise provided, no county, city, town, township, school corporation or other political subdivision of this state shall engage in the construction or maintenance of any public work involving the practice of engineering for which plans, specifications and estimates have not been prepared, certified and sealed by, and the construction and maintenance executed under the direct supervision of, a professional engineer. * * *."
*375 Subsection (c) of § 63-1535, supra, also provides that:
"(c) No official of this state, or of any city, town, county, township or school corporation thereof, now or hereafter charged with the enforcement of any law, ordinance or regulation relating to the construction or alteration of buildings or structures, shall use or accept or approve any plans or specifications that have not been prepared by, or under the supervision of and certified by, a registered professional engineer: * * *."
Sekerez interprets § 63-1535(c), supra, as requiring a professional engineer to certify and seal revised cover sheets where the corresponding plans, specifications and estimates remain unaltered. We do not agree.
The purpose of this provision is to insure that no approval is given by public officials to plans, etc. for public works which are not compiled under the supervision of a registered professional engineer. The object is not to promote mere formality but rather to guard against the acceptance of plans furnished by unqualified sources.
Where a registered professional engineer has initially certified the actual plans pertaining to a public project, and where the engineer has testified that the plans in question have been prepared under his direct supervision, the statutory provisions [§§ 63-1535(a) and 63-1535(c), supra], have been substantially complied with.
Looking to the evidence adduced at the hearing and all reasonable inferences therefrom which tend to support the subsequent ruling, we cannot say that the evidence leads to but one conclusion and the trial court reached a different one. We, therefore, find no abuse of discretion by the trial court in requiring Sekerez to post bond.
Another issue presented is whether the trial court erred in granting Commission's motion to strike Sekerez's amended complaint.
The pertinent entries of the trial court in the record before us are as follows:
"And afterward, to-wit: on the 17th day of January, 1973, the following Answer was filed and entered of record in the above entitled cause, which is in the words and figures as follows, to-wit:"
[Here follows the answer filed by Gary Redevelopment Commission.]
"And afterward, to-wit: on the 26th day of January, 1973, the following Amended Complaint was filed and entered of record in the above entitled cause, which is in the words and figures as follows, to-wit:"
[Here follows the amended complaint filed by Zarko Sekerez.]
On February 2, 1973, appellee filed its motion to strike the amended complaint. Such motion, omitting caption and formal parts, reads as follows:
"Defendant moves the Court to strike plaintiff's Amended Complaint from the files for the following reason:
"1. The Amended Complaint was filed after the answer to it was served. It was filed without leave of Court or written consent of defendant, all in violation of Trial Rule 15(A)."
On February 8, 1973, Commission's motion to strike was submitted to the trial court. Following arguments, the trial court granted Commission's motion and the amended complaint was thereupon ordered stricken from the files.
Sekerez did not file his amended complaint with leave of court. Neither did he obtain the written consent of the adverse party.
Trial Rule 15(A), Ind.Rules of Procedure, IC 1971, 34-5-1-1, provides that a *376 complaint may be amended at any time prior to service of the answer. Otherwise, a complaint may be amended only by leave of court or after obtaining consent in writing from the adverse party.
Thus, the trial court acted correctly in granting Commission's motion to strike.
The final issue raised by this appeal is whether the trial court erred in overruling Sekerez's motion to amend his complaint.
The record is devoid of such motion by appellant and the question, therefore, is not properly before this court.
No reversible error having been shown, the judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
Affirmed.
SHARP and STATON, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9737506 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:27:28.913855+00 ===

Lesinski, C. J.
The defendant-appellant, General Adjustment Bureau,* appeals from a decision of the lower court finding it liable to the plaintiffs in the amount of $3,215.05.
*18The facts are that on December 9, 1963, the plaintiffs, Hershel J. Phillips and Portia Phillips, suffered a fire loss at an apartment building which they own. The apartment building was insured against fire loss by the Insurance Company of North America and, allegedly, Washington Mutual Insurance Company. The plaintiffs thereafter reported the loss to the Davis-Grant agency, a Detroit agent for both companies. General was informed of the loss by the Davis-Grant agency. Thereupon, General represented to the plaintiffs and their public adjuster that it was acting in behalf of the companies involved and proceeded to ascertain the extent of the loss. The representations by General were, in fact, false in that it never had authorization 'for such action from either company. It is because of these representations and the reliance placed upon them by the plaintiffs and their public adjuster that negotiations about the loss were extended beyond the 60-day period required for filing a sworn proof of loss.
The adjustment of loss involved was for $6,680.09. The companies involved under the terms of the policies in question were to divide the loss on a •pro rata basis. A proof of loss was prepared, after the 60-day period required for filing a sworn proof of loss, signed by the plaintiffs and submitted to each insurance company.
The Insurance Company of North America paid its pro rata share but Washington Mutual Company refused payment on the grounds that the insurance policy had been cancelled prior to the loss; that it had not received proof of loss within the 60-day provision of the policy; and that General had no authority to act as an adjuster for Washington Mutual.
*19Subsequently, the plaintiffs brought an .action against both insurance companies and. General as their common agent. Prior to trial the plaintiffs discontinued their claim against Washington Mutual Insurance Company, conceding that the company had effectuated a valid cancellation of their policy prior to the loss. • ■
At trial, the Insurance Company of North America was granted a directed verdict. of no cause of action, upon the court’s finding that no valid cancellation of Washington Mutual’s policy at the time of the loss had been effected; and because the Insurance Company of North America had already paid its pro rata share, if had' no further liability to the plaintiffs. No appeal was taken,- from that order. , -
As to General, the trial court found that its'representations, though innocent, were in fact false, detrimental to the plaintiffs, and hence actionable. General was found liable to the plaintiffs in the amount of $3,215.05.
In its first assignment of error, and the only one we treat for we find it dispositive of the appeal, General attacks the trial court’s finding that an innocent misrepresentation is actionable in spite of the fact that General “did not actually profit” as a result of. the misrepresentation.
It is extremely difficult to ascertain from this record the role played by the Davis-Grant agency, but in deciding this issue we must assume that the agency did not properly retain General to act in behalf of the companies involved.
This State takes a minority position when dealing with the area of innocent misrepresentation. The Michigan rule is stated in 23 Am Jur, Fraud and Deceit, § 120, p 908, as follows:
*20“In some jurisdictions the rule is broadly stated that intent to deceive is not a necessary element of an action at law for fraud to recover damages. This is a minority view. The minority rule is followed in one state in a slightly more specific .formulation; and it is held that where an action is brought to recover for false and fraudulent misrepresentations made by one party to another in a transaction between them, any representations which are false in fact and actually deceive the other and are relied on by him to his damage are actionable, irrespective of whether the person making them acted in good faith in making them, where the loss of', the party deceived, inures to the benefit of the other.’’ (Emphasis supplied.)
See Rosenberg v. Cyrowski (1924), 227 Mich 508; Aldrich v. Scribner (1908), 154 Mich 23; Strand v. Librascope, Incorporated (ED Mich SD, 1961), 197 F Supp 743; Dykema v. Muskegon Piston Ring Company (1957), 348 Mich 129.
The plaintiffs cite cases to support their claim that a benefit to the party making the misrepresentation need not be present to uphold the injured party’s right to' recovery. All of the cited cases dealt with intentional fraud, however, we do not find them helpful authority here, where any misrepresentation made was admittedly unintentional. Whatever the rule may be elsewhere, Michigan requires a benefit to inure to the person making an innocent misrepresentation in order to render him liable to a party relying on it to his detriment.
The trial judge found that General had billed Washington Mutual for adjustment services but it -had not been established that General had been paid. The fact that General has an ostensible claim against Washington Mutual might be considered a benefit, *21but it is not such a benefit as is contemplated under the rule.
Reversed, costs to appellant.
T. G. Kavanagh, J., concurred with Lesinski, 0. J.
Hereinafter referred to as General.

=== CASE 9737507 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:27:28.918615+00 ===

J. H. Gillis, J.
(concurring). I concur in the result arrived at by my colleagues, but I prefer to plant my reversal solely on the following:
On April 12, 1966, plaintiffs, by their attorneys, filed the following discontinuance: ■
“Now come the plaintiffs ■ by their attorneys, Weiss & Bacalis, and herewith discontinue any claim against the Washington Mutual Insurance Company for the reason that plaintiffs now recognize that the defendant, Washington Mutual Insurance Company, has effected a valid cancellation of its policy number 105014 and that said policy was not in full force and effect when the plaintiffs sustained their casualty loss on December the 9th, 1963.”
Notwithstanding the discontinuance which was a' matter of record and called to the attention of the court, a written opinion was filed in which the court gave judgment for plaintiffs against General Adjustment Bureau. In the opinion'the court stated:
“Everyone acted on the assumption that the Washington Mutual Insurance policy was in full force and effect and the error was not discovered until after the aforementioned events.” (Emphasis supplied.)
Inasmuch as the plaintiffs’ policy was canceled at the time of the loss, they cannot complain and, in fact, should have known that any “innocent misrepresentation” by. General Adjustment was not detrimental to plaintiffs.
For the above reasons I join in the reversal.

=== CASE 9737508 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:27:29.211519+00 ===

MR. JUSTICE KLUCZYNSKI delivered the opinion of the court: This direct appeal by leave of court (50 Ill.2d R. 302(b)) is taken from a judgment of the circuit court of Cook County holding unconstitutional an ordinance (72 — 0—54) adopted by the Cook County Board of Commissioners. The ordinance in question created a new office of Cook County Comptroller and provided that this office was to be filled by appointment by the President of the County Board with the approval of the County Board. Defendant, Thomas P. Beck, was appointed as acting comptroller. The State’s Attorney of Cook County filed a complaint for a declaratory judgment and a writ of quo warranto challenging the validity of the ordinance. He alleged that the action taken by the County Board was an invalid attempt to contravene the statute directing the Cook County Clerk to perform the duties and functions of ex-officio comptroller. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1971, ch. 34, pars. 1142 through 1142-14.) The circuit court found the ordinance to be unconstitutional and enjoined the defendant from assuming the position. The duties, powers and functions of the Cook County Comptroller under the ordinance are the same as those granted by the aforementioned statute to the Cook County Clerk as ex-officio Coók County Comptroller. Both this ordinance and the statute direct the comptroller to prepare the estimate of revenue available for appropriation in the annual Cook County budget and then require that he approve all expenditures in accordance with the budget. The ordinance specifically provided that it was intended to supersede this statute whose substantive origin may be traced to 1887. Laws of 1887, p. 153. The primary issue is whether the Cook County Board was constitutionally vested with authority to supplant an existing statute which assigned certain functions to the Cook County Clerk. Plaintiff basically contends that the office of county clerk is a constitutional county office (Ill. Const. (1970), art. VII, sec. 4(c)) and, as such, is afforded significant protection from any attempt by the County Board which might tend to “eliminate” it; that section 6(f) of article VII of that document imposes the limitations contained in section 4 of the local government article upon a home-rule county’s attempt to transfer said functions; and, that section 4(d) of article VII provides that the County Board may not eliminate but only supplement those statutorily delegated duties. Conversely, defendant argues that a home-rule county, such as Cook County, acting pursuant to section 6(a) of article VII of the 1970 constitution may transfer functions pertaining to its government and affairs from one county officer to another. During oral argument of this cause the League of Women Voters of Cook County and Illinois were granted leave to file a brief amicus curiae which supports the position taken by defendant. Section 6 of article VII of the 1970 constitution provides in pertinent part as follows: “(a) A County which has a chief executive officer elected by the electors of the county and any municipality which has a population of more than 25,000 are home rule units. Other municipalities may elect by referendum to become home rule units. Except as limited by this Section, a home rule unit may exercise any power and perform any function pertaining to its government and affairs including but not limited to, the power to regulate for the protection of the public health, safety, morals and welfare; to license; to tax; and to incur debt. * * * (f) *** A home rule county shall have the power to provide for its officers, their manner of selection and terms of office in the manner set forth in Section 4 of this Article.” The provisions of section 4 of article VII necessary for consideration of this cause, state: “(c) Each county shall elect a sheriff, county clerk and treasurer and may elect or appoint a coroner, recorder, assessor, auditor and such other officers as provided by law or by county ordinance. Except as changed pursuant to this Section, elected county officers shall be elected for terms of four years at general elections as provided by law. Any office may be created or eliminated and the terms of office and manner of selection changed by county-wide referendum. Offices other than sheriff, county clerk and treasurer may be eliminated and the terms of office and manner of selection changed by law. Offices other than sheriff, county clerk, treasurer, coroner, recorder, assessor and auditor may be eliminated and the terms of office and manner of selection changed by county ordinance. (d) County officers shall have those duties, powers and functions provided by law and those provided by county ordinance. County officers shall have the duties, powers or functions derived from common law or historical precedent unless altered by law or county ordinance.” Section 4(c) of article VII permits a county to appoint certain officers by county ordinance. The action of the County Board in creating the office of comptroller was a proper exercise of the powers granted under section 4(c), and plaintiff does not specifically dispute this. The question, however, is whether duties given to said office may supersede those granted by the legislature to another county officer. Section 6(a) of article VII allows a home-rule county to “exercise any power and perform any function pertaining to its government and affairs.” In Kanellos v. County of Cook, 53 Ill.2d 161, we held that a home-rule county may adopt an ordinance pursuant to its home-rule power and thereby supersede a statute antedating the present constitution. In so doing we observed, at page 166, “The concept of home rule adopted under the provisions of the 1970 constitution was designed to drastically alter the relationship which previously existed between local and State government. Formerly, the actions of local governmental units were limited to those powers which were expressly authorized, implied or essential in carrying out the legislature’s grant of authority. Under the home-rule provisions of the 1970 constitution, however, the power of the General Assembly to limit the actions of home-rule units has been circumscribed and home-rule units have been constitutionally delegated greater autonomy in the determination of their government and affairs. To accomplish this independence the constitution conferred substantial powers upon home-rule units subject only to those restrictions imposed or authorized therein.” We hold that the Cook County Board, acting pursuant to its home-rule power found in section 6(a), has authority to transfer powers, duties and functions among county officers even to the extent that such exercise conflicts with a statute enacted prior to the adoption of the 1970 constitution unless otherwise limited by legislative action (see generally City of Evanston v. County of Cook, 53 Ill.2d 312, 319; Kanellos v. County of Cook, 53 Ill. 2d 161, 166) or a positive constitutional restriction. Since the adoption of the 1970 constitution, there has been no legislative enactment which would limit the power of the County Board exercised in this case. Section 6(f) of article VII, however, provides that a home-rule county is subject to the provisions of section 4 of that article as it pertains to provision for its officers, their selection method and term of office. Section 4(d) authorizes the legislature and county to prescribe the duties, functions and powers of county officers. After consideration of the pertinent constitutional provisions, we believe that the home-rule philosophy, as enunciated in Kanellos, is applicable, thereby permitting a home-rule county to validly transfer the powers, duties and functions of county officers who are subject to the provisions of section 4 of article VII. We further believe that to accept plaintiff’s position might frustrate the implicit intent of section 4(c) of article VII, which permits the creation of other offices to deal with the myriad complex problems of local government because of the possibility that certain functions of such offices might duplicate duties previously delegated to others. In so holding we are not unmindful of section 4(c), which proscribes the elimination of the office of county clerk by methods other than county-wide referendum. But this case is not one in which “elimination” of an office or any maj or step in that direction is involved, and we express no opinion as to the validity of transfer of duties which substantially emasculate county offices eliminable only by referendum. The County Board action here does not approach that result. The powers of the Cook County Clerk, which the County Board sought to transfer, were not derived from common law or constitutionally delegated to that office. The comptroller function was given specifically to the Cook County Clerk as a supplemental function of that office and was not assigned to other county clerks. Moreover, an examination of present statutes demonstrates that the office of Cook County Clerk retains substantially the same functions of all other county clerks in this State. For these reasons the judgment of the circuit court of Cook County is reversed and the cause remanded to that court with directions to dismiss the complaint. Reversed and remanded, with directions.

=== CASE 9737509 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:27:29.215325+00 ===

MR. JUSTICE RYAN, dissenting: I cannot agree with the opinion of the court. The opinion sets forth the provisions of the 1970 constitution which must be considered in this case. Section 4(c) of article VII requires that each county elect a county clerk and provides that the office may be eliminated only by a county-wide referendum. Section 4(d) of article VII pertains to the duties of county officers and provides: “County officers shall have those duties, powers and functions provided by law and those provided by county ordinance. County officers shall have the duties, powers or functions derived from common law or historical precedent unless altered by law or county ordinance.” (Emphasis added.) I interpret this section to mean that if the duties, powers and functions of the county officer are those derived from statutory authority they cannot be taken away or altered by county ordinance, but the county may by ordinance give to the county officer additional duties, powers and functions. On the other hand, if the duties, powers or functions of the county officer are derived not from statutory authority but from common law or historical precedent, then such duties, powers or functions may be altered by either an act of the General Assembly or by a county ordinance. The duties of which the county clerk of Cook County is divested by the county ordinance in question are statutory in origin and as the majority opinion indicates have been part of the statutory duties of that office since 1887. Section 9 of the transition schedule of the 1970 constitution provides: “All laws *** not contrary to, or inconsistent with, the provisions of this Constitution shall remain in force, until they shall expire by their own limitation or shall be altered or repealed pursuant to this Constitution.” The opinion of the court does not find that the statutory duties of the county clerk which are here in question are contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions of the constitution and I find them not to be. Therefore, the statute conferring the duties, powers and functions upon the county clerk of Cook County remains in effect until repealed by the General Assembly. The opinion of the court relies on our decision in Kanellos v. County of Cook, 53 Ill. 2d 161, as authority for the proposition that a home-rule county may adopt an ordinance pursuant to its home-rule authority and thereby “supersede a statute antedating the present constitution.” Kanellos has no application to this case because we there specifically found that the provisions of the statute which we held to have been superseded were inconsistent with the provisions of the constitution of 1970 and thus were not preserved by section 9 of the transition schedule. (53 Ill.2d at 166-167.) The opinion of the court makes no such finding with regard to the statute conferring the functions in question on the county clerk of Cook County. I agree that the 1970 constitution conferred substantially greater autonomy upon home-rule units than units of local government had previously enjoyed under the 1870 constitution. However, the exercise of the home-rule powers cannot be contrary to the other provisions of the constitution. Section 4(d) provides that the county offleers shall have the duties, powers and functions provided by law. In my opinion, the law conferring these duties, powers and functions upon county officers remains in effect until repealed by the General Assembly unless it has not been preserved by the provisions of section 9 of the transition schedule. Since the constitution provides that the county officers shall have these powers, duties and functions, the officers cannot be divested of them by a county ordinance. For these reasons, I would hold that the county ordinance of Cook County is invalid.

=== CASE 9737510 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:27:29.914684+00 ===

MR. JUSTICE RYAN delivered the opinion of the court: Kathryn Mieher, while driving east on State Highway 140 near Old Ripley, Illinois, collided with the right rear corner of an International Harvester truck which was also going east and which was making a right turn off of the highway. Kathryn Mieher died as a result of injuries received in the accident. The plaintiff, Esther Mieher, as administrator of Kathryn Mieher’s estate, filed a two-count action in the circuit court of Montgomery County against Kenneth L. Brown, the driver of the truck. Later, the plaintiff amended her complaint and added counts III and IV claiming damages against International Harvester Company (hereinafter defendant) for the wrongful death of the decedent, and for funeral, hospital and medical bills, alleging that the truck with which the decedent collided was negligently designed. On motion of the defendant, counts III and IV were stricken. Plaintiff appealed to the appellate court, which reversed the trial court (3 Ill. App. 3d 802), and we granted leave to appeal. The amended complaint alleged that the defendant had negligently designed the truck in that it did not attach to the rear of it a bumper, fender or shield. The plaintiff alleged that the absence of a bumper, fender or shield made the truck unsafe in that a vehicle colliding with the rear of it would be allowed to proceed unimpeded under the bed of the truck. From the allegations, it appears that the plaintiff’s decedent sustained fatal injuries when her automobile ran under the rear of the truck and the truck bed penetrated the windshield of the car which she was driving. The amended complaint had been considered by both parties in the trial court and in the appellate court as being based on the theory of strict liability. However, the appellate court held that it did not state a cause of action on the theory of strict liability in that it did not allege that the truck was in the same condition when it left the possession of the defendant as it was at the time of the accident which caused decedent’s death. (See Williams v. Brown Manufacturing Co., 45 Ill.2d 418, 432.) The appellate court held, however, that the amended complaint did state a cause of action based on common-law negligence on the basis of the allegation of negligent design, and it reversed the trial court’s dismissal. The appellate court correctly concluded that the amended complaint failed to state a cause of action for strict liability. We shall therefore examine the amended complaint as one based on common-law negligence. In doing so we must test the amended complaint by the traditional requirements of such an action: the existence of a duty owed by the defendant to the decedent, the breach of that duty and the injury proximately resulting from this breach. (Prosser, Handbook of the Law of Torts (4th ed. 1971), sec. 30.) The determination of the question of duty — whether the defendant and the decedent stood in such a relationship to one another that the law imposed upon the defendant an obligation of reasonable conduct for the benefit of the decedent — is an issue of law for the determination of the court. (Prosser, Law of Torts (4th ed. 1971), sec. 45; Restatement (Second) of Torts, sec. 328B.) Since we are here determining the propriety of the trial court’s dismissal of the amended complaint, we are concerned only with that question of law presented by the pleading. In concluding that under the facts alleged in the amended complaint the defendant owed the plaintiff’s decedent the duty to exercise reasonable care in designing its motor vehicle, the appellate court placed substantial reliance on Larsen v. General Motors Corp. (8th cir. 1968), 391 F.2d 495, and other cases which followed the Larsen rationale. (Badorek v. General Motors Corp. (1971), 11 Cal. App. 3d 902, 90 Cal. Rptr. 305; Grundmanis v. British Motor Corp. (E.D. Wis. 1970), 308 F. Supp. 303; Mickle v. Blackmon (1969), 252 S.C. 202, 166 S.E.2d 173; Dyson v. General Motors Corp. (E.D. Pa. 1969), 298 F. Supp. 1064.) The reasoning in this line of cases, as stated in Larsen, is: “While automobiles are not made for the purpose of colliding with each other, a frequent and inevitable contingency of normal automobile use will result in collisions and injury-producing impacts.” (391 F.2d at 502.) These cases finding that such injury-producing impacts are foreseeable conclude that the manufacturer is under a duty to design its vehicle to avoid subjecting the ,user to an unreasonable risk of injury in the event of collision. The appellate court acknowledged that there is a considerable amount of authority to the contrary. The leading case supporting the contrary view is Evans v. General Motors Corp. (7th cir. 1966), 359 F.2d 822, cert. denied, 385 U.S. 836, 17 L. Ed. 2d 70, 87 S. Ct. 83. Cases which accepted and followed Evans are: Schemel v. General Motors Corp. (7th cir. 1967), 384 F.2d 802, cert. denied, 390 U.S. 945, 19 L. Ed. 2d 1134, 88 S. Ct. 1030; Shumard v. General Motors Corp. (E.D. Ohio 1967), 270 F. Supp. 311; Walton v. Chrysler Motor Corp. (Miss. 1969), 229 So. 2d 568. This line of cases holds that the intended use of an automobile does not include its participation in collisions despite the manufacturer’s ability to foresee the possibility that such collisions may occur. These cases hold that the manufacturer’s duty extends only to insure that the vehicle is reasonably safe for its intended use. Naturally the plaintiff in this case urges the foreseeability test of Larsen in our determination of whether the defendant owed to the plaintiff’s decedent a duty to use reasonable care in designing its vehicle to avoid subjecting the decedent to an unreasonable risk. Just as naturally, the defendant argues against the application of the foreseeability doctrine as defined in Larsen and asserts that the defendant owed no duty to the decedent. The defendant likewise argues that the cases-which adhere to the Larsen reasoning are factually different from the case now before this court and are of no help in its determination. Both the Larsen cases and the Evans cases involve so-called “second collision” injuries by the occupants of the alleged defective vehicles. In these cases, after the original collision, the occupants were injured due to an alleged defect in the vehicle in which they were riding. Recovery was sought against the manufacturer of the vehicle in which the injured party was riding. Our case differs substantially, although it may be, in fact, a “second collision” case to the extent that the plaintiff claims that the decedent received fatal injuries occasioned by the defective design in the truck after the original collision with the truck had been brought about by other means. The question in Larsen and Evans concerned the duty of the manufacturer to design a vehicle in which it was safe to ride. The question in our case involves the duty of the manufacturer to design a vehicle with which it is safe to collide. The plaintiff insists that the distinction is of no importance. She contends that under the rationale of Larsen, the defendant should have foreseen that its truck would be struck in the rear and should have taken the necessary precautions to prevent an automobile from running under the bed of the truck. We do not believe, however, that the foreseeability rule applied in Larsen is intended to bring within the ambit of the defendant’s duty every consequence which might possibly occur. In a sense, in retrospect almost nothing is entirely unforeseeable. Professor Leon Green discusses foreseeability in distinguishing between the judge’s role in determining the duty owed and the jury’s role in determining the violation of the duty by stating: “ [H] owever valuable the foreseeability formula may be in aiding a jury or judge to reach a decision on the negligence issue, it is altogether inadequate for use by the judge as a basis of determining the duty issue and its scope. The duty issue, being one of law, is broad in its implication; the negligence issue is confined to the particular case and has no implications for other cases. There are many factors other than foreseeability that may condition a judge’s imposing or not imposing a duty in the particular case, but the only factors for the jury to consider in determining the negligence issue are expressed in the foreseeability formula.” Green, Foreseeability in Negligence Law,, 61 Colum. L. Rev. 1401, 1417-18. Thus, although foreseeability is generally accepted as the test to be applied by a jury in determining if a duty has been violated, in defining the scope of the duty, other elements must be considered by the court. See Comment, Automobile Design Liability: Larsen v. General Motors and Its Aftermath, 118 U. Pa, L. Rev. 299, 300 (1969). Section 435(2) of the Restatement (Second) of Torts provides: “The actor’s conduct may be held not to be a legal cause of harm to another where after the event and looking back from the harm to the actor’s negligent conduct, it appears to the court highly extraordinary that it should have brought about the harm.” Dean Prosser observed that this provision of the Restatement recognizes the basic idea “that liability must stop somewhere short of the freakish and the fantastic.” (Palsgraf Revisited, 52 Mich. L. Rev. 1, 27.) The court in Larsen stated that the duty of the manufacturer was only to “use reasonable care to avoid subjecting the user of the product to an unreasonable risk of injury.” (Emphasis added.) (391 F.2d at 502.) “Liability is imposed only when an unreasonable danger is created.” 391 F.2d 495, 502 n.3. It is apparent that the concept of duty in negligence cases is very involved, complex and indeed nebulous. The term is so ill-defined and its boundaries so indistinct that one commentator has observed: -“There is a duty if the court says there is a duty.” And he concluded that the court’s pronouncement often reflects the policy and social requirements of the time and community. Prosser, Palsgraf Revisited, 52 Mich. L. Rev. 1, 15; see also Prosser, Law of Torts (4th ed. 1971) 325-326. Although the injury complained of may have been, in a sense, foreseeable, we do not consider that the alleged defective design created an unreasonable danger or an unreasonable risk of injury. In the words of section 435(2) of the Restatement (Second) of Torts, “looking back from the harm to the actor’s negligent conduct, it appears to the court highly extraordinary that it should have brought about the harm” for which recovery is now sought. Public policy and the social requirements do not require that a duty be placed upon the manufacturer of this truck to design his vehicle so as to prevent injuries from the extraordinary occurrences of this case. Counts III and IV of the amended complaint do not state a cause of action against the defendant on the theory of common-law negligence. The judgment of the appellate court is reversed and the judgment of the circuit court of Montgomery County is affirmed. Appellate court reversed; circuit court affirmed.

=== CASE 9737511 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:27:29.918504+00 ===

MR. JUSTICE GOLDENHERSH, dissenting: The majority have correctly concluded that the rationale of Larsen and the cases which follow it is that since injury-producing impacts are foreseeable “the manufacturer is under a duty to design its vehicle to avoid subjecting the user to an unreasonable risk of injury in the event of collision.” The question in this case, however, does not, as stated by the majority, involve the duty of the manufacturer to design a vehicle “with which it is safe to collide.” The question involved is the extent of the duty of the manufacturer to design its vehicle so as to avoid the unreasonable risk of injury in the event of collision, whether the injured be a passenger in that vehicle, another vehicle, a pedestrian, or a bystander. Upon a close reading of the opinion it appears to me that the majority recognize that the duty owed by the manufacturer is to design his vehicle so as to avoid the unreasonable risk of injury in the event of collision irrespective of whether the injured is within or without the particular vehicle, and insofar as the opinion so holds, I concur. I do not agree, however, that the amended complaint, upon the facts alleged, fails to state a cause of action against the manufacturer, and I would affirm the judgment of the appellate court.

=== CASE 9737512 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:27:31.281275+00 ===

Mr. PRESIDING JUSTICE SCOTT delivered the opinion of the court: Harry Fredman, the plaintiff, is the owner of an apartment building in the City of Peoria and on November 15, 1971, he entered into an oral agreement with Kent and Kathy Clore as to the rental of an apartment within the building on a month to month basis for the consideration of $112.00 per month. During the months of February, May and August of 1972 inspections were conducted by the Peoria Department of Environmental Development of the apartment rented by the defendants and of the apartment building generally. Certain violations of the Peoria Housing Code were found, i.e., leaking roof, falling plaster, peeling paint, improper wiring, inadequate heat, and plaintiff was notified as to these violations and directed to correct them. The defendants allege in certain pleadings that the defendant was aware of some of the defects at the time they rented their apartment and agreed to have them remedied. Also the defendants allege that the inspections made by the Department of Environmental Development were made pursuant to their complaint. On June 13, 1972, the defendants commenced making payment of their rental money to the Director of the Department of Environmental Development pursuant to section 16 — 113.5 of the Peoria Housing Code, which provides: "Sec. 16 — 113.5 After inspection and due notice of violation by the Director, any tenant directly affected by a violation of this Code by the owner or lessor, and so long as the violation exists, may place all rents due to the owner or lessor in escrow with' the consent of the Director. The Director shall hold the rents in a separate account, as Escrow Agent for the tenant, until such time as the violation is corrected and if the owner is prosecuted, convicted and fined, until such fine and costs are satisfied in full. Thereupon, the Director shall release the escrowed funds or so much as may remain less any fine and costs to the owner or lessor.” On July 13, 1972, the defendants received from the plaintiff notice to terminate the lease agreement of their apartment within thirty days and the notice was given pursuant to Ill. Rev. Stat., ch. 80, sec. 6, the applicable portion of which states: “In all cases of tenancy for any term less than one year, other than tenancy from week to week, where the tenant holds over without special agreement, the landlord may terminate the tenancy by thirty days’ notice, in writing, and may maintain an action for forcible entry and detainer or ejectment.” On August 15, 1972, the defendants filed in the circuit court of Peoria County a verified complaint for a declaratory judgment and injunctive relief against the plaintiff, the City of Peoria, and the Director of the Department of Environmental Development of the City of Peoria which sought (1) compensating damages in the amount of the sum of rent paid to the plaintiff, (2) a mandatory injunction against the plaintiff directing him to repair the premises in a manner to meet the minimum requirements of the housing code, (3) a permanent injunction enjoining plaintiff from seeking eviction proceedings against the defendants, (4) a mandatory injunction against the Director of the Department of Environmental Development directing him to perform a thorough inspection of the premises and further directing him to report all violations of the Housing Code to the court, (5) a mandatory injunction requiring the Director of Environmental Development to continue accepting rental payments and to place them in escrow, and (6) reasonable attorney fees, court costs and other relief as the court might deem proper. On August 17, 1972, the plaintiff filed an action which results in this appeal, namely a suit in forcible entry and detainer against the defendants. This suit was predicated upon the statutory provisions found in Ill. Rev. Stat. 1971, ch. 80, sec. 6. The defendants filed a motion to dismiss this action or in the alternative to have it consolidated with their previously filed suit for declaratory judgment and injunctive relief. The plaintiff filed an answer to this motion and also a motion for summary judgment which was supported by affidavit. The defendants filed a reply to the plaintiffs’ answer, and both parties filed additional affidavits in support of their various pleadings. Lastly, as far as the pleadings are concerned, the defendants filed an answer and set forth affirmative defenses to the plaintiff’s action in forcible entry and detainer. On November 6, 1972, the circuit court of Peoria County denied the defendants’ motion to dismiss or consolidate and granted the plaintiff’s motion for summary judgment and possession of the premises in question. This appeal stems from this order of the trial court. The defendants raise several issues in this appeal, the first of which is that the trial court erred in denying their motion to dismiss the forcible entry and detainer action, or in the alternative consolidating it with the previous action filed by them.  With this contention of the defendants we do not agree. Their motion to dismiss or consolidate was filed pursuant to Ill. Rev. Stat., ch. 110, sec. 48(c), which provides: “48. Involuntary dismissal based upon certain defects or defenses. (1) Defendant may, within the time for pleading, file a motion for dismissal of the action or for other appropriate relief upon any of the following grounds. If the grounds do not appear on the face of the pleadings attacked the motion shall be supported by affidavit: (a) * * * (b) 6 * * (c) That there is another action pending between the same parties for the same cause.” The defendants’ motion to dismiss or consolidate on its face does not satisfy the statutory requirements in that it fails to identify any other pending action between the same parties for the same cause. Nor was this failure corrected by a supporting affidavit, which is understandable since it would have been impossible to do so. Section 48(c) of chapter 110, Ill. Rev. Stat., in order to become operative requires an identity of parties and causes between two actions before a motion for dismissal or consolidation can be found to be well taken. In the instant case no such identity is present since the parties are the plaintiff Harry Fred-man and the defendants Kent and Kathy Clore, while in the suit filed by the defendants we find the Clores as plaintiffs pitted against the defendants Harry Fredman, The City of Peoria, and the Director of the Department of Environmental Development for the City of Peoria. As to the identity of “causes” set forth in the two suits wé find no resemblance whatsoever. True that they both stemmed from the same rental agreement, but there the identity ceases. One suit, namely the one now before us, is an action in forcible entry and detainer which presents the issue as to right of possession of rented premises. The other is a class action in equity seeking compensatory damages, injunctive relief and attorney fees. The purpose of section 48 (c) of the Civil Practice Act is to foster orderly procedure by preventing a multiplicity of actions. (People ex rel. Lehman v. Lehman, 34 Ill.2d 286, 215 N.E.2d 806.) To have granted defendants’ motion to dismiss or consolidate would have resulted in a situation that would have presented such divergent theories and different prayers for relief that a most difficult if not impossible trial would have been presented to the trial court. We believe that the trial court correctly denied the defendants’ motion.  The defendants further contend that the public policy of the State of Illinois and the duty of every person is to provide and maintain a healthful environment and that every person has a right to such environment and in support of this contention cites the Illinois Constitution, 1970, article XI, sections 1 and 2, as well as the Municipal Housing Code of the City of Peoria and Ill. Rev. Stat., ch. 80, sec. 71. We quarrel not with this contention of the defendants. Our constitution does in fact set forth such a policy. We also recognize that the provisions of the Housing Code of the City of Peoria and the Landlord and Tenant Act cited by the defendants both provide for the protection of tenants from a retaliatory eviction should they complain to certain authorities as to violations of a building code by an owner. In examining the record we fail to find any evidence that the plaintiff was aware of the defendants’ complaints as to his violation of the Building Code in the City of Peoria, llie defendants in their pleadings aver that the defendant was aware of their complaints but a mere allegation is not sufficient to create a material issue of fact. Mere allegations or denials in pleadings controverted by affidavit are insufficient to create a genuine issue as to a material fact. (St. Louis Fire and Marine Insurance Co. v. Garnier, 24 Ill.App.2d 408, 164 N.E.2d 625.) The defendants’ argument that the plaintiff’s suit for possession is an act of retaliation presupposes that the plaintiff had knowledge of complaints as to building code violations. The only reference as to such awareness on the part of the plaintiff is found in the pleading of the defendants. Such allegations can only be considered as self-serving and are not sufficient to invoke the provisions of the retaliation provision contained in the Housing Code of the City of Peoria or in our state statutes. The defendants further urge that if the rights they claim as tenants, to-wit, a healthful environment and freedom from retaliatory actions are not deemed to be a “special agreement” encompassed by Ill. Rev. Stat., ch. 80, sec. 6, then such statute is unconstitutional. We have already determined that there is no basis for the defendants’ charge of “retaliatory action” on the part of the plaintiff so it is unnecessary for us to consider this attack on the constitutionality of the statute.  In analyzing the argument of the defendants it becomes clear that they want this court to hold that in a forcible entry and detainer suit when no rent is claimed by the landlord the tenants may nevertheless raise equitable defenses in an effort to defeat the claim for possession. The defendants desire that this court extend the holding in Jack Spring, Inc. v. Little, 50 Ill.2d 351, 280 N.E.2d 208, so as to permit equitable defenses in an action where no rent but only possession is claimed. In Spring our supreme court held that where the landlord claims rent due, the tenants claim for damages, resulting from a breach of implied warranty of habitability, can be raised to determine the issue of whether the tenant owes the landlord any rent. It should be noted that our supreme court specifically limited the application of the law as set forth in the case of Spring by stating: “* * e [W]e make clear precisely what this case does not involve.’ It does not involve nor purport to adjudicate issues which might arise in an action based on notice given in accordance with any section of the Landlord and Tenant Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1969, ch. 80) except section 8, which is here specifically involved.” We are concerned with an action based on notice given in accordance with section 6, not section 8, of the Landlord and Tenant Act and in view of the precise limitation set forth in Spring we deem the holding in that case inapplicable to the instant case and further consider the “limitation” as an admonition against extending the law as set forth in Spring to actions resulting from other sections of the Act. For the reasons set forth we hereby affirm the trial court’s order denying the defendants’ motion to dismiss or consolidate and its further order granting plaintiff’s motion for summary judgment. Affirmed. DIXON, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9737513 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:27:31.285963+00 ===

Mr. PRESIDING JUSTICE STOUDER dissenting: I do not agree with the majority of the court. In my opinion the trial court was in error in its holding that the defense of retaliation is inappropriate in this forcible entry and detainer action. The final order issued by the trial court granting plaintiff’s motion for summary judgment states matters germane to the distinctive purpose of the proceedings are not raised. Although my colleagues address. their attention initially to the question of whether there is a basis for the defendants’ defense of retaliation, the basis for the defense does not become an issue until a determination is made as to whether the defense is procedurally appropriate. According to section 5 of the Forcible Entry and Detainer Act (IU. Rev. Stat. 1971, ch. 57, par. 5), matters not germane to the distinctive purpose of the proceeding shaH not be introduced. The purpose of this summary statutory proceeding is to adjudicate rights to possession and the proceeding should not be impeded by collateral matters not directly connected with the question of possession. (Bleck v. Cosgrove, 32 Ill. App.2d 267, 177 N.E.2d 647.) Matters which are germane to the question of the litigants right to possession may be raised in these proceedings. (Rosewood Corp. v. Fisher, 46 Ill.2d 249, 263 N.E.2d 833.) In Rosewood, defendants raised defenses going to the validity and enforceability of the contracts upon which plaintiffs based their claim of right to possession. The court held these defenses were germane to the distinctive purpose of a forcible entry and detainer action. In Marine Park Associates v. Johnson, 1 Ill.App.3d 464, 274 N.E.2d 645, the court in a forcible entry and detainer action brought by the lessor, aUowed the lessee to raise a defense based on the Civil Rights Act of 1968 after the lessor refused to renew a lease on the apartment because of racial reasons. In recent cases where a landlord has sought possession through a forcible entry and detainer action based on failure of a tenant to pay rent, the Illinois Supreme Court has held the tenant may raise issues pertaining to the question of whether the tenant owes rent which is due and unpaid. (Jack Spring, Inc. v. Little, 50 Ill.2d 351, 280 N.E.2d 208, and Peoria Housing Authority v. Sanders, 54 Ill,2d 478, 298 N.E.2d 173.) The defenses raised were based on allegations of breach of express covenant to repair, breach of implied warranty of habitability and an unconstitutional rental policy. The question of whether rent is owed is germane to the question of who has the right to possession. Since plaintiff does not base his right to possession on faUure to receive rent from defendants, the defense raised in the present case is different from those in the above cases. Nonetheless, I believe it should be considered germane since it relates to who has the superior right to possession. Defendants claim the notice to vacate sent to them by plaintiff was in violation of section 16 — 118 of the Housing Code of the City of Peoria. That section reads: “Sec. 16 — 118 Retaliatory Eviction by Owner No owner or lessor shall evict or cause to evict or terminate the tenancy of a renter or lessee solely as retahation because that renter or lessee complains to the City of Peoria or the Circuit Court of Peoria County against the owner charging the owner with violation of this Code or with violation of any warranty of habitability accruing to the rentor or lessee from the owner. The fact that the rent or lease consideration of the renter or lessee is not more than thirty (30) days delinquent at the time the owner gives notice of eviction or termination of lease or rental and the fact that, within six (6) months prior to the notice of eviction or termination of the lease or rental, the renter or lessee has not been convicted of creating a nuisance at the dwelling or dwelling unit from which eviction is sought and the renter or lessee has not been convicted of violation of sections 16 — 116 and 16 — 117 of this Code, shall be prima facie evidence that the eviction or termination of lease or rental by the owner is solely retaliatory because that renter or lessee has complained against the owner charging him with violation of this Code; Any person convicted of violating this section shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).” Section 71 of the Landlord and Tenant Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1971, ch. 80, par. 71) recognizes a similar right of a tenant to be free from retaliatory actions by a landlord. This section reads: “It is declared to be against the public policy of the State for a landlord to terminate or refuse to renew a lease or tenancy of property used as a residence on the ground that the tenant has complained to any governmental authority of a bona fide violation of any applicable building code, health ordinance, or similar regulation. Any provision in any lease, or any agreement or understanding, purporting to permit the landlord to terminate or refuse to renew a lease or tenancy for such reason is void.” The historical note following this section in the Illinois Annotated Statutes (S.H.A. ch. 80, par. 71) states that the Act is “to protect the right of tenants to complain of violations of governmental regulations.” When a defense raised is based on rights set forth in a statute or code section which limit a landlord’s right to terminate a lease and regain possession, this is surely related to a landlord’s possessory rights. Although there is an absence of Illinois cases based on similar fact, there is other judicial authority relating to the problem facing the court under similar eviction statutes in other states. In Edwards v. Habib (1968), 397 F.2d 687, cert, denied (1969), 393 U.S. 1016, the court held landlords could not use eviction statutes to retaliate against tenants invoking their rights under housing and sanitation codes of the District of Columbia. The landlord had given the tenant who rented on a month to month basis, a notice to vacate after the tenant complained to the District of Columbia housing officials of violations of the code which the landlord refused to repair. The court said the code impliedly effected a change in the rights of landlords and tenants so that retaliation constituted a defense in an action of eviction. The Supreme Court of California in Schweiger v. Superior Court of Alameda County, 3 Cal.3d 507, 90 Cal. Rptr. 729, 476 P.2d 97, found a tenant could defend an unlawful detainer action on grounds that the landlord increased rent and commenced an action for eviction in retaliation for a tenant’s demand that certain repairs be made. The court stated, “If wé deny tenants a defense against retaliatory eviction in unlawful detainer actions, we lend the exercise of judicial process to aid landlords in punishing those tenants with the audacity to exercise their statutory rights.” It is in the public interest to require a landlord to maintain leased premises in a habitable condition and tenants have the right to complain of code violations. The effect on this statutory right would be to treat it as a nullity if landlords were allowed to invoke a forcible entry and detainer action whenever a tenant complains of code violations. It is hard to imagine how a defense aUeging that the landlord terminated a lease and is seeking possession in retaliation and in violation of a statute, can be said to be collateral to the distinctive purpose of a forcible entry and detainer action. The defendants are merely seeking to assert their paramount right to possession by stating facts upon which they base their right. It is maintained by my colleagues that to permit such defense would be an extension of the holding in Jack Spring Inc. v. Little, 50 Ill.2d 351, 280 N.E.2d 208, since plaintiff’s claim to possession is not based upon failure to pay rent. The statute does not require possession to be based upon rent before a germane matter can be introduced by defendants. Also, in cases such as Rosewood, supra, and Marine Park, supra, possession is claimed with no question of rent being involved. Furthermore, I do not believe the Illinois Supreme Court in Spring set forth an admonishment against application of the law allowing germane defenses in different factual situations, rather, it merely stated the court was not adjudicating issues other than the precise issue before it. In fact, it seems to me that Spring requires the defenses raised in this case be permitted in a forcible entry and detainer action. Otherwise the landlord’s duties and obligations may be easily and simply evaded, thereby nullifying the holding in Spring. In this connection it should also be observed the plan contemplated by Peoria’s ordinance for payment of rent to the housing administration obviates some of the problems and objections raised in the dissenting opinions in the Spring case. The tenant is required to make the rental payment agreed upon during the continuance of the controversy and cannot arbitrarily decline to make payments to anybody on the excuse the property is in poor condition. Both the trial court and the majority determined retaliation was an inappropriate defense, nevertheless both ruled there were no facts relating to retaliation presented in the pleadings and affidavits. Having found the defense not germane, it is difficult to understand how either could consider the sufficiency of facts constituting retaliation. The conclusion reached by the majority which proclaims an absence of facts showing plaintiff was aware of the defendants’ complaints of his violation of the Peoria Building Code is contrary to my belief. The defendants started making rental payments to the Director of the Department of Environmental Development pursuant to section 16 — 113.5 on June 13, 1972. However, the plaintiff did not give defendants notice to vacate until a month later on July 13, 1972. It is stated in the affidavit of Frank E. Naven, Director of the Department of Environmental Development of the City of Peoria, that he notified plaintiff on June 13, 1972, the future rental payments on defendants’ apartment would be held in escrow until all violations had been corrected. In an affidavit by defendant, Kent Clore, he states in June, 1972, Mr. Harry Fredman stated more than once that no repairs would be made until defendants moved out. There is no denial by plaintiff of these facts nor does he at any time state he was not aware of the complaints made by defendants. In fact, he states in his affidavit notice was not initiated for retaliatory reasons but in preparation to upgrade the condition of the premises. No facts are stated in the affidavit and therefore, there is no basis to determine what his intention was for such plans for upgrading. The affidavit falls short of the requirements for an affidavit set forth in the Illinois Supreme Court Rules (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1971, eh. 110A, sec. 191), and therefore, could not in any event form a basis for summary judgment. Also, plaintiff’s affidavit by attempting to negate an inference of retaliation is an indication that plaintiff knew of defendants’ complaints of building code violations. Section 16— 118 of the Peoria Housing Code cited above, sets the requirements for establishing prima facie evidence of retaliation. Applying those requirements to this case; first, the defendants are not more than 30 days delinquent in rent at the time the owner gave notice of termination, and second, the defendants have not been convicted of creating a nuisance at the dwelling nor convicted of section 16 — 116 (Reckless Criminal Damage by Occupant) nor 16 — 117 (Wilful Criminal Damage by Occupant). Defendants have alleged these facts in tire pleadings and affidavits and it therefore seems to me a question of fact on the issue of retaliation is raised. Due to the fact it is not clear whether the trial judge ruled on the question of whether there were sufficient facts to constitute the defense of retaliatory eviction, I would reverse and remand directing the court to consider the defense. FinaUy, I believe the trial court erred in denying defendants’ motion to consolidate this action with the prior action initiated by the defendants. The majority bases its affirmance of the denial on section 48, Subsection 1 (c) of the Civil Practice Act (Ill. Rev. Stat., ch. 110, par. 48, subpar. 1 (c)). Only a motion to dismiss is governed by this section. A different section of the Civil Practice Act, section 51 (Ill. Rev. Stat., ch. 110, par. 51), governs a motion to consolidate. It provides, * ° actions pending in the same court may be consolidated, as an aid to convenience, wherever it can be done without prejudice to a substantial right.” Under the Civil Practice Act, consolidation has been effected where parties are not the same and where the plaintiff in one action is the defendant in the other. (See, 3 Nichols Illinois Civil Practice, sec. 2530, at 144.) It is apparent the subject matter of the suits and the rights of plaintiff and defendants are the same in both actions. Since the two actions contained common questions of law and fact, it would be most convenient for the court to hear and determine the cases at the same time. Prejudice to a substantial right of a party is not likely to occur. If retaliation is an inappropriate defense as considered by the majority of the court, the necessity of consolidating the actions becomes even more apparent. Although consolidation is in essence discretionary with the court, I believe the court should have granted the motion to consolidate. However, standing alone, I do not consider such denial as reversible error.

=== CASE 2211994 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:14.361027+00 ===

462 N.W.2d 460 (1990)
CITY OF MINOT, North Dakota, Plaintiff and Appellee,
v.
Michael W. NELSON, Defendant and Appellant.
Cr. No. 900150.
Supreme Court of North Dakota.
November 13, 1990.
*461 Mark Ashley Flagstad (argued), Asst. States Atty., Minot, for plaintiff and appellee.
Schoppert Law Firm, Minot, (argued), for defendant and appellant; Thomas K. Schoppert.
GIERKE, Justice.
After a conviction on a conditional plea of guilty pursuant to N.D.R.Crim.P. 11(a)(2), Michael Nelson appeals from an order denying a motion to dismiss a complaint of driving while under the influence of intoxicating liquor with a blood alcohol content in excess of .10% and to suppress a blood alcohol test, arguing that the officer did not have an articulable basis upon which to stop his vehicle. We reverse.
At approximately 2:30 a.m. on December 1, 1988, a radio dispatch directed Sergeant Alan Hanson to go to the Robinson Trailer Court. The dispatcher relayed a call from an unidentified person who indicated that there was a car running in front of a trailer and that the person was suspicious because the car didn't belong there. A second call was received and the license number of the vehicle was given to the dispatcher.[1] No other information was given to the dispatcher. When Sergeant Hanson arrived, the vehicle was no longer parked in front of the trailer. Sergeant Hanson observed the vehicle being driven on both 27th Street SW and then back in the trailer court going past the trailer again.
The only evidence presented was the transcript from the administrative hearing on Nelson's license suspension. At that hearing Sergeant Hanson testified that he stopped the vehicle to find out who the driver was and why he was in front of that trailer. Sergeant Hanson arrested Nelson for driving while under the influence of intoxicating liquor with a blood alcohol content in excess of .10% and for open container in a motor vehicle. Nelson moved to dismiss and to suppress the blood alcohol test result on the grounds that the officer did not have an articulable basis to stop him.
The trial court ruled that the telephone calls made to the Minot Police Department gave the officer sufficient impetus to stop the vehicle and denied the motion to suppress and dismiss. Nelson appealed contending that the trial court erred in denying his motion.
We have held that for a legal investigative stop of a vehicle, an officer must have an articulable and reasonable suspicion that a law has been or is being *462 violated. State v. Lykken, 406 N.W.2d 664, 666 (N.D.1987). An investigatory stop, such as occurred here, "must be justified by some objective manifestation that the person stopped is, or is about to be, engaged in criminal activity." United States v. Cortez, 449 U.S. 411, 417, 101 S.Ct. 690, 694, 66 L.Ed.2d 621 (1981). The factual basis for the stop need not be the officer's personal observations alone, but may arise from information furnished by other persons. State v. Lykken, supra. Even an anonymous informant may supply sufficient information for a reasonable suspicion justifying a stop. State v. Boushee, 284 N.W.2d 423, 430 (N.D.1979).
In Wibben v. N.D. State Highway Commissioner, 413 N.W.2d 329, 331 (N.D. 1987) this court cautioned that "[i]nformation supplied by an anonymous informant cannot alone establish probable cause for a warrant if the tip provides virtually nothing from which one might conclude that the informant is honest or that his information is reliable, or if the information `gives absolutely no indication of the basis'" for identifying the criminal activities. [Quoting State v. Thompson, 369 N.W.2d 363, 367 (N.D.1985) ] (citing Illinois v. Gates, 462 U.S. 213, 103 S.Ct. 2317, 76 L.Ed.2d 527 (1983). Information from an anonymous informant used for an investigative stop must be sufficiently reliable to support a reasonable suspicion of unlawful conduct, though not the more exacting standard of probable cause necessary to make an arrest. Wibben v. N.D. State Highway Commissioner, supra.
In the record before us there is a complete lack of even the most minimal indicia of reliability of either the informant or of the information for the anonymous tip and the information received from the anonymous informant gives absolutely no indication of the basis for identifying possible criminal activity. It would have been relatively easy for the dispatcher to solicit some minimal articulable facts from the anonymous informant to support the bare assertion that the vehicle was suspicious. See, Olson v. Commissioner of Public Safety, 371 N.W.2d 552 (Minn.1985). This case differs from Wibben in that Sergeant Hanson was unable to personally verify the details of the tip by his own observations. By the time he arrived at the trailer park the vehicle was no longer parked in front of the trailer. The vehicle was being driven. There is nothing in the record that justifies a suspicion that Nelson was, or was about to be, engaged in criminal activity. We conclude that Sergeant Hanson did not have an articulable and reasonable suspicion for stopping Nelson's vehicle for investigation.
Reversed.
ERICKSTAD, C.J., and VANDE WALLE, LEVINE and MESCHKE, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  There is nothing in the record to indicate that both calls were made by the same person.

=== CASE 9737788 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:34:34.687733+00 ===

Mr. PRESIDING JUSTICE MILLS delivered the opinion of the court: The principle of liberal pleading simply cannot be stretched to encompass a paucity and dearth of allegations. There must be a bottom line on even barely adequate pleading, and we have reached it in this case. The minor plaintiff brought an action to recover damages for an injury suffered while using playground equipment on school grounds in the control of the defendant school district. Plaintiffs second amended complaint was dismissed with prejudice for failure to state a cause of action. We affirm. On October 11, 1978, plaintiff filed a complaint for personal injury resulting from defendant’s negligence, asserting that the plaintiff was injured while using playground equipment controlled by the defendant. Defendant’s motion to dismiss was allowed and on June 6,1979, plaintiff filed an amended complaint alleging wilful and wanton misconduct on the part of the defendant. Following a hearing, plaintiff was allowed to file a second amended complaint. Paragraph 8 of that complaint stated: “Defendant, by its agents and employees, was then and there guilty of one or more of the following acts of wilful and wanton misconduct: a. Failed to keep its playground equipment in proper repair, specifically leaving nails protruding dangerously from said equipment, when it knew or should have known of the existence of said protruding nails. b. Maintained its playground and playground equipment in a condition it knew or should have known was unsafe and dangerous. c. Failed to notify or warn Plaintiff and others of the dangerous and unsafe playground equipment, even though it knew or should have known such equipment was dangerously unsafe.” Another motion to dismiss was filed by the defendant and on January 15, 1980, the trial court dismissed the second complaint with prejudice. Plaintiff initially argues that this cáse is controlled by the decision in Gerrity v. Beatty (1978), 71 Ill. 2d 47, 373 N.E.2d 1323, and that he must merely plead and prove negligence on the part of the defendant. Plaintiff argues that the allegations of wilful and wanton conduct in his amended complaint can be ignored as surplusage, and the complaint can be read as stating .a cause of action in negligence. Defendant argues that even under the liberal pleading rules, the basic purpose of pleading is notice to the other party, and it is clear from any reading of the second amended complaint that the action was based on wilful and wanton misconduct and not negligence. Defendant thus reasons that the sole question on appeal is whether the allegations in the plaintiff’s second amended complaint give rise to any inference of wilful and wanton activity.  There are certain general rules of construction to be applied when a complaint is challenged for failure to state a cause of action. The essential test of the sufficiency of the complaint is whether it reasonably informs the defendant of a valid claim under a general class of cases of which the court has jurisdiction. (Kramer v. McDonald’s System, Inc. (1978), 61 Ill. App. 3d 947, 378 N.E.2d 522, aff’d on other grounds (1979), 77 Ill. 2d 323, 396 N.E.2d 504.) In determining the sufficiency of the complaint, the court must accept as true all well pleaded facts and reasonable inferences drawn therefrom. (Morse v. Nelson (1977), 48 Ill. App. 3d 895, 363 N.E.2d 167.) No pleading is bad in substance where it reasonably informs the opposite party of the nature of the claim. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1979, ch. 110, par. 42(2).) Finally, a complaint should not be dismissed for failure to state a cause of action unless it clearly appears that no set of facts could be proved under pleadings which would entitle plaintiff to relief. Cain v. American National Bank & Trust Co. (1975), 26 Ill. App. 3d 574, 325 N.E.2d 799.  The second amended complaint in this case specified certain acts which the plaintiff alleged constituted wilful and wanton misconduct. Nowhere in the complaint does the plaintiff assert any acts which constitute negligence or that the defendant was in any way negligent. The fact that the original complaint was grounded in negligence and the two subsequent complaints asserted wilful and wanton misconduct tends to indicate that the plaintiffs had switched theories. In this situation, the complaint did not adequately apprise the defendant that plaintiff was proceeding on a theory of negligence and is therefore insufficient to state a cause of action in negligence. Plaintiff also argues that the allegations contained in the second amended complaint are sufficient to plead a cause of action on a theory of wilful and wanton misconduct. The dispute centers around the “knew or should have known” language under Paragraph 8 of the complaint. Defendant argues that the “should have known” test is the standard for negligence and since the allegations of Paragraph 8 would allow a jury to hold defendant liable for mere negligent conduct, it is insufficient to state a cause of action for wilful and wanton misconduct. Plaintiff cites a number of cases where courts have held that a person is guilty of wilful or wanton misconduct when he commits an act under circumstances exhibiting a reckless disregard for the safety of others, such as a failure (after knowledge of impending danger) to exercise ordinary care to prevent it, or a failure to discover the danger through recklessness or carelessness when it could have been discovered by the exercise of ordinary care. See, e.g., Marquart v. Toledo, Peoria & Western R.R. Co. (1975), 30 Ill. App. 3d 431, 333 N.E.2d 558; Schneiderman v. Interstate Transit Lines, Inc. (1946), 394 Ill. 569, 69 N.E.2d 293.  But we agree with the defendant and the trial court. We hold that the complaint was insufficient to state a cause of action based on wilful and wanton misconduct because it fails to assert either knowledge or recklessness on the part of the defendant. (See Turner v. Commonwealth Edison Co. (1976), 35 Ill. App. 3d 331, 341 N.E.2d 488.) As the court in Rowe v. Frazer (1967), 83 Ill. App. 2d 367, 377, 227 N.E.2d 781, 786, stated: “A wanton act involves a conscious indifference to a known danger. It is based on the concept that under the known or plainly observable circumstances the doing or failing to do something will naturally and probably result in injury to another, and the defendant must have been aware of that situation and ignored it. [Citations.]” Although this opinion speaks for itself, a few remarks are in order to prevent the reader from being misled by the dissent. Initially, the dissent claims that a count which is “mislabeled” as wilful and wanton conduct will withstand a motion to dismiss if it states another good cause of action. One wonders how the dissent concludes that the complaint was “mislabeled.” Plaintiff makes no such allegation. The dissent also utilizes quotations from the cases of Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Co. v. La Salle National Bank (1979), 77 Ill. App. 3d 478, 395 N.E.2d 1193, and Rosenberg v. Packerland Packing Co. (1977), 55 Ill. App. 3d 959, 370 N.E.2d 1235, as setting forth “THE LAW.” It is a curious rule that a pleading is sufficient to withstand a motion to dismiss if any good cause of action is stated, although not one intended by the plaintiff. This rule provides the heart and soul of the dissent. While the rule has been cited in a few cases, to our view it has never been stretched to the dimensions the dissent now suggests. The most interesting aspect of this rule is its origin. The authorities who, like the dissent, mistakenly cite the rule as “THE LAW,” uniformly cite to 2 Nichols, Illinois Civil Practice §1413 (Rev. ed. 1979), to support this proposition. But an examination of the most recent edition of Nichols reveals that it cites Rosenberg and Browning v. Heritage Insurance Co. (1975), 33 Ill. App. 3d 943, 338 N.E.2d 912, as support for this statement. Both Rosenberg and Browning, however, rely on the earlier edition of Nichols as support for this rule! The logical question is which came first, the chicken or the egg? Or, is it merely “bootstrapping?” But aside from the suspect parentage of this rule, we question its validity. One wonders how a complaint which espouses a theory unintended by the plaintiff can be sufficient to place the defendant on notice of the nature of the claim? The logical extension of this rule is a complete abolition of the concept of pleading. The plaintiff merely approaches the bench with a story and the court identifies, or even creates, a theory of recovery. The dissent sadly misperceives the purpose of pleadings and the proper role of the judiciary in an adversarial system. If a plaintiff’s attorney does not even have a duty to properly present his claim to the court, what reason is there for the attorney to receive a fee? One can also take issue with the quotations the dissent extracts from the Rosenberg and Great Atlantic cases. Just as the blind man is unable to perceive the elephant by touch, the selective extraction and interpretation of these cases by the dissent has created a whole new creature. For instance, the dissent fails to point out that the portion of the Rosenberg opinion upon which it relies was an appeal pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 308 (73 Ill. 2d R. 308), with the trial court posing a question of the law asking only under what circumstances may a principal be liable for the outrageous conduct of its agent where there is no contact. Since the trial court had denied the defendant’s motion to dismiss that count of the complaint, the sufficiency of the allegations was not even presented to the court. Likewise, in the Great Atlantic case, the court indicated that the complaint purported to state a cause of action and trespass. After noting that trespass requires a wrongful interference with the actual possessory interest in property, the court concluded that the complaint was sufficient to state a cause of action to enjoin interference with a lease-hold interest including easements appurtenant thereto. Both cases are clearly distinguishable from the instant appeal — both in substance and degree. The dissent also quibbles with our Turner citation. We point out that the signal “see” is used where the cited authority constitutes the basic source material that supports the proposition; it is used instead of “no signal” when the proposition is not stated by the cited authority but falls from it. (Uniform System of Citation 6-7 (12th ed. 1976).) If one continues to read Turner beyond the point described by the dissent, the following is found: “In order to constitute ‘wilful and wanton’ misconduct, the act or omission must be not only negligent, but exhibit a conscious disregard for the safety of others. [See Yelinich v. Capalongo, 38 Ill. App. 2d 199, 186 N.E.2d 777.] * * * While we agree with the plaintiff that the knowledge may be either actual or constructive, there must be a conscious disregard or indifference for the consequences when the known safety of others is involved. [Myers v. Krajefska, 8 Ill. 2d 322, 134 N.E.2d 277; Murphy v. Jewel Companies, Inc., 24 Ill. App. 3d 1, 320 N.E.2d 47.] As was observed in Ritter v. Ferenczi, 16 Ill. App. 3d 218, 305 N.E.2d 426, at 430, ‘ “Wilful and wanton conduct is carelessness, but carelessness is not wilful and wanton misconduct.” [Rowe v. Frazer, 83 Ill. App. 2d 367, 378-379, 227 N.E.2d 781, 786.]’ ” 35 Ill. App. 3d 331, 337-38, 341 N.E.2d 488, 493. As a final point, we would be remiss if we did not point out that the dissent overlooks perhaps the most crucial factor in this case — the earlier complaint. Did the plaintiff appeal the earlier dismissal of the negligence complaint? No. Rather, the plaintiff decided to file another complaint which she denominated as “wilful and wanton” misconduct. We are now asked to disregard her words and express actions and go back to the first negligence complaint. We decline the invitation. The trial court’s dismissal of plaintiff’s second amended complaint with prejudice was proper. Affirmed. WEBBER, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9737789 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:34:34.692541+00 ===

Mr. JUSTICE CRAVEN, dissenting: The majority has misapplied the law of pleading, and I am compelled to dissent. The complaint alleges that the school district knew of the protruding nails. Alternatively, the pleader states that the school district should have known of the protruding nails. The majority focuses on the second alternative and claims that the complaint fails to state a cause of action for wilful and wanton conduct. My thesis is that the first alternative premised upon actual knowledge states a good cause of action for wilful and wanton conduct; I also believe that the second alternative is sufficient to state a good cause of action for wilful and wanton conduct. I go even further and claim that if a good cause for wilful and wanton conduct is not stated by the complaint, then a good cause for negligence is stated. Even the casual reader will see that the majority is wrong when it states that the complaint “fails to assert either knowledge or recklessness.” Knowledge of the dangerous condition is clearly stated in the complaint. I trust that all would agree that a school district is guilty of wilful and wanton conduct if it knows that its school ground equipment has nails protruding from it, fails to correct the situation, fails to warn of it, and a nine-year-old student rips himself upon a nail. Please reread the quotation from Rowe v. Frazer (1967), 83 Ill. App. 2d 367, 377, 227 N.E.2d 781, 786, quoted by the majority. Defendant has argued in this court that the “should have known” language of the complaint is a standard for negligence. The majority adopts this view and claims that the complaint is deficient because it fails to assert recklessness. The majority says that we are to “see” Turner v. Commonwealth Edison Co. (1976), 35 Ill. App. 3d 331, 341 N.E.2d 488.1 have seen it, and it says that under the Structural Work Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1979, ch. 48, par. 60 et seq.) the word “wilfully” is synonymous with “knowingly.” A person will be deemed to have known that which he reasonably should have known. Liability under the Act exists where the existence of dangerous conditions could have been ascertained by the exercise of reasonable care. The court concluded in Turner, from the evidence a jury could find, and did find “that the defendant knew, or should have known” of dangerous operations and conditions. 35 Ill. App. 3d 331, 335, 341 N.E.2d 488, 492. Further, in determining whether plaintiff in Turner had produced sufficient evidence of wilful and wanton conduct under another count, the appellate court concluded that he had not. But the court agreed with plaintiff that the knowledge of a defendant could be either actual or constructive. The opinion in Turner does not support the majority’s conclusion that recklessness must be alleged. Legal conclusions such as “negligence,” “wilful and wanton conduct,” “recklessness” need not be alleged. Section 42(2) of the Civil Practice Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1979, ch. 110, par. 42(2)) states clearly and unequivocally: “No pleading is bad in substance which contains such information as reasonably informs the opposite party of the nature of the claim or defense which he is called upon to meet.” The characterization of acts as “wilful and wanton,” “reckless,” or “negligent” is not necessary. In a cause based on negligence, no specific form of words is required to state the negligence on which the action is based. (Miller v. S.S. Kresge Co. (1922), 306 Ill. 104, 137 N.E. 385; 2 Nichols, Illinois Civil Practice §961 (Rev. ed. 1979).) There need not be an express allegation that the act was “negligent.” It is the facts alleged that are important. If from the alleged facts a judge can see that all elements of the cause of action are stated, then characterizations are unimportant and the complaint will survive a motion to dismiss for failure to state a cause of action. If the facts are said to be negligence, and don’t show it, then the characterization as negligence is equally unimportant and the complaint is subject to the motion. What has been said as to negligence applies equally as well as to the other two characterizations. It must be beyond dispute that “should have known” knowledge is sufficient for wilful and wanton conduct. (Turner; Restatement (Second) of Torts §500; Prosser, Torts §34 (4th ed. 1971).) The difference between wilful and wanton conduct or negligence is a difference of degree only. Whether or not there has been wilful and wanton conduct in any given case necessitates close scrutiny of the facts as disclosed by the evidence. Myers v. Krajefska (1956), 8 Ill. 2d 322, 134 N.E.2d 277. I would hold that the allegations of the complaint state a good cause of action because the school district either knew or should have known of the dangerous condition. Finally, we come to my contention that a count mislabeled as wilful and wanton conduct will withstand a motion to dismiss if it states another good cause of action — in this case, negligence. Here is the law: “On a motion to dismiss a complaint for insufficiency, every intendment and fair inference is in favor of the pleadings, and if under any aspect of the facts stated the plaintiff could recover, the motion should be denied. (See Kenneke v. First National Bank (1978), 65 Ill. App. 3d 10, 382 N.E.2d 309; Matchett v. Rose (1976), 36 Ill. App. 3d 638, 344 N.E.2d 770.) A motion to dismiss should be denied if a good cause of action is stated, although not the one intended by plaintiff. (2 Nichols, Illinois Civil Practice §1413 (1961).) Although count I is denominated by plaintiff a cause of action for trespass, we find it sufficient as an action to enjoin interference with a leasehold interest, including easements appurtenant thereto, to withstand a motion to dismiss.” Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Co. v. La Salle National Bank (1979), 77 Ill. App. 3d 478, 482, 395 N.E.2d 1193, 1196-97. “Plaintiffs contend that defendant Packerland should be held liable under count II for intentionally hiring an unstable driver, while defendant Packerland argues that plaintiffs are attempting to espouse a theory of negligent hiring in count II. We agree that our courts recognize a cause of action for negligent or reckless hiring of an employee who commits a criminal or intentional act outside the scope of employment. (Tatham v. Wabash R.R. Co. (1952), 412 Ill. 568, 107 N.E.2d 735; Becken v. Manpower, Inc. (7th Cir. 1976), 532 F.2d 56.) However, we construe count II to allege an entrustment theory; that defendant Packerland wilfully, wantonly, or intentionally entrusted its truck to a driver it knew or should have known was emotionally and mentally unstable and unsuitable, had a disposition for intentional conduct which would cause or strike fear into other persons using roadways reserved for the general public, and was probably insane. A motion to dismiss does riot lie if a good cause of action is stated, although not the one intended by plaintiff(s). Browning v. Heritage Insurance Co. (2d Dist. 1975), 33 Ill. App. 3d 943, 947, 338 N.E.2d 912; Nichols, Illinois Civil Practice §1413 (1961).” Rosenberg v. Packerland Packing Co. (1977), 55 Ill. App. 3d 959, 964, 370 N.E.2d 1235, 1239. No one appears to dispute that this boy could recover for the school district’s simple negligence in failing to maintain its equipment, upon proper proof. Gerrity v. Beatty (1978), 71 Ill. 2d 47, 373 N.E.2d 1323. I also note the rule that unnecessary allegations (e.g., wilful and wanton) are surplusage and can be disregarded. The test is whether the alleged surplusage could be stricken and still leave a good pleading. 2 Nichols, Illinois Civil Practice §766 (Rev. ed. 1979). The substantive effect of the majority opinion is to impose a strict, even formalistic, pleading rule upon the minor plaintiff. I dissent.

=== CASE 9737790 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:34:35.010216+00 ===

BUCHANAN, Chief Judge.
CASE SUMMARY
Luther Young (Young) challenges the revocation of the suspension of sentences *1085imposed following his guilty plea to the charges of Unlawful Use of a Credit Card and Uttering a Forged Instrument.
We affirm in part and reverse and remand in part.
FACTS
The evidence most favorable to the State indicates the following:
On September 2, 1976, Young was charged by information with Unlawful Use of a Credit Card and Uttering a Forged Instrument. On November 3, 1976, Young entered a guilty plea to both charges, and was given two concurrent sentences of one year, and two to fourteen years. However, following a hearing held pursuant to Young’s Petition for Treatment In Lieu of Sentencing, the sentences were held in abeyance pending a report from the Department of Mental Health.
At a subsequent hearing, held December 17, 1976, the court found Young to be a drug abuser and likely to be rehabilitated through treatment. The court therefore committed Young to the Indiana Department of Mental Health “for a period not to exceed three years or until further order.” (R. at 62).
Young progressed relatively well during his in-patient treatment. After about one year as an in-patient, Young became an out-patient at an Indianapolis facility, and continued to adhere to his probationary drug treatment program for roughly five more months. He was arrested for robbery, however, on June 23, 1978.
The record in this case includes a chronological compilation of correspondence and pleadings relating to Young’s criminal history in the Marion County Superior Court, Criminal Division 2, resulting from the September, 1976 charges involving the credit card. Some of those records (Notice of Probation Violation; Amended Notice of Probation Violation), also contain references to other convictions of the Defendant, including Attempted Voluntary Manslaughter and two counts of theft from Johnson County for which Defendant was convicted December 14, 1978. With the exception of the Johnson County theft convictions, all of Defendant’s other appearances in the courts occurred in Marion Superior Court, Criminal Division 2.
On May 15 and May 22, 1979, a Probation Violation Hearing was held in Marion Criminal Court. During that hearing, the State sought to introduce evidence of Defendant’s prior convictions, sentences, and probation through the testimony of Young’s probation officer, and one of the supervisors of the drug rehabilitation program Young was enrolled in. Defense counsel made continuing hearsay objections to the testimony of these individuals, arguing that they had no firsthand knowledge of the convictions or terms of probation. All such objections were overruled, and the previously suspended sentences for Unlawful Credit Card Use and Uttering a Forged Instrument were imposed.
Defendant appeals from revocation of his probation.
ISSUES
Defendant raises the following issues on appeal:
1. Does the record establish Young’s pri- or sentences and probation history?
2. Were the conditions of Young’s probation too vague to be applicable?
3. Did the evidence support the finding that Young violated the conditions of his probation?
4. Did the evidence support the finding that Young was convicted of another crime prior to the expiration of his probation?
5. Did the court properly sentence Young by ordering his previously suspended sentences to “run consecutively to any other sentences he may be serving?
DECISION
We affirm the trial court on issues one through four, and remand for further findings regarding issue five.
*1086
ISSUES 1-4
With the exception of the Johnson County Theft convictions, all of Defendant’s involvement with the prosecutorial authorities occurred in the Marion County Superior Court, Criminal Division 2. The record in this case contains references to other prosecutions involving the same defendant in the same court. Although defense counsel interposed hearsay objections to the testimony produced by the State, and although those objections were cogent as to their hearsay character, it is well established that a court judicially knows its own records. Starkie v. State (1943), 113 Ind.App. 589, 49 N.E.2d 968.
As to the matters involving the prosecution of Young for the 1976 charges of false credit card use and uttering a forged instrument, “The.... court takes judicial knowledge of the facts disclosed by the record in any given case.” State v. Simpson (1906), 166 Ind. 211, 76 N.E. 544, 545, reh. at 166 Ind. 215, 76 N.E. 1005. Furthermore, the commentators have recognized that “it is settled, of course, that the courts, trial and appellate, take notice of their own respective records in the present litigation, both as to matters occurring in the immediate trial, and in previous trials or hearings,” McCormick, Evidence, 2d Ed. § 330 at 766 (1972). (emphasis added.)
Because the court will take judicial notice of earlier determinations involving the same parties which are vital to the determination of the present action, Ensor v. Bennett (1921), 76 Ind.App. 467, 132 N.E. 379, any misconduct involving Defendant aired in Judge Brewer’s court was properly within the evidence considered by the trier of fact at the revocation hearing. Additionally, because there is a principle of law to the effect that the court may hear evidence in order to inform itself of that which it takes judicial knowledge, Apple v. Greenfield Banking Co. (1971), 255 Ind. 602, 266 N.E.2d 13, there was no error in allowing the State to examine correction Department employees as to information which, while hearsay to them, was judicially noticed by the court. So there was evidence properly before the court, except for the Johnson County conviction, that Defendant violated the terms of his probation.
Defendant’s second alleged issue, pertaining to the vagueness of the terms of his probation, must also fail. The order committed Young to the Department of Mental Health, “for a period not to exceed three years or until further order of (the committing) court.” R. at 62. Clearly, such an order places Defendant under the supervision of the Department. Young knew that under their supervision he was to attend certain out-patient meetings. This he failed to do. Furthermore, he was arrested for robbery on June 23, 1978, well within the three year probationary period.
Because the initial commitment came from, and all subsequent correspondence from the Department of Mental Health regarding Young’s progress came into the same court which revoked his probation, judicial notice was properly taken of both the terms of the probation and the violations thereof.
Thus, we affirm the trial court’s findings in issues one through four, supra.
ISSUE 5
We must hold differently, however, as to Defendant’s issue number five. A trial court has no authority to order the previously suspended sentences to run consecutive to any other sentence.1 Consecutive sentences must be authorized by statute. Williams v. State (1977), Ind., 366 N.E.2d 642; Baldock v. State (1978), Ind.App., 379 N.E.2d 539. At the time of Young’s convictions for Unlawful Use of a Credit Card and Uttering a Forged Instrument there was no statute allowing previously suspended sentences, imposed as the result of a probation violation, to run consecutive to a sentence imposed for an offense committed during the probation and prior to revocation. The existing law, which would require consecutive sentences, I.C. 35-50-1-2 (Burns Code Ed., Repl.1979), is not applicable. Without consideration of *1087an ex post facto question, the savings clause of the new penal code of which I.C. 35-50-1-2 is a part provides:
“(a) Neither this act nor Acts 1976, P.L. 148 affects:
(1) rights or liabilities accrued;
(2) penalties incurred; or
(3) proceedings begun;
before October 1, 1977. Those rights, liabilities, and proceedings are continued, and penalties shall be imposed and enforced as if this act and Acts 1976, P.L. 148 had not been enacted.”
Acts 1977, P.L. 340, Sec. 150, p. 1611.
The probation revocation is a continuation of the same proceeding which was commenced when Young was first charged with his prepenal code offenses which culminated in his convictions of Unlawful Use of a Credit Card and Uttering a Forged Instrument. Therefore, when his probation was revoked and his original sentences, previously suspended, were ordered executed, the sentences commence as if I.C. 35-50-1-2 did not exist by the very terms of the savings clause. Prior to I.C. 35-50-1-2 a sentence commences at the time it is given and ordered executed. See, Stuck v. State (1972), 259 Ind. 291, 286 N.E.2d 652.
Therefore, we reverse and remand solely for the purpose of correcting Young’s sentences and commitments by striking the verbiage concerning their being consecutive to another sentence.
Otherwise the judgmént is affirmed.
SHIELDS, J., concurs in part and concurs in result in part with opinion.
SULLIVAN, J., concurs in part and concurs with SHIELDS’, J., opinion.
. We express no opinion as to whether the converse is true.

=== CASE 9737791 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:34:35.014863+00 ===

SHIELDS, Judge,
concurring in part and concurring in result in part.
I concur in Issue 5 and concur in result in Issues 1^4.
I choose to address separately Issues 1-4 because I have reservations about certain conclusions reached by Judge Buchanan and further believe Judge Buchanan’s language on judicial knowledge is overly broad.
Issue 1. Does the record establish Young’s prior sentences and probation history?
The testimony of Willie Storie, a probation officer with the Marion County Criminal Court Probation Department, received without objection, establishes the prior history of this proceeding. Storie testified at the probation revocation hearing that Young was convicted in the trial court on November 19, 1976 of the unlawful use of a credit card and uttering a forged instrument. He further stated Young received the benefit of P.L. 591 and, as a result, had his statutory sentences suspended and received three years probation. Therefore, Young’s first issue is meritless.
Issue 2. Were the conditions of Young’s probation too vague to be applicable?
Only two alleged conditions of Young’s probation are in issue: (1) that Young successfully complete the P.L. 59 drug treatment program and (2) that Young not be convicted of a subsequent offense.
At the probation revocation hearing Sto-rie testified the probation agreement, signed by Young, contained the condition that he complete the P.L. 59 drug treatment during his three years probationary period. Further, Young’s verified application for treatment as a drug abuser contains the following:
“8. That he has been advised by his attorney that if Defendant elects to receive treatment and is accepted, he may be placed on probation ... and if he adheres to the treatment program and fulfills the other conditions of probation, he will be discharged, but any failure to adhere to the treatment program is a breach of probation which could result in revocation of probation and execution of sentence.”
This evidence is sufficient to permit a reasonable factfinder to conclude that a condition of Young’s probation, known to him, was his successful completion of the drug treatment program.
*1088The record is devoid of any evidence that the probation agreement contained any condition relating to a subsequent conviction. However, this deficiency is cured by I.C. 35-7-2-2 (Burns Code Ed.) which provides:
“... If it shall appear that the defendant has violated the terms of his probation or has been found guilty of having committed another offense, the court may revoke the probation or the suspension of sentence and may impose any sentence which might originally have been imposed.”
Therefore, it is inconsequential that the evidence fails to establish the probation agreement contained a condition relating to a subsequent conviction. The statute specifically provides that under the circumstances of a subsequent conviction the trial court may revoke the probation and impose sentence.
Issues 3 and 4: Did the evidence support the finding that Young violated the conditions of his probation? Did the evidence support the finding that Young was convicted of another crime prior to the expiration of his probation?
The evidence supports the finding that Young was convicted of a subsequent offense within the period of his probation. Mr. Storie testified Young received three years probation. While the record is unclear as to the date of sentencing, the earliest possible date is November 19, 1976. Hence the three years had not elapsed on May 4, 1979, the date Storie testified, without objection, that Young was sentenced by this same trial court for the offense of attempted voluntary manslaughter, necessarily a new penal code offense. Therefore, the evidence supports the trial court’s revocation of Young’s probation on the basis he committed a subsequent crime contrary to the provisions of I.C. 35-7-2-2.
Finally, I take advantage of Judge Buchanan’s comments on the cogent objections made by Young’s counsel at the revocation hearing to make the observation that evi-dentiary objections guard rights and must not be deprecated. Counsel, even in the face of hostility, must persevere in exercising the right to protect the client and, at the same time, the trial judge must recognize counsel’s duty and exercise judicial restraint to ensure counsel has the opportunity to make his record.
. Acts 1974, P.L. 59, Sec. 18, p. 253.

=== CASE 9737792 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:34:35.282996+00 ===

POPOVICH, Chief Justice.
The facts of this case are reported in Minnesota v. Hershberger, 444 N.W.2d 282 (Minn.1989) (Hershberger I). On appeal of that decision to the United States Supreme Court, certiorari was granted, the judgment was vacated, and the case was remanded to this court for reconsideration in light of the decision in Employment Div., Dep’t of Human Resources of Oregon v. Smith, 494 U.S. -, 110 S.Ct. 1595, 108 L.Ed.2d 876 (1990) (Smith II). Minnesota v. Hershberger, 494 U.S. -, 110 S.Ct. 1918, 109 L.Ed.2d 282 (1990). By order dated June 8, 1990, we required the parties to address two issues:
1. Whether Employment Div., Dep’t of Human Resources of Oregon v. Smith, 494 U.S. -, 110 S.Ct. 1595, 108 L.Ed.2d 876 (1990), is controlling upon this court’s application of the free exercise clause of the first amendment of the United States Constitution in this case; and
2. Whether Minn.Stat. § 169.522 (1988) when applicable to these appellants violates rights protected by article I, section 16 of the Minnesota Constitution.
I.
At the outset, we must address the state’s request that this court reconsider our findings in Hershberger I, that the Amish appellants hold a sincere religious belief which forbids use of the SMV symbol, and that a less restrictive alternative to use of the symbol exists. While it is true that the United States Supreme Court’s vacation of Hershberger I leaves that decision without force or effect, Threlkeld v. Robbinsdale Fed’n of Teachers, Local 872, AFL-CIO, 316 N.W.2d 551, 552 (Minn.), appeal dismissed, 459 U.S. 802, 103 S.Ct. 24, 74 L.Ed.2d 40 (1982), the record before us remains as it was when we found the Amish appellants to have demonstrated a personal sincere religious belief in conflict with the SMV statute and the state to have failed to demonstrate that use of silver reflective tape in conjunction with lighted red lanterns does not constitute a less restrictive alternative to the SMV symbol. Hershberger I, 444 N.W.2d at 287, 289.
Reconsideration of these issues would be proper if the Supreme Court had *396based its remand on a perceived error in their determination. See, e.g., Hill v. Western Elec. Co. 672 F.2d 381, 387-89 (4th Cir.) (court may reinstate prior findings upon remand after vacation on appeal if error has not affected the merits of the determination sought to be reinstated), cert. denied 459 U.S. 981, 103 S.Ct. 318, 74 L.Ed.2d 294 (1982); 18 Wright, Miller & Cooper, Federal Practice and Procedure, § 4432, at 171 (1990 Supp.) (“Following vacation by an appellate court and remand, * * * it may at times be appropriate to cure the defect that led to the appellate decision and to reinstate the original findings in the course of continued proceedings in the same case.” (emphasis added). The vacation and remand in this case goes to the application, as part of first amendment free exercise analysis, of the compelling state interest/least restrictive alternative test, and not to any perceived error in this court’s findings in Hershberger I. Appellants have demonstrated a willingness to be incarcerated to avoid using a symbol whose color and meaning are antithetical to their faith, establishing that their religious belief in opposition to the SMV symbol is sincere. We note again the state failed to establish use of reflective tape with lighted red lanterns is not a less restrictive alternative protecting public safety.
II.
While the practical application of Smith II remains to be seen, the Supreme Court appears to have significantly changed first amendment free exercise analysis. The Smith II court held a law of general application, which does not intend to regulate religious belief or conduct, is not invalid because the law incidentally infringes on religious practices. This holding apparently does away with the traditional compelling state interest test for laws burdening the exercise of religion standing alone. 494 U.S. at -, 110 S.Ct. at 1599-1603. The Smith II court limited the compelling state interest test used by this court in Hershberger I to claims involving not the free exercise clause alone, but free exercise in conjunction with other constitutional protections. Id. at -, 110 S.Ct. at 1601. These so called “hybrid” cases involve free exercise claims that touch on other constitutional protections ranging from parental rights, e.g., Wisconsin v. Yoder, 406 U.S. 205, 92 S.Ct. 1526, 32 L.Ed.2d 15 (1972), to freedom of speech and press. E.g., Murdock v. Pennsylvania, 319 U.S. 105, 63 S.Ct. 870, 87 L.Ed. 1292 (1943). Section 169.522 does not intend to regulate religious conduct or belief. Accordingly, under the first amendment free exercise clause as now interpreted by Smith II, whether the compelling state interest test is applicable apparently depends on whether requiring the Amish to comply with the SMV statute infringes on rights other than the free exercise of religion.
To establish a hybrid case under Smith II, appellants argue the compelled use of the SMV symbol touches on freedoms of assembly, speech, travel and particularly, freedom of association. The Amish community demonstrates the attributes of those associations traditionally deserving constitutional protection. The Amish community embodies “deep attachments and commitments to the necessarily few other individuals with whom one shares not only a special community of thoughts, experiences, and beliefs but also distinctively personal aspects of one’s life.” Roberts v. United States Jaycees, 468 U.S. 609, 620, 104 S.Ct. 3244, 3250, 82 L.Ed.2d 462 (1984). The United States Supreme Court has recognized that religious practices of the Amish “pervade[] and determine[] the entire mode of life of * * * adherents.” Yoder, 406 U.S. at 210, 92 S.Ct. at 1530. Buggy and other slow moving vehicle transportation is an integral part of the Amish communal life and worship, so that a statute infringing on such transportation impairs associational freedoms.
While there might be merit in deciding the case and affirming Hershberger I based on associational freedoms also infringed by the statute, thereby distinguishing Smith II, we decline to do so. It is unnecessary to rest our decision on the uncertain meaning of Smith II when the Minnesota Constitution alone provides an *397independent and adequate state constitutional basis on which to decide. See, e.g., Michigan v. Long, 463 U.S. 1032, 1040, 103 S.Ct. 3469, 3476, 77 L.Ed.2d 1201 (1983) (respect for independence of state courts avoids federal review of issues of state law); L. Tribe, American Constitutional Law § 3-24, at 165-66 (2d ed. 1988) (doctrine of independent and adequate state grounds prevents interference with state’s interest in developing and applying its own law). We therefore decline to decide the applicability of Smith II to the facts before us.
III.
We address now the issue we reserved for another day in Hershberger I: whether Minn.Stat. § 169.522, when applicable to these appellants, violates rights protected by article I, section 16 of the Minnesota Constitution. 444 N.W.2d at 284. Section 16 states:
The enumeration of rights in this constitution shall not deny or impair others retained by and inherent in the people. The right of every man to worship God according to the dictates of his own conscience shall never be infringed; nor shall any man be compelled to attend, erect or support any place of worship, or to maintain any religious or ecclesiastical ministry, against his consent; nor shall any control of or interference with the rights of conscience be permitted, or any preference be given by law to any religious establishment or mode of worship; but the liberty of conscience hereby secured shall not be so construed as to excuse acts of licentiousness or justify practices inconsistent with the peace or safety of the state, nor shall any money be drawn from the treasury for the benefit of any religious societies or religious or theological seminaries.
Minn. Const, art. I, § 16 (emphasis added). This language is of a distinctively stronger character than the federal counterpart, which states only that “Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof * * U.S. Const, amend. I. Whereas the first amendment establishes a limit on government action at the point of prohibiting the exercise of religion, section 16 precludes even an infringement on or an interference with religious freedom. Accordingly, government actions that may not constitute an outright prohibition on religious practices (thus not violating the first amendment) could nonetheless infringe on or interfere with those practices, violating the Minnesota Constitution. Commentators have noted “the state Bill of Rights expressly grants affirmative rights in the area[] of * * * religious worship while the corresponding federal provision simply attempts to restrain governmental action.” Fleming & Nordby, The Minnesota Bill of Rights: “Wrapt in the Old Miasmal Mist”, 7 Hamline L.Rev. 51, 67 (1984).
Section 16 also expressly limits the governmental interests that may outweigh religious liberty. Only the government’s interest in peace or safety or against acts of licentiousness will excuse an imposition on religious freedom under the Minnesota Constitution. Conversely, the free exercise clause of the first amendment has been interpreted to allow varied government interests to justify such an imposition. See, e.g., Bowen v. Roy, 476 U.S. 693, 707, 106 S.Ct. 2147, 2156, 90 L.Ed.2d 735 (1986) (interest in avoiding case by ease inquiries in administration of social security benefits outweighs religious freedom); Goldman v. Weinberger, 475 U.S. 503, 508, 106 S.Ct. 1310, 89 L.Ed.2d 478 (1986) (military’s interest in uniformity and discipline outweighs individual’s interest in wearing yarmulke). Because section 16 precludes an infringement on or an interference with religious freedom and limits the permissible countervailing interests of the government, Minnesotans are afforded greater protection for religious liberties against governmental action under the state constitution than under the first amendment of the federal constitution.
The state argues that by expressly including public safety as a restriction on exercise of religious freedoms, section 16 requires us to deny an exemption from the SMV statute for the Amish. The relevant provision of section 16 states:
*398[T]he liberty of conscience hereby secured shall not be so construed as to excuse acts of licentiousness or justify practices inconsistent with the peace or safety of the state, * * *.
Minn. Const, art. I, § 16. Rather than a blanket denial of a religious exemption whenever public safety is involved, only religious practices found to be inconsistent with public safety are denied an exemption. By juxtaposing individual rights of conscience with the interest of the state in public safety, this provision invites the court to balance competing values in a manner that the compelling state interest test we relied on in Hershberger I ably articulates: once a claimant has demonstrated a sincere religious belief intended to be protected by section 16, the state should be required to demonstrate that public safety cannot be achieved by proposed alternative means. Hershberger I, 444 N.W.2d at 288-89.
This analysis is similar to that applied to the claim for religious freedom based jointly on federal and state constitutional protection in State v. Sports & Health Club, 370 N.W.2d 844 (Minn.1985). While we did not expressly base our decision in Sports & Health Club on section 16 grounds, we held an exemption from the state Human Rights Act was not required, notwithstanding that sincere religious beliefs were burdened by the Act, because the state had a compelling interest in prohibiting discrimination and no less restrictive alternative existed. 370 N.W.2d at 853; see also State v. French, 460 N.W.2d 2 (Minn.1990) (plurality) (exemption based on religious grounds required under Minnesota Constitution unless state demonstrates compelling and overriding state interest in statutory purpose and in refusing to grant exemption). Thus, while the terms “compelling state interest” and “least restrictive alternative” are creatures of federal doctrine, concepts embodied therein can provide guidance as we seek to strike a balance under the Minnesota Constitution between freedom of conscience and the state's public safety interest.
Religious liberty is a precious right. The Preamble to the Constitution of the State of Minnesota states:
We, the people of the state of Minnesota, grateful to God for our civil and religious liberty, and desiring to perpetuate its blessings and secure the same to ourselves and our posterity, do ordain and establish this Constitution.
Minn. Const, preamble (emphasis added). The framers thus acknowledged religious liberty as coequal with civil liberty. The history of the adoption of the constitution indicates the importance of individual rights to the framers. See Fleming & Nordby, supra, at 70-71. This court has long recognized that individual liberties under the state constitution may deserve greater protection than those under the broadly worded federal constitution. See, e.g., State v. Fuller, 374 N.W.2d 722, 726 (Minn.1985) (double jeopardy clause); Wegan v. Village of Lexington, 309 N.W.2d 273, 281 n. 14 (Minn.1981) (equal protection); O’Connor v. Johnson, 287 N.W.2d 400, 405 (Minn.1979) (rights of criminally accused); State v. Oman, 261 Minn. 10, 21-22, 110 N.W.2d 514, 522-23 (1961) (due process); Davis v. Pierse, 7 Minn. 1, 6-7 (Gil. 1) (1862) (rights of criminally accused). Specifically as to individual religious freedom, a plurality of this court in French recognized that the early settlers of this region were of varied sects, may have endured religious intolerance in their native countries and were thus sensitive to religious differences among them. French, 460 N.W.2d at 9-10. This history supports a broad protection for religious freedom in Minnesota.
The interest in public safety is also fundamental, and serves as a rationale for the very formation of our state government. Article I, section 1 of the Minnesota Bill of Rights establishes, “Government is instituted for the security, benefit and protection of the people * * *.” Minn. Const, art. I, § 1. Protection of public safety has long been understood to include control over the public highways, roads and streets of the state. See State v. Edwards, 287 Minn. 83, 86, 177 N.W.2d 40, 42-43 (1970).
*399Competing values of such significance require this court to look for an alternative that achieves both values articulated in section 16. Specifically, if freedom of conscience and public safety can be achieved through use of an alternative to a statutory requirement that burdens freedom of conscience, in this ease the SMV symbol, section 16 requires an allowance for such an alternative. As we found in Hershberger I, the state has failed to demonstrate that use of reflective tape and a lighted red lantern proposed by the Amish is an insufficient warning to other drivers of a slow-moving buggy. 444 N.W.2d at 289. The reflective tape and lighted lantern provides an alternative that achieves both of the important values embodied in section 16: freedom of conscience and public safety.
The record in this case demonstrates an important attribute of the balancing test we adopt today for purposes of analyzing article I, section 16 of the Minnesota Constitution. The state’s interest in public safety cannot be disputed. Merely because public safety is articulated as a competing interest in section 16, however, does not establish that interest as paramount. To infringe upon religious freedoms which this state has traditionally revered, the state must demonstrate that public safety cannot be achieved through reasonable alternative means. It may be that a claim for a religious exemption from public safety laws will seldom prevail over the state’s strong interest in protecting the lives of its citizens. Today we hold only that the state has failed to provide a record which demonstrates that both values embodied in section 16, freedom of conscience and public safety, cannot be achieved through use of white reflective tape and a lighted red lantern.
The decision of the trial court denying the motion of these appellants to dismiss all pending charges is vacated, and those charges are hereby dismissed.

=== CASE 9737514 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:27:34.744195+00 ===

MR. JUSTICE SCHAEFER delivered the opinion of the court: This action was originally brought in the circuit court of Cook County on behalf of the plaintiff, Robert Lee Anderson, a minor, by his mother and next friend, Louise Anderson, against the Cosmopolitan National Bank of Chicago, Realty Service Co., Jesse Smith and Mable L. Smith, to recover damages for personal injuries allegedly suffered by the plaintiff. Thereafter leave was granted to file an amended complaint and to add William H. Suchier and Mary Murphy Suchier as defendants. Subsequently, the trial court granted the Suchiers’ motion for summary judgment, dismissed the action as to them and, acting pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 304(a), found that there was no just reason for delaying enforcement or appeal. The plaintiff appealed from the order and the appellate court reversed. (Anderson v. Cosmopolitan Nat’l Bank of Chicago (Suchier)(1971), 132 Ill. App. 2d 307.) We allowed the Suchiers’ petition for leave to appeal. The plaintiff’s amended complaint, which was further amended in the appellate court under Supreme Court Rule 362, alleged that on May 7, 1963, the plaintiff, then three years old, resided with his mother in an apartment building located at 120 South Wood Street in Chicago. It further alleged that on that date the plaintiff was injured while playing in the second-floor hallway of the building when he fell through a railing from which some slats were missing. It is undisputed that the Suchiers became the owners of the Wood Street property on March 25, 1963, when title was conveyed from Walter and Mildred Gainer to a trust of which William H. Suchier and Mary Murphy Suchier, his wife, as joint tenants, were the beneficiaries. On May 1, 1963, the Suchiers entered into an installment contract for the sale of the property for $3000 to Jessie and Mable Smith. One hundred dollars was paid down and the balance was to be paid in installments of $100 per month. No interest was to be charged if the payments were made on the first day of each month. Under the contract title was not to be conveyed until all the installment payments were made, and the seller retained the right to make repairs on the property if the purchaser did not do so. The contract provided that the buyer would keep the premises insured, and that if he did not do so the seller could, and add the amount paid for insurance to the purchase price. If the buyer failed to make an installment payment the seller could, at his option, consider the contract forfeited, retain the payments made up to that time and retake possession of the property. The Smiths took possession on May 1, 1963. In an affidavit filed in support of her motion in the appellate court for leave to file a second amended complaint, the plaintiff’s mother stated: “3. That on April 1, 1963, I rented the second floor apartment at 120 S. Wood, Chicago, Illinois, from Jessie Smith and Mable Smith, and paid $68 a month. 4. That I moved into the apartment and at that time stair railings were missing and I told the lady I was renting from, who was Mrs. Smith, to fix them and she never did. 5. That the railings were rotten and loose andl could tell that they were in bad condition and had been in bad condition for a long time before I moved in.” The plaintiff’s theory is that the defect existed prior to the date of the installment contract sale to the Smiths and that the Suchiers knew or should have known of it, and were therefore negligent in failing to keep the property in repair. The generally accepted rule in this country is that an ordinary vendor of real property is not liable for personal injuries which are sustained subsequent to his transfer of possession and control. (Maisenbach v. Buckner (1971), 133 Ill. App. 2d 53, 272 N.E.2d 851, 854; Conway v. Epstein (1964), 49 Ill. App. 2d 290; Annot., 48 A.L.R.3d 1027, 1035; Restatement 2d, Torts sec. 352.) The trial court applied this rule, and dismissed the action as to the vendors, the Suchiers. The general rule, however, is subject to an established exception when the vendor actively conceals or fails to reveal a dangerous condition to the vendee. In this situation the liability of the vendor continues until the vendee discovers the defective condition and has an opportunity to remedy it. (Restatement 2d, Torts sec. 353.) In reversing the judgment of the circuit court, the appellate court relied upon the New York case of Farragher v. City of New York (1966), 26 App. Div. 2d 494, 215 N. Y.S.2d 542, aff’d (1968), 21 N. Y.2d 156, 235 N.E.2d 218, which extended this exception to a defect which was known to the vendee, and held that even in the case of a known defect the vendor’s liability continues until a sufficient time has elapsed to permit the vendee to remedy it. And because the appellate court was of the opinion that the second amended complaint “alleges facts from which a jury could infer that the Smiths as vendees did not have a reasonable opportunity to repair the defective railing,” the judgment was reversed and the case was remanded “to permit the trial court to resolve the factual issues presented.” The New York case involved an unusual situation. The defect was the absence of an automatic sprinkler system. It was undisputed that it would take 90 days to install such a system and the accident occurred when the vendee had been in possession less than 90 days. The position there taken by the New York court does not appear to have found acceptance elsewhere, and we are not persuaded that it should be applied generally to exonerate a vendee from liability for a defective condition of which he is aware. Even if we were to apply this exception to the present case, we could not agree with the appellate court’s conclusion. Whatever may have been the relation of the Smiths to the property between April 1 and May 1, the interval between May 1, when they took possession, and May 7, when the accident occurred could not reasonably be found inadequate for the simple repairs here involved. The plaintiff does not urge us to affirm the judgment of the appellate court for the reasons stated in the opinion of that court. Rather the argument is that those who sell real estate upon installment contracts should be subjected to a different and more strict liability than is imposed upon other vendors. Specifically, it is urged that “the ‘contract seller’ should be treated as an owner or lessor” because of the significant rights that he retains under his contract. These rights usually include the right to enter and make repairs and to charge the cost to the buyer. The seller has the right to insure if the buyer fails to do so and, in the event of a default on the part of the buyer, has a simple remedy by which he may regain possession. We are not persuaded by this argument. Substantially similar arguments can be advanced with respect to mortgagees, who have the same or substantially similar rights. That the device of the installment contract as a means of financing the purchase of real estate is subject to abuse, and indeed has been abused, does not mean that it is not a useful credit device or that this court should impose upon a contract seller the liability of an owner of real estate. In our opinion the judgment of the circuit court was correct, and it is affirmed. The judgment of the appellate court is reversed. Appellate court reversed; circuit court affirmed.

=== CASE 9737515 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:27:34.748573+00 ===

MR. JUSTICE GOLDENHERSH, with whom MR. JUSTICE KLUCZYNSKI joins, dissenting: Mr. Justice Kluczynski and I respectfully dissent from the majority opinion. We would affirm the judgment of the appellate court for the reason that the circuit court, in entering judgment for the defendants, failed to follow the established rule that the right of the moving party to summary judgment must be free from doubt and the motion denied if there are triable issues of fact which, if decided favorably to the opponent of the motion, will entitle him to the relief sought in his pleadings. It is true, as stated by the majority, that the rule is generally accepted that an “ordinary” vendor of real estate is not liable for personal injuries sustained subsequent to his transfer of possession and control. The majority, however, recognize a well-defined exception to that rule that when there is a concealed dangerous or defective condition liability on the part of the vendor continues beyond discovery of the defective condition, and until there has been a reasonable “opportunity to remedy it.” Whether there has been an opportunity to remedy the defect is, of course, a question of fact. In this case the vendors sold a building, apparently in a state of disrepair and dilapidation, as evidenced by a total price of $3,000, a down payment of $100, and “rotten and loose” porch and stair railings in “bad condition.” The sale was made on May 1, 1963, and the plaintiff was injured on May 7. The same rationale which imposes liability upon one who sells property with a concealed, defective, dangerous condition until discovery, and until there has been an opportunity to repair, compels the conclusion that a vendor who sells property with a visibly dangerous defect should be held liable until a reasonably sufficient time has elapsed to permit the vendee to repair it. The only difference between the two situations is that in the case of the concealed defect the reasonable period of time commences to run from discovery, and in the case of the patently dangerous defect, from the time of relinquishment of the right to possession and control. In either instance, whether there has been a reasonable opportunity to repair is a question of fact. The majority seek to distinguish the New York case on the ground that it “involved an unusual situation.” In that case, unlike this one, it could at least be determined from the record what repairs were necessary and the length of time required to make them. Here, the majority, for reasons not apparent from this record, conclude as a matter of law that the time between May 1 and May 7 “could not reasonably be found inadequate for the simple repairs here involved.” For all this record reflects it could well be that the “rotten” condition was so extensive as to require extensive reconstruction, not merely replacement of a rail. We agree with the majority that this case need not be decided on the issue of whether a contract seller should be treated as an owner or lessor, but it should clearly be affirmed upon application of the rules governing summary judgment. We point out that the effect of the appellate court decision is not, as stated by the majority, to exonerate the vendee, but to hold the vendors in the case until the fact issues can be decided upon the evidence. In contrast, the majority opinion serves to exonerate these vendors, sellers of property in a dangerously defective condition, without a determination of the key issue of whether there was a reasonably adequate period of time after the sale to permit the repairs to be made.

=== CASE 2210863 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:59.043502+00 ===

301 N.E.2d 368 (1973)
Billie Ray ADAMS and William E. Adams, Appellants,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee.
No. 473S72.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
September 26, 1973.
Barrie C. Tremper, Public Defender, Fort Wayne, Ferdinand Samper, Sr., Indianapolis, for appellants.
Theodore L. Sendak, Atty. Gen., John H. Meyers, Deputy Atty. Gen., Indianapolis, for appellee.
PER CURIAM.
Appellants' brief was filed in this case on June 5, 1973. On August 13, 1973, the Attorney General filed his brief wherein he contends, among other things, that the appellants' brief does not contain a statement of the facts or a summary of the argument. He further points out other deficiencies in the brief including the absence of citations to support many of the points raised. The Attorney General thus urges that the appellants' brief should be dismissed for failure to comply with Rule AP. 8.3(A) (1-7).
We observe that the Attorney General is correct in his observations as to the inadequacies of the appellants' brief. However, after conference on this matter, this Court is of the opinion that to dismiss this appeal at this time would only delay the ultimate decision in this matter.
Although it is not essential in every criminal case to recite the evidence, where, as in this case, the appellants are asking this Court to pass upon the admissibility of some of the evidence presented by the State over objection of the appellants, it is necessary that we have a statement of the evidence submitted in the trial court to enable us to pass upon the questions presented.
The Court, therefore, orders the attorneys for the appellants in this cause to re-brief this case and in so doing comply with the Rules of this Court.
Attorneys for the appellants are given thirty days from receipt of a copy of this opinion from the Clerk of this Court within which to accomplish said brief.
The Clerk is ordered to mail copies of this opinion to each of the attorneys of record in this case by certified mail with return receipt requested. The date of such *369 return receipt is to be used in calculating the time for the filing of appellants' brief.
The Attorney General is given thirty days from the date of the filing of appellants' amended brief within which to file an answer brief.

=== CASE 9737516 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:27:37.796483+00 ===

J. H. Gillis, J.
Defendant Robert Farrell, a Michigan resident, was the driver of a Michigan-licensed automobile which went out of control and rolled over a number of times while proceeding west on highway 401 in the Province of Ontario, Canada. Defendant Dietrich Leasing, Incorporated, is a Michigan corporation with its principal place of business in Wayne county. Dietrich was the owner of the automobile being driven by Farrell.
At the time of the misfortune in Ontario, Farrell was en route from Buffalo, New York, to Detroit, his most direct route taking him through Ontario. There were 3 passengers in Farrell’s automobile, all of whom were New York residents: Leona Abend-schein, Darrell Abendschein and Penny Lipsitz. Leona was killed in the crash. Darrell, 12 years old, and Penny, 19 years old, were severely injured.
Plaintiff Earl Abendschein was the husband of Leona and is the personal representative of her estate. He also sues as guardian of Darrell. Plaintiff Paul Kanter is guardian for Penny. Appointments were made and letters were issued by the New York courts.
Plaintiffs brought this action in the circuit court for Wayne county alleging'that defendant Farrell operated the automobile in a grossly negligent manner with reckless and intentional disregard of his own safety and that of his passengers and was guilty of wanton and wilful misconduct. In particu*665lar, it is alleged that Farrell consumed excessive amounts of alcohol both while driving and before driving with a conscious indifference to the safety of his passengers. Plaintiffs plead that Farrell drove his automobile at an excessive rate of speed (90 miles per hour around curves) over the protestations of his passengers, and refused to slow down on their demands.
Defendants moved for summary judgment in the trial court for plaintiffs’ failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted (G-CR 1963, 117.2[1]). The motion urged that the issue of defendants’ liability must be governed by the law of Ontario, the place of the wrong. Ontario statutes (Ont Rev Stat c 172, § 105 [2] [1960]) deny recovery to a gratuitous passenger who is injured as a result of the negligence or gross negligence of the host-driver. No allegation is made that this was not a gratuitous guest-passenger relationship within the meaning of the Ontario statute.
Plaintiffs argued in the trial court, as they contend on this appeal, that Ontario law should not govern the issue of liability of a host-driver to his guest-passenger. New York allows recovery against the host for ordinary negligence (Babcock v. Jackson [1963], 12 NY2d 473 [240 NYS2d 743, 191 NE2d 279, 95 ALR2d 1]), and Michigan allows recovery for injuries sustained due to the driver’s gross negligence or wilful and wanton misconduct, OLS 1961, § 257.401 (Stat Ann 1960 Rev § 9.2101). Under the law of either New York or Michigan, plaintiffs have stated a good cause of action.
The trial judg’e granted the motion for summary judgment on the authority of Kaiser v. North (1939), 292 Mich 49, and dismissed the action. To be sure, Kaiser, decided some 29 years ago, does appear to *666be on all fours with the present case, and to compel the result reached by the trial court.
In Kaiser, two Michigan residents were driving in Ontario where their automobile was involved in an accident. The Supreme Court affirmed the summary dismissal holding first, that the law of the place of the wrong governs (the lex loci delicti) and second, that the Ontario statute did not contravene the public policy of the State of Michigan. This precise issue of what law governs the host’s responsibility ;to his guest has not been questioned since 1939.1 In Goldberg v. Koppy Tool & Die Co. (1962), 365 Mich 469, the'Court spoke in terms of law governing the guest-passenger relationship but in actuality had before it. only the question of whether defendant was negligent under the law of Tennessee. The Court did apply Tennessee law to the duty owed the passenger by her host, but a careful reading will disclose that' the choice-of-laws problem was not raised or decided.
Thus in innumerable cases the Court has said that matters relating- to the existence of a right of action, that is whether a cause of action exists, are governed by the law of the place of the wrong, but, as in Goldberg, only decided that the issue of negligence is determined by law of the place of the wrong. Leebove v. Rovin (1961), 363 Mich 569; Blake v. Brama (1955), 343 Mich 27; Slayton v. Boesch (1946), 315 Mich 1. In other cases, the Court was deciding the applicable law governing substantive rights in a suit brought under a foreign statute, Summar v. Besser Manufacturing Co. (1945), 310 Mich 347; Howard *667v. Pulver (1951), 329 Mich 415; Yount v. National Bank of Jackson (1950), 327 Mich 342.
In Bostrom v. Jennings (1949), 326 Mich 146, the Court held that the law of the place of the wrong governed the question of whether plaintiff-passenger was a joint adventurer with the driver-host. A careful reading of this case will reveal that the choice-of-laws problem was not decided. The question the Court had before it already assumed the applicability of foreign substantive law, and the Court decided whether the relationship was a matter of substance or procedure under local law.
Reviewing the post-Kaiser Michigan authority, we find that the only cases in which the Court was called upon to make a choice of conflicting substantive law were those in which the foreign standard of conduct was applied to a Michigan suit. That is, we are firmly committed to the notion that the substantive wrong being sued upon and the sufficiency of the alleged facts constituting that wrong must be governed by the law of the place of the wrong. While other cases recite a broad rule of governing laws, they were mere recitals and were not necessary to resolution of any choice of conflicting laws.
The case of Kaiser v. North, itself does specifically decide a conflicting choice-of-laws problem. Its holding cannot be distinguished from the pertinent issue in the present case; that is, that the law of the place of the wrong governs the rights and duties between nonresident hosts and passengers, who fortuitously happened to be in the state wherein the accident occurred. Plaintiffs do not attempt to distinguish the present case, and ask this Court to merely criticize the rule of Kaiser as presently being out of step with other jurisdictions. If Kaiser is to be over-iuled, to be sure that is the function of the Supreme Court.
*668Kaiser is not based on any authority which remains viable today, and, although the operative facts in the present case are indistinguishable from Kaiser, the policy facts on which that decision rested have changed radically in the intervening years— so much so that one might question whether we are even deciding the same problems raised by the Kaiser situation. Kaiser’s emphasis on comity might lend support to the argument that that case no longer stands as authority.
Kaiser and the Michigan decisions predating that case reveal that our Courts have never expressed an independent analysis or reason for the rule therein stated. Lex loci delicti was the universal rule among the jurisdictions and universality of application made the rule not only desirable in terms of predictability, but almost automatic as well, with no alternative rules being presented to the courts. The authority referred to in Kaiser included Restatement of the Law, Conflicts, § 388; 15 CJS, Conflict of Laws, §§4, 12, pp 865, 899; Beale on Conflicts, § 378.4; Goodrich on Conflicts (1st ed) § 92, p 188; and the only Michigan case cited as authority was Eskovitz v. Berger (1936), 276 Mich 536.
Esl&ovits v. Berger is well illustrative of the point that the lex loci delicti rule had simply come to be accepted in Michigan, apparently because it was, at that time, the general if not the only rule available. In Esl&ovits two Michigan residents were injured in an automobile accident which occurred in the State of Ohio. Ohio allowed recovery by a guest passenger on a showing of ordinary negligence. The Ohio statute was held to govern in the Michigan lawsuit.
Although the language of the Esl&ovits opinion is phrased in all-encompassing, sweeping choice-of-laws language (“all matters relating to the right of action are governed by the laws of Ohio,” 276 Mich *669536, 540) the decision did not deal with a choice-of-laws question. Even by the time Eskovits was decided, the doctrine of lex loci delicti was being automatically applied in this State. It is noteworthy that defendant’s brief in Eskovits did not even raise the choice-of-laws question.2 So automatic was the application of the law of the place of the wrong that defendant’s only issues on appeal were whether application of Ohio law contravened the public policy of Michigan and whether defendant was negligent under Ohio law.
Through the unfortunate use of the broad language as pointed out above, Eskovits has come to be cited as something of a leading case in this State on choice of applicable laws governing tort actions. Thus in the Kaiser Case, the unfortunate misapplication of Eskovits formed a questionable foundation for the decision.
There were other cases besides Eskovits which were decided prior to Kaiser, but like Eskovits did not actually decide the issue before the Court in Kaiser. Why Eskovits was chosen as authority is by now a historical curiosity- — other cases were only beside the point but Eskovits was unfortunate dictum. Of these pre-Kaiser decisions, the bulk deal with the law applicable to the standard of conduct or the substantive elements of the tort. It was universally accepted and would not be seriously disputed today that the measure of conduct is determined by the law of the place of the wrong, Stahl v. Bell (1936), 276 Mich 37; Meyer v. Weimaster (1936), 278 Mich 370; Edison v. Keene (1933), 262 Mich 611; and in Perkins v. Great Central Transport Corp. (1933), 262 Mich 616, a similar decision *670was dictum since foreign and local law on contributory negligence were tbe same.
In Hazard v. Great Central Transport Corp. (1935), 270 Mich 60, the Court did employ some language which might indicate a choice of laws for governing legal incidents of relationships having-had some contact with Michigan. Again, however, this language was dictum, and the dispositive issue on appeal was whether the jury’s verdict was supported by the evidence. In its dictum the decision cites the case of Young v. Masci (1933), 289 US 253 (53 S Ct 599, 77 L Ed 1158, 88 ALR 170), which merely decided whether New York could constitutionally apply its ownership statute to a New Jersey bailor of an automobile involved in an accident in New York. Young supports a broader multistate legislative jurisdiction — a wider choice of applicable laws rather than a narrow choice of laws formula.
In two early and “venerable” cases the Michigan Supreme Court applied Canadian law to injuries occurring in Canada. On the facts, however, they are distinguishable from the case at bar and from Kaiser, and were not cited in the Kaiser Case. In Wingert v. Wayne Circuit Judge (1894), 101 Mich 395, plaintiff’s decedent drowned in Canadian waters allegedly due to defendant’s negligence in Canada. Michigan had nothing to do with the relationship, the accident, or the injury and understandably, the Court held the Michigan statute inapplicable. It is doubtful whether a different conclusion could have been reached. See Home Insurance Company v. Dick (1930), 281 US 397 (50 S Ct 338, 74 L Ed 926, 74 ALR 701). The second of these early cases is Turner v. St. Clair Tunnel Co. (1897), 111 Mich 578 (36 LRA 134). A workman on the tunnel was injured when he was working on the Canadian side. It was held that whether the actions of his super*671visor were negligent in failing to supervise properly was a question under Canadian law. Again, the conduct is measured by the law of the place of the wrong.
We have indulged this extensive review of Michigan authority to point out that Kaiser is the only decision in Michigan to decide the question of what law governs the legal incidents (the standard of care or duty owed) of a relationship having contact with more than one jurisdiction. Kaiser stands alone with no Michigan authority before or after its decision coming to its support. The decision itself does not purport to be making law but merely to be following established rules. Those rules are not only unsettled today, but are contrary to the modern trend of decisions. If this is so, if the very foundation facts on which Kaiser rests are no longer existent, then we cannot see why Kaiser should be held to control a new set of foundation facts.
The citation of Beale on Conflicts (§ 378.4) in Kaiser did express the prevailing lex loci delicti rule of the day. Professor Beale’s work was printed in 1935 and the author was also the reporter for the American Law Institute’s Restatement of the Conflict of Laws (section 388 of the Restatement was cited in Kaiser). Beale’s work would no longer be acceptable to the American Law Institute whose proposed Restatement 2d expressly repudiates the original view and that partially relied upon in Kaiser. See Restatement of the Law 2d, Conflict of Laws, Proposed Official Draft (May 1, 1968), §§ 145,3 1464 and following comments and reporter’s notes.
*672The reference to Goodrich on Conflicts (1st ed) no doubt supported the proposition that lex loci delicti governs as to all matters relative to the right. The 4th edition (Scoles, 1964) of Goodrich on Conflicts dramatizes the evolution of choice-of-laws concepts over the intervening years, and this later edition of the work no longer supports a mechanical application of lex loci delicti to all aspects of the multistate tort case. See section 92 (p 165) et seq.:
“Frank recognition that the law by which the forum is guided in determining the issues in tort cases is that of the state which is most significantly related to the issue will avoid the mechanistic results that have characterized this area in the past. Courts will be required to make and perhaps to articulate pertinent policy considerations that will enable our common-law rules to develop commensurate with the growing complexity of multistate torts.” (Id, section 92 at pp 166, 167.)
The citation to 12 CJ, Conflict of Laws, § 35, p 452, and 15 CJS, Conflict of Laws (now obsolete), §§ 4,12, pp 865, 899, did reflect the general view as it existed in 1939, the publication date of the later volume. The view expressed in Corpus Juris, however, as we shall point out, is but the collection of prevail*673ing views amongst the jurisdictions which has drastically and dramatically changed in recent years.
The Kaiser decision further cites the case of American Banana Co. v. United Fruit Co. (1909), 213 US 347 (29 S Ct 511, 53 L Ed 826), for the proposition that: “the character of an act as lawful or unlawful must he determined wholly by the law of the country where the act is done.” To be sure, we agree that whether or not activities in a foreign jurisdiction constitute a substantive wrong should be governed by the laws of that jurisdiction. That is not to say, however, that the territorial limitation of a state’s laws limits its application of its own laws to an issue with which it has a substantial and legitimate interest. Given the multistate legislative interest, American Banana imposes no choice-of-laws mandate on the respective states, Richards v. United States (1962), 369 US 1 (82 S Ct 585, 7 L Ed 2d 492). Such choice-of-laws rules, within the limit of legitimate governmental interest in the matter, have been and remain a matter of internal policy of the respective states, Richards, supra.
We are left with the inescapable conclusion that Kaiser was not the result of independent analysis based on facts similar to those now before us. Nowhere in Kaiser is inquiry made as to why the law of the place of the wrong should invariably govern the standard of care owed by parties to a relationship based primarily in a state other than that in which the injury occurred. We conclude that a necessary ingredient of the Kaiser decision was that the application of lex loci delicti as to any and all issues relating to the right was the universally accepted rule in this country. What should the result be on a re-examination of Kaiser when the very essential fact of universality and predictability are no longer existent? It appears to our minds that *674Kaiser governs a fact situation which no longer exists. Under the facts of the present case, including the jurisdictional facts which are necessarily part of any conflicts or choice-of-laws rule, our Supreme Court should write on a clean slate. No Michigan decision has decided the issue of choice-of-laws amid a family of sister sovereignties who have chosen to apply the law of the place of most significant relationship with the particular issue in question.
In Reich v. Purcell (1967), 67 Cal 2d 551, 555 (63 Cal Rptr 31, 432 P2d 727), the California court forthrightly rejected the lex loci delicti rule in favor of the more flexible and modern approach of most significant relationship. Justice Traynor, writing for the court, stated:
“As jurisdiction after jurisdiction had departed from the law of the place of the wrong as the controlling law in tort cases, regardless of the issue involved * * * that law no longer affords even a semblance of the general application that was once thought to be its great virtue. We conclude that the law of the place of the wrong is not necessarily the applicable law for all tort actions brought in the courts of this state.”
We believe that Kaiser was predicated on this “general application” and that the reason having disappeared from the present case, that decision is simply no longer applicable. Ratio est legis anima; mutata legis ratione mutalur et lex.5
Indeed, the lex loci delicti formulation is no longer of general application. Nearly" every jurisdiction6 *675which has recently considered the choice-of-laws issue in multistate torts has departed from the lex loci delicti formulation as to applicable law. The precise language and rules adopted by these jurisdictions vary in exact content but are unanimous in seeking a rule of governing law which will do justice in a particular case and vindicate the state’s policy having the most significant relationship with the particular issue of the case. Reich v. Purcell, supra;7 Babcock v. Jackson (1963), 12 NY2d 473 (240 NYS2d 743, 191 NE2d 279, 95 ALR2d 1);8 Wartell v. Formusa (1966), 34 Ill 2d 57 (213 NE2d 544); Balts v. Balts (1966), 273 Minn 419 (142 NW 2d 66);9 Clark v. Clark (1966), 107 NH 351 (222 A 2d 205);10 Griffith v. United Air Lines, Inc. (1964), 416 Pa 1 (203 A2d 796);11 Mellk v. Sarahson (1967), 49 NJ 226 (229 A2d 625);12 Wilcox v. Wilcox (1965), 26 Wis 2d 617 (133 NW2d 408); Merchants National Bank & Trust Co. of Fargo v. United States (DC ND, 1967), 272 F Supp 409; Casey v. Manson Construction & Engineering Company (1967), 247 Or 274 (428 P2d 898); Wessling v. Paris (Ky, 1967), 417 SW2d 259; Williams v. Rawlings Truck Line, Inc. (CA DC, 1965), 357 F2d 581.13
Concluding then, as we do, that every vestige of reason for the Kaiser decision has been stripped *676away, it now remains to decide which law should govern the issue of duty owed by a host-driver to his guest-passenger. More particularly, we must analyze the respective interests of Ontario, New York and Michigan in resolving this issue and which of those interests will be served by application of that jurisdiction’s substantive rules.
The sole issue on this appeal is the duty attached to a legal relationship created and consummated in New York. We believe that State’s law should govern the duties and liabilities imposed through that relationship. Kaiser v. North, supra, which we are obligated to follow, compels a contrary conclusion. But to our minds it would seem only logical not to subject a one-time legal relationship such as host and passenger to a multitude of legal incidents, unanticipated by the parties, solely by virtue of crossing states’ lines.
Babcock v. Jackson, supra, is not explicit on this point. There, New York law was held to govern the issue of duty owed by a New York driver to a New York passenger who were involved in an automobile accident while passing through Ontario. The opinion talks both about the most significant relationship with the issue of duty owed, and a “grouping of contacts” approach to arriving at a choice of governing law. This has led to an uncertainty in the minds of some as to whether the test of Babcock is a qualitative appraisal of respective states’ interests or a mechanical (quantitative) counting or grouping of relevant contacts. See comment, 52 Va L Rev 302. The later decision in Dym v. Gordon (1965), 16 NY2d 120 (262 NYS2d 463, 209 NE2d 792), would make it appear that New York will identify the most significant relationship in terms of a quantitative counting of the contacts. Thus in Dym, two New York residents met in Colorado and were traveling *677in that State when the accident occurred. Although Colorado had no more interest in the host-passenger liability there than Ontario had in Babcock, Colorado law was held to govern the liability issue apparently because it had the greatest number of contacts.
There would appear to be a common thread running through these cases of great weight being placed on the initial situs of the relationship whose legal incidents are in issue, or the place where that relationship was created.
A similar comparison can be found in New Hampshire. In Dow v. Larrabee (1966), 107 NH 70 (217 A2d 506), a New Hampshire resident went to Massachusetts to pick up another New Hampshire resident who had been staying in Massachusetts. On the return trip the accident occurred while the parties were still in Massachusetts. Although the New Hampshire court was applying the most significant interest formula, Massachusetts’ law was held to govern because it was there the guest-passenger relation was created. In Clark v. Clark, supra, decided later that year by the same court, two New Hampshire residents were driving from one point in that state to another when they passed through Vermont. The accident occurred in Vermont, and the law of that State required gross negligence for a guest-passenger action. In Clark, however, the guest-passenger relation arose in New Hampshire and that State’s law was held to govern.
The many cases dealing with the issue of intrafamilial liability have likewise been governed by the law of the situs of the relationship, Emery v. Emery (1955), 45 Cal 2d 421 (289 P2d 218); Wartell v. Formusa, supra; Balts v. Balts, supra; Koplik v. C. P. Trucking Corporation (1958), 27 NJ 1 (141 A2d 34). Although explained on the basis that the domicile state has the most significant interest in *678the family relationship (Wartell, supra, 34 Ill 2d 57, 59 [213 NE2d 544, 545]) it is not unlike other legal relationships which may exist within the state as well. The gist, we believe, aside from the somewhat exceptional nature of family law, is that the state in which the legal incidents of a relationship are primarily situate has the most significant interest in governing that relationship for choice-of-law purposes.
We believe this to be the better and more logical choice of law as to this issue of a host’s duty to his guest. Defendant Farrell went into New York and there the guest-passenger relationships were formed. All parties could reasonably anticipate, on beginning the trip from Buffalo to Detroit, that New York’s law might govern the rights incident to that relationship. We do not rest this decision, on any pretense of a contract made in Buffalo relative to the carriage to Detroit. There was an agreement, however, by which defendant agreed to become a host-driver and his passengers agreed to ride with him. The agreement, and consequently the relationship, was born in New York and was a creature of New York law. If the parties had contemplated the governing law at the inception of their relationship, we can only say, in the absence of a contrary showing, that they would contemplate application of New York’s rules. We cannot say that under such an arrangement these New York parties would have contemplated application of Ontario or even Michigan law to their relationship. One might imagine the surprise of a New York resident out for a ride over to Ontario where he now finds out that his driver is free to indulge in the most wanton misconduct without fear of liability.
Ontario has no genuine interest in whether a New York passenger can recover for the wrongful acts *679óf a Michigan host-driver, driving a Michigan vehicle. The policy behind the Ontario statute involved in this case was to prevent fraudulent and collusive suits against a gratuitous host’s insurer. See Bab-cock v. Jackson, supra, citing article at 1 Toronto LJ 358 (1936); see, also, 67 Columbia L Rev 459. Ontario’s policy will be neither served nor thwarted by the imposition of liability in this present case — a Canadian insurer not being involved. Ontario simply has no interest in the resolution of this issue and there is no good reason why its laws should serve such an ignoble purpose in this'case.
Because we do not believe that Michigan has the most significant relationship with Farrell’s responsibility to his passengers, we need not reach the question of whether this State would be free to apply its .own substantive rules of liability. See Home Insurance Co. v. Dick, supra.
Ontario has the primary interest in the conduct taking place on the highways and roads within the province. It is generally accepted that as to the substantive wrong, i.e., whether the conduct constituted negligence or gross negligence, the law of the place of the wrong governs. Babcock v. Jackson, supra; Reich v. Purcell, supra; Williams v. Rawl-ings Truck Line, Inc., supra. Ontario’s interest in this aspect of the case is prime. The decisions of this State which have considered the question will support the application of Ontario law to determine whether the defendant Farrell’s conduct was tor-tious.
Kaiser v. North, however empty a shell, remains for its destruction by its creating tribunal. "We urge a fresh look at the dictates of lex loci delicti and are hopeful that plaintiff will so pursue his cause. In our desire to have this rule re-examined we share the expression of the late Judge Robert M. Toms, *680when, in speaking of his duty to precedent, he stated (as quoted in Detroit Edison Company v. Janoss [1957], 350 Mich 606, 614):
“ ‘The court fervently hopes the petitioners in this case will appeal his decision and that it will be promptly and definitely reversed by the Supreme Court in which event the court will join a host of others in dancing in the streets.’ ”
Affirmed. Costs to appellees.
Quinn, J., concurred with j. H. Giulis, J.
Some of the Michigan authority, much of it referring to the Kaiser decision, would appear to rule on principles broader than those actually before the Court. Language has plagued this area of the 'law especially when courts have spoken in terms of “right” or “remedy.” An illustration of this language problem is pointed out by the concurring opinion to Browning v. Shackelford (1967, Miss), 196 So 2d 365, 373.
Supreme Court Records and Briefs, April Term, 1936, Docket No. 23.
“(l) The rights and liabilities of the parties -with respect to an issue in tort are determined by the local law of the state which, as to that issue, has the most significant relationship to the occurrence and the parties under the principles stated in § 6.
“(2) Contacts to be taken into account in applying the principles pf § 6 to determine the law applicable to an issue include:
*672“(a) the place where the injury occurred,
“(b) the place where the conduct causing the injury occurred,
“(e) the domicil, residence, nationality, place of incorporation and place of business of the parties, and
“(d) the place where the relationship, if any, between the parties is centered.
“These contacts are to be evaluated according to their relative importance with respect to the particular issue.”
“In an aetion for a personal injury, the local law of the state where the injury occurred determines the rights and liabilities of the parties, unless, with respect to the particular issue, some other state has a more significant relationship to the occurrence and the parties, in which- event the local law of the other state will be applied,”
In mildest paraphrase, this maxim reflects the familiar principle that when the reason of the law is changed, the law is also changed. See, also, Steger v. Blanchard (1958), 353 Mich 140, 144.
The only jurisdiction recently to have upheld the automatic application of lex loci delicti is Maryland, where the court of- appeals considered the abandonment of the rule to be for the legislature. White v. King (1966), 244 Md 348 (223 A2d 763). Insofar as our research discloses, this approach is unique.
In California, see, also, Emery v. Emery (1955), 45 Cal 2d 421 (289 P2d 218).
Other New York decisions include Dym v. Gordon (1965), 16 NY2d 120 (262 NYS2d 463, 209 NE2d 792); Macey v. Rozbicki (1966), 18 NY2d 289 (274 NYS2d 591, 221 NE2d 380).
Following the now famous Minnesota ease of Schmidt v. Driscoll Hotel, Inc. (1957), 249 Minn 376 (82 NW2d 365). Another case applying the law of the place of wrongful conduct is Myers v. Gaither (DC App, 1967), 232 A2d 577.
And Dow v. Larrabee (1966), 107 NH 70 (217 A2d 506).
The Griffith decision is especially significant when viewed in comparison with Kilberg v. Northeast Airlines, Inc. (1961), 9 NY 2d 34 (211 NYS2d 133, 172 NE2d 526).
Also Koplik v. C. P. Trucking Corporation (1958), 27 NJ 1 (141 A2d 34).
More recently, Roscoe v. Roscoe (CA DC, 1967), 379 F2d 94.

=== CASE 9737517 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:27:37.806622+00 ===

Levin, P. J.
(dissenting). I agree with my brothers that the doctrine of lex loci delicti is obsolete. Our principal disagreement concerns our reviewing function. In my opinion, merely because the Michigan Supreme Court has not formally repudiated lex loci does not bind us to await its decision if we are convinced that were it passing on the question today the Supreme Court would adopt another approach to the choice-of-law problem.
1.
Judge Gillis’ opinion fully demonstrates that thosé courts which have felt themselves free to reexamine the question have repudiated lex loci delicti.
“No conflict of laws authority in America today agrees that the old rule should be retained. See, e. g., texts and articles by Cavers, Ehrenzweig, Hancock, Leflar, Morris, Reese, Rheinstein, Trautman, Traynor, von Mehren and Weintraub, to mention only a few. No American court which has felt free to re-examine the matter thoroughly in the last decade has chosen to retain the old rule.” Clark v. Clark (1966), 107 NH 351, 352 (222 A2d 205, 207).
I am convinced our Supreme Court, for the same compelling reasons that have influenced courts in *681numerous jurisdictions to abandon lex loci, will reach the same conclusion when given an opportunity to do so.
I conceive it our duty to decide this case as we confidently believe the Supreme Court would decide it.1
*682“We must determine with the best exercise of our mental powers of which we are capable that law which in all probability will be applied to these litigants or to others similarly situated. * * *
*683“The measure of [a lower court’s] duty is to divine, as best it can, what would be the event of an appeal in the case before it.” [Quotations from opinions of Judges Clark and Hand in Spector Motor Service, Inc., v. Walsh, supra, footnote 1, pp 814, 823.] *684We should, of course, be most circumspect in our analysis before concluding a previously declared rule of law would no longer be followed today. We may not properly intrude on the Supreme Court’s function or subtly inject a personal view in attempted replacement of governing law. But where the evidence is overwhelming, as here, that a rule previously announced would no longer be followed, our duty to the litigants requires us to act on that conviction, acknowledging, as we do so, that we have been declared wrong before.
There are substantial reasons why we should not await a formal overruling declaration from our Supreme Court. The litigant whose cause is defeated by application of a rule of law predictably obsolete may not have the wherewithal to carry the struggle further. The Supreme Court may decline to grant leave to appeal for reasons unconnected with its view of the meritorious question.2 I think it fairer to *685the litigants in this case, and to those other litigants whose eases now may be pending in the trial courts ' of this State and in the Federal courts, governed in diversity eases by the rule of Erie Railroad Company v. Tompkins (1938), 304 US 64 (58 S Ct 817, 82 L Ed 1188, 114 ALR 1487), who look to the decisions of our Court as well as those of the Supreme Court of Michigan for guidance concerning governing law, to decide this case as we are convinced the Supreme Court of Michigan would decide it.3
*6862.
Although convinced that the Michigan Supreme Court would not choose the law’ of Ontario (the lex loci), I think it far from clear it would necessarily apply New York law in preference to Michigan law. Even though the fatal journey commenced in New York, and thus, in a sense, the guest-passenger relationship was there created, to exalt that factor to the exclusion of all others would be to return to Professor Beale’s vested rights approach to choice-of-law problems, substituting lex loci relationis or a kind of lex loci contractus for lex loci delicti. The cases that have abandoned lex loci emphasize the importance of examining all relevant factors, all significant contracts, not just one, in resolving choice-of-law problems.4
*687Here, the relationship is not centered in either Michigan or New York; the plaintiffs are domiciliarles of New York, bnt the defendant driver and the defendant corporate owner of the car are domiciled in Michigan. Whether Michigan should choose its own law in preference to New York’s depends on considerations inadequately covered by the summary judgment record on which this case comes to us,5 and not fully developed in the briefs.
*6883.
There is no need to consider whether New York’s law should be applied in preference to Michigan’s until it is first determined that there is a difference between the laws of the two States. See Traynor, Is This Conflict Really Necessary?, 37 Tex L Rev 657 (1959). And we cannot determine whether there is a difference without first determining the law that each of the two States would apply in resolving this controversy.
In choosing New York’s law in preference to Michigan’s, the majority, of necessity, proceed on the supposition that there is a difference between the law of the two States — that Michigan law requires a guest passenger to prove gross negligence and New York law does not. That supposition, in turn, is based on the assumption that Michigan’s owner liability statute and its guest-passenger amendment6 operate extraterritorially.
At the times the owner liability statute was enacted (PA 1915, No 302, §29 [CL 1915, §4825]) and its guest-passenger amendment was added (PA 1929, No 19 [CL 1948, § 256.29 (Stat Ann § 9.1446)]), the universal rule was that all matters relating to a right of action for personal injury brought in one jurisdiction for a tort committed in another were governed by the law of the place of injury.7 That *689being tbe conceptual setting at the time of enactment, it seems to me anomalous to interpret our owner liability statute and its guest passenger amendment as having extraterritorial effect, to impute to the legislature the intention to make the statute operate extraterritorially8 even though, when enacted, all courts, including Michigan’s,9 applied the lex loci, and refused to apply any other law, common or statutory, in determining the standard of care owed a guest passenger.
*6904.
If, as suggested by this opinion, Michigan’s owner liability statute does not apply extraterritorially, then, in determining the Michigan law (the lex fori) applicable in a case not governed by the statute, it would be necessary to consider and decide as common-law questions both the extent of the owner’s vicarious liability10 and whether a different standard of care applies when the injured person is a guest passenger.11 "We might well conclude that our common law permits a guest passenger to recover from both a vicariously liable owner and the driver upon showing ordinary negligence. If that be the decision, then there would be no difference between the law of Michigan and New York and, thus, no need to make a choice of law on that issue,12 once it is de-*691cidecl Ontario’s law (the law of the place of injury) does not control decision.
If Michigan’s owner liability statute operates ex-traterritorially, there remains a substantial question whether we should not apply, in a suit in this forum against a Michigan driver and a Michigan owner, the policy expressed in Michigan’s “extraterritorial statute.” Their expectations and their insurer’s expectations may be thought superior to New York’s interest in protecting its guest passenger domiciliarles.13 Courts which have adopted the substantial contacts *692approach have held that the law of the forum presumptively applies until it has been shown that because of some special relationship or consideration the nonforum contacts have greater significance.14
The New Hampshire and Wisconsin supreme courts have declared that the forum should try to select the law which reaches the soundest result:
“We prefer to apply the better rule of law in conflicts cases just as is done in nonconflicts cases, when the choice is open to us. If the law of some other state is outmoded, an unrepealed remnant of a bygone age, ‘a drag on the coattails of civilization,’ (Freund, Chief Justice Stone and the Conflict of Laws, 59 Harv L Rev 1210, 1216 [1946]), we will try to see our way clear to apply our own law instead. If it is our own law that is obsolete or senseless (and it could be) we will try to apply the other state’s law. Courts have always done this in conflicts cases, but have usually covered up what they have done by employing manipulative techniques such as characterization and renvoi.” Clark v. Clark (1966), 107 NH 351, 355 (222 A 205, 209).
Accord: Heath v. Zellmer (1967), 35 Wis 2d 578 (151 NW2d 664, 673).
A commentator recently suggested that the effort to achieve the result attainable under the “better *693law” explains some of the conflict found in the host-guest conflict cases.15 Perhaps that is what we should try to accomplish in this ease, hut on the present summary judgment record I see neither need for decision nor basis for an informed decision thereon.
See Spector Motor Service, Inc. v. Walsh (CA2, 1943), 139 P2d 809, 814, remanded on other grounds Spector Motor Service, Inc. v. McLaughlin (1944), 323 US 101 (65 S Ct 152, 89 L Ed 101), where, speaking for a majority of the second circuit panel, Judge Clark wrote:
“If that were the whole story or if further our duty were limited to picking the closest unoverruled analogy in reported cases and following that blindly and mechanically, we should hold that these cases, and particularly the Alpha Cement case, had foreclosed all further discussion. But that is far from the whole story; the trends noted above have gone further in several specific eases fundamentally close to this and in divisions in the [United States Supreme] Court itself, which are certainly not without significance in forecasting the future eourse of the law. And our function eannot be limited to a mere blind adherence to precedent. We must determine with the best exercise of our mental powers of which we are capable that law which in all probability will be applied to these litigants or to others similarly situated. If this means the discovering and applying of a ‘new doctrinal trend’ in the Court, Perkins v. Endicott Johnson Corp. (CA2), 128 F2d 208, 217, 218, affirmed 317 US 501 (63 S Ct 339, 87 L ed 424), this is our task to be performed direetly and straightforwardly, rather than ‘artfully’ dodged. The Attitude of Lower Courts to Changing Precedents, 50 Yale L J 1448, 1459. As was said recently with rare prescience by Judge Parker in the controversial issue as to the constitutionality of the required flag salute: ‘Under such cireumstanees and believing, as we do, that the flag salute here required is violative of religious liberty when required of persons holding the religious views of plaintiffs, we feel that we would be recreant to our duty as judges, if through a blind following of a decision which the Supreme Court itself has thus impaired as an authority, we should deny protection to rights which we regard as among the most sacred of those protected by constitutional guaranties.’ Barnette v. West Virginia State Board of Education (DC SD W Va), 47 F Supp 251, 253, affirmed 319 US 624 (63 S Ct 1178, 87 L ed 1628).” (Emphasis supplied.)
While disagreeing with the majority’s prediction of how the United States Supreme Court would decide the ease there presented, Judge Learned Hand in dissent nevertheless expressed his agreement with the foregoing quoted statement, when he said (p 823) :
“It is always embarrassing for a lower court to say whether the time has come to disregard decisions of a higher court, not yet explicitly overruled, because they parallel others in which the higher court has expressed a contrary view. I agree that one should not *682wait for formal retraetion in the face of changes plainly foreshadowed; the higher court may not entertain an appeal in the ease before the lower court, or the parties may not ehoose to appeal. In either event the actual decision will be one which the judges do not believe to be that whieh the higher court would 'make. But nothing has yet appeared which -satisfies me that the case at bar is of that kind; and, as I have said, I can see no good reason for making any distinction between one kind of federal activity and another. The way out is in quite another direction, and includes both. Nor is it desirable for a lower court to embrace the exhilarating opportunity of anticipating a doctrine whieh may be in the womb of time, but whose birth is distant; on the contrary I conceive that the measure of its duty is to divine, as best it can, what would be the event of an appeal in the ease before it.” (Emphasis supplied.)
See, also, Putman v. Erie City Manufacturing Company (CA5, 1964), 338 F2d 911, 921, 923, where Judge Wisdom wrote:
“The Erie problem this case presents is troublesome, but is not as troublesome as the problem that confronted the First Circuit in Mason v. American Emery Wheel Works, (CA1, 1957), 241 F2d 906. In that ease the plaintiff, an employee of a subvendee of the defendant manufacturer, was injured when an emery wheel disintegrated. Mississippi law controlled. The supreme court of Mississippi had unequivocally held in Ford Motor Co. v. Myers (1928), 151 Miss 73 (117 So 362), and in a number of earlier cases, that privity was a prerequisite to recovery against a manufacturer. Nevertheless, basing its decision on a dictum in a later case and the evident trend in other states started by MacPherson v. Buick Motor Co. [(1916), 217 NY 382 (111 NE 1050, LRA 1916F 696, Ann Cas 1916C 440)], the court dispensed with the necessity of privity * * *
“This Court has the same deference for the Texas supreme court that Judge Magruder had for the Mississippi supreme court in Mason v. American Emery Wheel Works. Echoing Judge Magruder [241 F2d 906, 909], we conclude that it would be 'gratuitous and unwarranted’ to assume that the forward-looking supreme court of Texas, which in Decker [Jacob E. Decker & Sons, Inc., v. Capps (1942), 139 Tex 609 (164 SW2d 828, 142 ALR 1479)] was one of the leaders in the assault on the citadel of privity, would now hold that privity is required in nonfood eases, 'when we bear in mind the readiness of other courts, in conservative jurisdictions at that, to overrule their earlier holdings and to bring their jurisprudence into accord with what is now the overwhelming weight of authority’.” (Emphasis supplied.)
Similarly, see Necaise v. Chrysler Corporation (CA5, 1964), 335 F2d 562, 572, 573:
*683“It is difficult for us to conclude that the supreme eourt of Mississippi would now hold that a defective automobile is not a dangerous instrumentality per se.” (Emphasis supplied by the court.)
See, also, Judge Woodbury’s dissenting opinion in United States v. Girouard (CA1, 1945), 149 F2d 760, reversed 328 US 61 (66 S Ct 826, 90 L Ed 1084); Picard v. United Aircraft Corporation (CA2, 1942), 128 F2d 632, 636; S. C. Johnson & Son, Inc. v. Palmieri (CA1, 1958), 260 F2d 88; Maxfield v. Denver and R. G. W. R. Co. (1958), 8 Utah 2d 183 (330 P2d 1018); Watts v. Pioneer Corn Company, Inc. (CA7, 1965), 343 F2d 617; Gardella v. Chandler (CA2, 1949), 172 F2d 402, 409, Judge Frank’s opinion.
The reader will observe that the eases cited in this footnote can by and large be distinguished from the ease at bar on the ground that the changes in controlling law dealt with in the cited cases either were foreshadowed by other opinions of the highest Court itself or concerned the law of another jurisdiction (i.e., conflict of laws or Federal diversity eases), in which latter situations there was no way of obtaining the opinion of the Court with the final say on the deeisional trends adopted in some of the cited eases. The noted distinction although valid, in my opinion weakens only the authority, not the persuasiveness of the analysis in the cited cases.
Compare opinion of Mr. Justice Frankfurter concurring in Bernhardt v. Polygraphic Company of America (1956), 350 US 198, 209, 210 (76 S Ct 273, 280, 100 L Ed 199):
“For the mere fact that Vermont in 1910 restated its old law against denying equitable relief for breach of a promise to arbitrate a contract made under such Vermont law, is hardly a conclusive ground for attributing to the Vermont Supreme Court application of this equitable doctrine in 1956 to a contract made in New York with explicit agreement by the parties that the law of New York which allows sueh a stay as was here sought, New York civil practice act, § 1451, should govern. Cf. Brown v. Perry, 104 Vt 66 (156 A 910, 77 ALR 1294). Law does change with times and circumstances, and not merely through legislative reforms. It is also to be noted that law is not restricted to what is found in Law Reports, or otherwise written. See Nashville, C. & St. L. R. Co. v. Browning (1940), 310 US 362, 369 (60 S Ct 968, 84 L ed 1254). The Supreme Court of Vermont last spoke on this matter in 1910. The doctrine that it referred to was not a peculiar indigenous Vermont rule. The attitude refleeted by that decision nearly half a century ago was the current traditional judicial hostility against ousting courts, as the phrase ran, of their jurisdiction.”
Likewise here. The Michigan Supreme Court did not invent lex loci delicti. It was adopted in Michigan, without consideration of *684its desirability, beeause it represented the generally accepted rule of law for deciding choice of law questions in tort cases. It would have been unique to have then adopted any other rule, just as today it would be unique to continue to adhere to the old rule.
To the extent Kaiser v. North (1939), 292 Mich 49, reflects a policy decision on the part of the Supreme Court to adopt the then prevalent conflict-of-laws rule, we would be applying that policy were we to adopt, as I would, the new approach to choice of law problems adopted by so many other jurisdictions.
The fairly recent Michigan Supreme Court decisions reiterating the old rule can be explained by the failure of counsel to raise the question whether the old rule should continue to govern, which in turn may be explained by the fact nothing may have turned in those cases on selection of one law rather than another or uncertainty, as here, what law would be selected if the old rule were abandoned.
“It is time to remind again, as Justice Holmes did for the Court in United States v. Garner (1923), 260 US 482, 490 (43 S Ct 181, 67 L ed 361) that 'The denial of a writ of certiorari imports no expression of opinion upon the merits of the case, as the bar has been told many times’, and that this Court has formally adopted that reminder as expressive of its policy and attitude toward the effect of orders denying leave to appeal.” Frishett v. State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Company (1967), 378 Mich 733, approving our Court’s reversal of a summary judgment. The per curiam opinion of the Supreme Court observed (see footnote 5) *685that a trial “will provide a much better footing for determination of the posed question of law.”
Compare Rodebaugh v. Grand Trunk W. R. Co. (1966), 4 Mich App 559, limiting a rule of law enunciated a number of years ago by the Michigan Supreme Court.
See Comment: The attitude of Lower Courts to Changing Precedents, 50 Yale L J 1448 (1941).
A view differing with the one expressed in this opinion is ably presented in Kelman, The Force of Precedent in the Lower Courts, 14 Wayne L Rev 3, 10 (1967).
Trial and intermediate appellate court judges are daily engaged in announcing new rules of law, either because the question is new or thought to be now, or because they must choose among conflicting high eourt precedents, or because they discern a “distinction”, all of which is perceptively recognized and well illustrated in Professor Kelman’s article.
The trial judge’s power to find the facts in cases tried without a jury, rule on evidentiary questions, control the course of proceedings, grant motions for a new trial, the sentencing power, etc., and our Court’s power to grant or deny leave to appeal, have much greater impact on the law than will the relatively rare decision of a lower court tribunal stating forthrightly it is convinced, on the basis of substantial evidence, that a previously declared rule of law would no longer be followed by the Supreme Court.
JSTo judicial action is more viable than a judge’s ruling on a question of law, unlike decisions on the countless discretionary matters which in most eases have low viability, if any viability at all. Our Court sits in panels of 3, the agreement of 2 is required to take any aetion, and presumably all 3 judges would be in agreement, as all 3 of us are in this case on the meritorious question, if the evidence that the Supreme Court would no longer adhere to a previously declared rule of law' is clear enough to warrant the degree of conviction on our part which alone would justify us in acting thereon. If the conviction on which we act is unjustified, the Supreme Court is not without remedy.
There need be little concern that lower court judges wall proceed other than with great circumspection when addressing themselves *686to a presented question of the continued viability of high court established precedent.
See, e.g., Heath v. Zellmer (1967), 35 Wis 2d 578 (151 NW2d 664), and Zellinger v. State Sand & Gravel Co. (1968), 38 Wis 2d 98 (156 NW2d 466).
Kuchinic v. McCrory (1966), 422 Pa 620 (222 A2d 897), held that Pennsylvania was the State “with the most significant interest in defining the legal consequences attached to the relationship.” In reaching that decision the court mentioned, in addition to the faet the host-guest relationship was established in Pennsylvania, that the relationship was intended to terminate and the domicile of all 4 xiassengers was in Pennsylvania.
In Heath v. Zellmer, supra, the Wisconsin eourt selected its own law in preference to Indiana’s, the latter being the State where the host-guest relationship was established. The court acknowledged that Indiana had substantial contacts; the trip both commenced and was expected to end in Indiana. The ease is ap-Xirovingly discussed in the law review article cited in footnote 15.
In Macey v. Rozbicki (1966), 18 NY2d 289 (274 NYS2d 591, 221 NE2d 380), the host-guest relationship was “created” in Ontario, yet Ontario’s rule denying recovery was not applied in an action between relatives, all New Yorkers. Compare Dym v. Gordon (1965), 16 NY2d 120 (209 NE2d 792, 262 NYS2d 463).
Contrast: Dow v. Larrabee (1966), 107 NH 70 (217 A2d 506), but see Clarke v. Clarke, supra.
The proposed official draft of Restatement, Second, Conflicts of Law, would sum up the state of American law as follows:
“§ 145. The General Principle.
“(1) The rights and liabilities of the parties with respect to an issue in tort are determined by the local law of the state which, *687as to that issue, has the most significant relationship to the occurrence and the parties under the principles stated in section 6.
“(2) Contracts to be taken into account in applying the principles of section 6 to determine the law applicable to an issue include:
“(a) the plaee where the injury occurred,
“(b) the plaee where the conduct causing the injury occurred,
“(c) the domieil, residence, nationality, plaee of incorporation and place of business of the parties, and
“(d) the plaee where the relationship, if any, between the parties is centered.
“These contacts are to be evaluated aeeording to their relative importance with respect to the particular issue.” Restatement, Second, Conflict of Laws, proposed official draft, Pt II.
“§ 6. Choice of Law Principles.
“(1) A court, subject to constitutional restrictions, will follow a statutory directive of its own state on ehoice of law.
“(2) When there is no such directive, the factors relevant to the choice of the applicable rule of law include
“(a) the needs of the interstate and international systems,
“(b) the relevant policies of the forum,
“(c) the relevant policies of other interested states and the relative interests of those states in the determination of the particular issue,
“(d) the protection of justified expectations,
“(e) the basic policies underlying the particular field of law,
“(f) certainty, predictability and uniformity of result, and
“(g) ease in the determination and application of the law to be applied.” Restatement, Second, Conflict of Laws, proposed official draft, Pt I.
“Reversal of this summary judgment will doubtless bring about a trial of plaintiff’s allegations, the record of winch will provide a much tetter footing for determination of the posed question of law. Summary judgment, for the reason assigned by defendant, should not have been granted. Rather the question should have been reserved for consideration on motion for peremptory instruction or directed verdict.” (Emphasis supplied.) Frishett v. State Farm Mutual Auto-motile Insurance Company, supra.
CLS 1961, § 257.401 (Stat Ann 1960 Rev §9.2101).
ll Am Jur, Conflict of Laws, §182, p 490; Restatement, Conflicts of Law, § 378, et seq. Later, owners were sometimes held vicariously liable based on statutes other than that of the plaee of injury by characterizing the owner’s actions outside the state of injury as consent to the application of whatever law it was sought to apply; these cases are discussed in Ehrenzweig, Part II, p 794, infra, footnote 11.
If Michigan’s statute applied extraterritorially it must have so applied in 1915 and 1929. It is incongruous to say that the statute applies extraterritorially and also to say, because of Kaiser v. North (1939), 292 Mich 49, we must apply only the law of the plaee of injury.
*689Kaiser can be read as holding that the owner liability statute is not effective extraterritorially. See footnote on p 53 and the following (p 54): “Neither our constitutional laws nor our statutory laws are of extraterritorial force as applied to a ease of this character.”
“Unless the intention to have a statute operate beyond the limits of the state or country is clearly expressed or indicated by its language, purpose, subject matter, or history, no legislation is presumed to be intended to operate outside the territorial jurisdiction of the state or country enaeting it. To the contrary, the presumption is that the statute is intended to have no extraterritorial effect, but to apply only within the territorial jurisdiction of the state or country enaeting it, and it is generally so construed. An extraterritorial effect is not to be given statutes by implication. Accordingly, a statute is prima facie operative only as to persons or things within the territorial jurisdiction of the lawmaking power whieh enacted it.” 50 Am Jur, Statutes, § 487, pp 510, 511.
In 1936 New York’s Court of Appeals held its owner liability statute “has no extraterritorial effect.” Cherwien v. Geiter (1936), 272 NY 165 (5 NE2d 185). In 1967, it overruled its earlier holding. Farber v. Smolak (1967), 20 NY2d 198 (229 NE2d 36). Thus, there is precedent for breathing extraterritoriality into our (at time of enactment) local statute, but, on principle as well as authority, New York’s 1967 decision is not persuasive. The 1967 New York decision did not consider or attempt to explain how a statute construed to be without extraterritorial application at the time of enactment could be held to operate extraterritorially by the passage of time.
See, also, footnote 7. Compare Kernan v. Webb (1929), 50 RI 394 (148 A 186), and Masci v. Young (1932), 109 NJL 453 (162 A 623), affirmed Young v. Masci (1933), 289 US 253, 258 (53 S Ct 599, 77 L Ed 1158, 88 ALR 170), regarding vicarious liability of nonresidents when lex loci delicti was the universal rule. See, also, Restatement of the Law, Conflicts of Law, § 387, p 384(2), 11 Am Jur, Conflicts of Law, § 182, p 492, n 10, and 8 Am Jur 2d, Automobiles and Highway Traffic, § 601, p 153.
See Slayton v. Boesch (1946), 315 Mich 1.
See 8 Am Jur 2d, Automobiles and Highway Traffic, §§ 571-594, pp 122-149.
See, also, Prosser, Law of Torts (3d ed), pp 494-499. Professor Prosser states Florida has gone further than any other jurisdiction in extending common law liability, making the owner liable for any negligent driving by another on the theory that an automobile is a “dangerous instrumentality.” See, also, Harper and James, The Law of Torts, § 26.10, p Í394, commenting on both the Florida rule of law and an insurance aspect of the matter.
8 Am Jur 2d, Automobiles and Highway Traffic, § 469, pp 33, 34.
See, also, Ciarle v. Ciarle, supra, where the court observed: “No American state has newly adopted a guest statute for many years. Courts of states which did adopt them are today construing them much more narrowly, evidencing their dissatisfaction with them. Pedrick, Taken for a Ride: The Automobile Guest and Assumption of Risk, 22 La L Rev 90 (1961) ; Comment, The Ohio Guest Statute, 22 Ohio St L J 629 (1961). Though still on the books, they contradict the spirit of the times.” 107 NH 351, 357 (222 A2d 205, 210). Similarly, see Heath v. Zellmer, supra, p 603.
Professor Ehrenzweig has eolleeted and classified both the guest passenger and vicarious liability conflict of laws cases, and has suggested that (p 991) “lex fori supplemented by a test of reasonable insurability emerges as the rationally applicable law.” See Ehren-zweig, Guest Statutes in the Conflict of Laws — Towards a Theory of Enterprise Liability under ‘Foreseeable and Insurable Laws’: I, 69 Tale L J 595 (1960); Ehrenzweig, Vicarious Liability in the Conflict of Laws — Toward a Theory of Enterprise Liability under ‘Foreseeable and Insurable Laws’: III, 69 Tale L J 978 (I960).
However, a conflict of laws issue could arise in regard to the owner’s vicarious liability. In Farber v. Smolak, supra (see foot*691note 8), New York’s Court of Appeals achieved the result it desired to reach, namely, the automobile owner should be held vicariously liable in respect to the outstate accident as under New York’s owner liability statute, by overruling its earlier decision in Cherwein v. Getter, supra. The same result could have been achieved by declaring that under the forum’s common law (applicable to those eases governed by New York law but until Farter v. Smolak not governed by its owner liability statute) the owner was vicariously liable on eommon-law principles (see footnote 10, supra).
If, as appears to be the ease (see law review articles cited in footnotes 14 and 15 and eases cited in footnote 11), the courts are seeking means of avoiding the operation of the guest statutes and retaining the owner’s vicarious liability, it would be simpler in many eases to develop the forum’s common law rather than to go around Robin Hood’s barn, turning the matter into a choice-of-law question and reconstruing the owner liability and guest-passenger statutes, which, when enacted, could only have been concerned with intrastate accidents. The difficulty with making it a ehoiee of law question is revealed by the cases where this has been done: The solution worked out in the first case frequently does not serve well as cases with different facets come to decision (see law review articles cited in footnotes 14 and 15).
The courts are making new law when they reeonstrue their statutory law or choose a foreign law to achieve the desired result; they would beeome no more involved in the law-making process, and in a sense less so, were they simply to reformulate the eommon-law rules regarding the owner’s vicarious liability and the standard of care owed a guest passenger as applied to outstate accidents so as to achieve the same results attained by “choosing” foreign law or by reinterpreting local and foreign statutes.
The approach suggested would not eliminate choice-of-law problems when a contact State’s law is different than the forum’s, but it would eliminate the impetus for reinterpretation of owner-liability and guest-passenger statutes passed long ago and it would eliminate the choice-of-law problem in those eases where the common law of the forum as so formulated is the same as the applicable law of all other contact States.
Compare Heath v. Zellmer, supra, 596, and Zellinger v. State Sand & Gravel Co., supra.
Wilcox v. Wilcox (1965), 26 Wis 2d 617 (133 NW2d 408); Kell v. Henderson (1966), 26 App Div 2d 595 (270 NYS2d 552), holding that New York’s law rather than Ontario’s governs a lawsuit between persons who were residents and domiciliarios of Ontario arising out of a New York accident (discussed by Rosenberg, Two Views on Kell v. Henderson: An Opinion for the New York Court of Appeals, 67 Colum L Rev 459 (1967), and by Trautman, A Comment, 67 Colum L Rev 465 (1967), and in article cited in footnote 15, infra). See, also, footnote 4, Traynor, op cit, p 674, and Ehrenzweig, op cit.
Compare Reich v. Purcell (1967), 67 Cal 2d 551 (63 Cal Rptr 31, 432 P2d 727), a wrongful death action, choosing Ohio law (residence of decedents and survivors) over Missouri (place of injury) and California (forum and defendant’s residence) ; similarly, see Tramontana v. S. A. Empresa De Viacao Aerea Bio Grandense (CA DC, 1965), 350 E2d 468.
See footnote 12. See, also, Ehrenzweig, Foreign Guest Statute and Forum Accidents: Against the Desperanto of State “Interests”, 68 Colum L Rev 49, 54 (1968).

=== CASE 9737518 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:27:38.985581+00 ===

*138Tauro, C. J.
This is a petition for a writ of certiorari and related relief brought under G. L. c. 211, § 3,2 asking the court to exercise its supervisory powers “to correct and prevent errors and abuses” in bind-over hearings conducted in the District Courts of the Commonwealth. The petitioner asks us to vacate the District Court’s decision to decline jurisdiction and bind the defendant over for trial on the ground that he was .not given a fair hearing on the question of whether he “appear[s] to be guilty.” c. 218, § 30. This petition comes before us upon a reservation and report without decision by a single justice upon the pleadings and a statement of agreed facts.
Although we will review interlocutory rulings in criminal cases under our general superintendence powers “only in the most exceptional circumstances,” Gilday v. Commonwealth, 360 Mass. 170, 171, we will act “at whatever stage in the proceedings it becomes necessary to protect substantive rights.” Barber v. Commonwealth, 353 Mass. 236, 239. The question before us is whether the summary manner in which the District Court judge conducted the petitioner’s bind-over hearing violated his “substantive” rights.
The pertinent facts may be summarized briefly. On March 15,1973, the petitioner was arraigned in the Municipal Court of the Roxbury District on charges of possession of marihuana and unlawfully carrying a firearm. After the charges were read to the petitioner, the judge entered a plea of not guilty on both complaints, and asked the arresting officer for a statement of the facts leading to the petitioner’s arrest. After listening to the arresting officer’s statement, the judge examined the petitioner’s probation file, set a trial date for *139March 26, 1973, and assigned the case to the Boston University Defenders Program. (No attorney from that program was present in the court room during this stage of the proceedings.) Further action on the case was suspended for approximately an hour and a half to allow the Roxbury Court clinic to determine if the petitioner was drug dependent. During this interval, the petitioner’s family asked an attorney from the Roxbury Defenders Committee to represent the petitioner. Upon resumption of the case and after the judge had read the clinic’s evaluation report, the Roxbury Defenders Committee’s attorney addressed the bench in regard to representing the petitioner. The attorney informed the judge that he had represented this indigent petitioner in the past and that the petitioner wished to be represented by him in the present procéedings. A conversation then ensued between the judge and the Roxbury Defenders Committee’s attorney concerning bail proceedings in the Commonwealth’s court system and an unrelated charge against the petitioner which was still awaiting trial in Suffolk Superior Court. After expressing his disapproval of the Roxbury Defenders Committee’s former and present course of action in bail matters, the judge declined jurisdiction over the complaints and set bail at $5,000.
The facts of the instant case indicate that the petitioner’s preliminary hearing consisted of a statement by the arresting officer. The petitioner was not given a meaningful opportunity to cross-examine this witness or present evidence on his own behalf and he was not advised that he could cross-examine witnesses and present evidence.3 He was not represented by counsel at the time. Obviously, the summary nature of the petitioner’s bind-over “hearing” does not satisfy the procedural requirements of a probable cause hearing which we held in Myers v. Commonwealth, 363 Mass. 843, are mandated by c. 276, § 38. The question before us is *140whether that statute applies to criminal charges over which the District Court may exercise final jurisdiction.4
The Commonwealth argues that c. 218, § 30,5 which authorizes the bind-over procedure, does not require or even suggest that the District Court judge must first find probable cause before holding the defendant for trial. The statute notes that the examining magistrate “may so commit or bind over persons brought before them who appear to be guilty of crimes within their final jurisdiction” (emphasis supplied). Apparently, the Commonwealth’s argument rests on its assumption that the statutory requirement that defendants “appear to be guilty” before being bound over for trial cannot be equated with or read in light of c. 276, §§ 38-42, provisions concerning probable cause hearings.
We are unable to find any support for such an assumption either in the express language of the pertinent statutory provisions or in their legislative history. As we noted in the Myers case, supra, the rules governing the conduct of preliminary hearings in the Commonwealth are summarily set forth in G. L. c. 276, §§ 38-42. Section 38 grants all defendants, who have not been indicted by a grand jury, a right6 to an adversary hearing where they may confront their *141accusers and present testimony in their own behalf on the question whether there is probable cause to bind them over for trial. See Myers v. Commonwealth, supra. Defendants are held for trial only if it appears to the examining magistrate (1) “that a crime has been committed” and (2) “that there is probable cause to believe the prisoner guilty.” C. 276, § 42. These two requirements are designed to establish an effective bind-over standard which screens out those groundless or unsupported charges that should not go to trial. Nothing in the statutory text of these provisions suggests that they are applicable only to charges like those in the Myers case over which the District Court has no concurrent jurisdiction. To the contrary, c. 276, § 42, makes it clear that in cases where the District Court declines to exercise its final jurisdiction, the judge must find probable cause before setting bail. (“If it appears that a crime has been committed and that there is probable cause to believe the prisoner guilty, the court or justice shall, if final jurisdiction is not exercised, admit the prisoner to bail, if the crime is bailable and sufficient bail is offered; otherwise, he shall be committed to jail for trial” [emphasis supplied].)
The unambiguous reference in § 42 to cases where the District Court declines to exercise its final jurisdiction over the charges before it and its requirement that in such cases probable cause be found before the defendant is committed or admitted to bail make it clear that the Legislature did not intend that probable cause hearings be held in District Courts only in cases where the District Courts did not have ultimate jurisdiction over the charges involved. Such a distinction would make little sense because the preliminary hearing’s primary function of determining whether there is sufficient legally admissible credible evidence of the defendant’s guilt to justify holding him over for trial is applicable to any case where a bind-over determination is being made. The fact that the District Court could have exercised its final jurisdiction7 *142does not justify a failure to make a proper bind-over determination when the court decides to decline final jurisdiction.
Therefore, we must reject the Commonwealth’s argument that c. 218, § 30, should not be interpreted in conjunction with c. 276, §§ 38-42. We construe the requirement of c. 218, § 30, that defendants shall not be bound over for trial unless they “appear to be guilty” to mean that the District Court judge must always make a finding of “probable cause to believe the prisoner guilty,” c. 276, § 42, before he binds any defendant over for trial in the Superior Court, regardless of whether the District Court has concurrent jurisdiction over the crimes charged. Our holding is supported by earlier decisions of this court which held that the statutory predecessors of c. 218, § 30, and c. 276, §§ 38-42, must be read together as requiring a finding of probable cause before a bind-over determination could be made. See Commonwealth v. Harris, *1438 Gray 470; Commonwealth v. Sullivan, 156 Mass. 487.8 See also Smith, Criminal Practice and Procedure, § 686, p. 337.
Since the petitioner was deprived of his statutory right to a probable cause hearing before being bound over for trial, unless the court decides to exercise its jurisdiction, he must be given a new preliminary hearing to determine whether there is sufficient evidence to justify holding him for trial. Therefore, pursuant to our powers of “general superintendence of all courts of inferior jurisdiction,” c. 211, § 3,' the original bind-over decision is vacated and the case is to be transferred to the Municipal Court of the Roxbury District for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.9
So ordered.
Section 3, as amended by St. 1956, c. 707, § 1, reads in part: “The supreme judicial court shall have general superintendence of all courts of inferior jurisdiction to correct and prevent errors and abuses therein if no other remedy is expressly provided; and it may issue writs of error, certiorari, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and all other writs and processes to such courts . . . which may be necessary to the furtherance of justice and to the regular execution of the laws.
“In addition to the foregoing, the justices of the supreme judicial court shall also have general superintendence of the administration of all courts of inferior jurisdiction . . . and it may issue such writs . . . and such orders, directions, and rules as may be necessary or desirable for the furtherance of justice, the regular execution of the laws, the improvement of the administration of such courts, and the securing of their proper and efficient administration.”
See Rule 6 of the Initial Rules of Criminal Procedure for the District Courts of Massachusetts. “An unrepresented defendant who has pleaded not guilty to any complaint shall be advised by the judge at the time of his hearing or trial that on any material matter pertaining to the offense charged he has the following rights: — (a) to cross examine any witness offered by the prosecution; and (b) subject to cross examination to offer testimony by himself or any other witness.”
The Myers case concerned criminal charges not within the District Court’s concurrent jurisdiction.
Chapter 218, § 30, reads in part: “They [District Court judges] shall commit or bind over for trial in the superior court persons brought before them who appear to be guilty of crimes not within their final jurisdiction, and may so commit or bind over persons brought before them who appear to be guilty of crimes within their final jurisdiction.”
The Commonwealth relied on Commonwealth v. Nason, 252 Mass. 545, to support its contention that the defendant had no statutory right to a probable cause hearing before being bound over for trial. However, the precise holding in the Nason case was that defendants have no right to a probable cause hearing when they are indicted by the grand jury because the indictment itself rests on a finding of probable cause which obviates the need for a preliminary hearing on the same question. In the Nason case, a probable cause hearing was pending when the defendant was indicted. This court held that “[t]he pendency of such a hearing in the district court is not a ground for quashing an indictment pending the examination.” P. 548. This is still the law of the Commonwealth.
However, in all those cases where the defendant is under arrest and has not been indicted by a grand jury he is entitled “as soon as may be” to a determination of whether there is probable cause to hold him for trial by an examining magistrate at a probable cause hearing. See c. 276, § 38. “The court or justice before whom a person is taken upon a charge of crime shall, as soon as may be, examine on oath the complainant and the witnesses . . .” (emphasis supplied).
Earlier decisions by this court suggested that a District Court judge need not indicate to'defence counsel prior to the hearing whether it is to be a trial on the merits or a probable cause hearing. See Commonwealth v. Goddard, 13 Mass. 455, 458; *142Commonwealth v. Rice, 216 Mass. 480,481. In practice, many District Court judges do not decide whether to conduct a full trial on the merits until they have heard the prosecution’s evidence. See Smith, Criminal Practice and Procedure, § 686.
This practice creates serious tactical problems for defence counsel who have no way of knowing until the end of the hearing whether the hearing is for probable cause or a full trial on the merits. “The problem is that his tactics are different, depending upon the nature of the hearing. If it is a probable cause hearing, his objective is discovery, and he will not ordinarily object to inadmissible evidence nor will he offer any evidence in the defendant’s behalf. However, if the hearing is a trial on the merits, he will ordinarily try the case ‘tight’ and object to evidence and offer a defense.” Smith, Criminal Practice and Procedure, supra, §686. Finally, such a practice may lead to violations of Rule 8 of the Initial Rules of Criminal Procedure for the District Courts of Massachusetts as District Court judges often consult the defendant’s probation record (as the District Court judge did in the instant case) before they decide whether to hold a probable cause hearing or a full trial on the merits.
To avoid these' problems, a District Court judge should announce, before the hearing commences, whether he is conducting a probable cause hearing or a full trial on the merits. Before making this initial decision, the District Court judge may ask counsel for both the prosecution and defence for a discussion limited to the circumstances of the particular case necessary to aid him in his decision to exercise or decline final jurisdiction. As an example of this preliminary inquiry, the judge may ascertain whether there are companion cases pending in the Superior Court or whether there are other cases against the defendant growing out of the same transaction. Where the judge decides that the District Court will retain its jurisdiction in the case but reaches this decision after receiving information which was inadmissible as evidence and prejudicial to the defendant, the case, on defendant’s motion, shall be tried on the merits before another District Court judge. See Commonwealth v. Rice, supra 216 Mass, at 481, for a discussion of the relevant factors that a District Court judge should consider in determining whether or not to exercise final jurisdiction.
The Sullivan case involved a crime over which the District Court had concurrent jurisdiction with the Superior Court. The District Court had discharged the defendant because it did not appear “that there is probable cause to believe defendant guilty” (emphasis supplied). In reviewing this decision, this court noted that “It is well settled that a district court or a trial justice may either try and acquit, or convict, a person charged with the offence of keeping a tenement for the illegal keeping or illegal sale of intoxicating liquors, or may examine the case for the purpose of determining whether there is probable cause to believe him guilty, and, if so, may order him to recognize for his appearance before the Superior Court. . . . Commonwealth v. Harris, 8 Gray, 470. ... In the present case, the record states that the defendant is discharged because ‘it does not appear that there is probable cause to believe defendant guilty.’ This language indicates that the court did not assume to take final jurisdiction, but was simply doing the preliminary duty of determining whether the defendant should be held for appearance before a higher tribunal” (emphasis supplied). P. 489.
A brief comment on the concurring opinion is indicated. In cases where the District Court can exercise final jurisdiction the statute clearly gives the right of choice between a trial and a probable cause hearing to the judge and not to the defendant. If it were otherwise, a defendant could prevent the consolidation of cases in the Superior Court when this is deemed appropriate and necessary for the orderly processing of criminal business. This is but one example. Thus, it is immaterial that the “petitioner has not requested, and is not now requesting, a full trial . . .” as noted in the concurring opinion. Nor can he be “deemed to have waived” a right which never existed. Therefore, it is necessary for the court presently to express an opinion “on the procedure to be followed by a District Court judge.” Otherwise District Court judges are still left without guidelines as to the proper method of procedure.
When the instant case is transferred to the District Court, as ordered, a probable cause hearing will be held “unless the court decides to exercise its jurisdiction.” As the opinion states, the judge will make known beforehand which of the two procedures he will follow.

=== CASE 9737519 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:27:38.990859+00 ===

*144Quirico, J.
(concurring) The specific relief sought by the
petitioner is that this court order the Municipal Court of the Roxbury District to “schedule a probable cause hearing for the charges against [the] defendant” and that further action by the Commonwealth be stayed pending the holding of such a hearing. The briefs of both the petitioner and the Commonwealth state the principal question for decision to be whether a defendant, appearing before a judge of a District Court on a criminal complaint charging an offence of which that court has final jurisdiction, is entitled to a “bind-over” or “probable cause” hearing, so called, before the judge can decline jurisdiction and bind the defendant over to the Superior Court. By its opinion this court holds that the petitioner is entitled to such a hearing and I concur with that holding.
The petitioner has not requested, and is not now requesting, a full trial in the District Court on the merits of the complaint against him. If he had the right to request and receive such a trial, he should be deemed to have waived it by reasons of his limited request for a “probable cause” hearing. For this reason I would refrain from presently expressing any opinion on the procedure to be followed by a District Court judge in a situation where the defendant has not waived his right to a trial on the merits of the complaint.

=== CASE 2210869 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:59.093472+00 ===

301 N.E.2d 524 (1973)
Robert CARTER, Defendant-Appellant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Plaintiff-Appellee.
No. 1-473A65.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, First District.
October 4, 1973.
*525 James R. Cotner, Bloomington, for defendant-appellant.
Theodore L. Sendak, Atty. Gen., Wesley T. Wilson, Deputy Atty. Gen., Indianapolis, for plaintiff-appellee.
ROBERTSON, Presiding Judge.
Defendant-appellant (Carter) brings this appeal from a conviction following trial by jury for involuntary manslaughter. He argues two allegations of errors: (1) that the trial court erred in overruling his motion to quash the indictment, and (2) that the verdict was not supported by sufficient evidence.
Carter was charged by indictment in two counts  the first being voluntary manslaughter and the second involuntary manslaughter. Carter's argument on appeal was restricted to the sufficiency of the second count, and we, therefore, narrow our consideration to it only.
Carter's overruled motion to quash challenged the indictment as stating facts not constituting a public offense and as not stating the offense with sufficient certainty. Carter's argument centers on the language in the indictment which charged defendant:
"did ... kill one Barbara Carter, by then and there beating the said Barbara Carter with a blunt instrument and causing her to be overexposed to the elements, thereby feloniously, but involuntarily, inflicting a wound and overexposer [sic] in and upon the said Barbara Carter, of which wound and overexposer [sic] the said Barbara Carter ... died...."
As to whether the offense is stated with sufficient certainty, the State contends that the necessary implication from the language of the indictment is that had the victim not been struck she would not have been overexposed. The indictment, the State argues, "charges that Barbara Carter died as a result of the wound inflicted in the assault and battery upon her and of the overexposure to the elements resulting from such wound." The State's argument must fail because nothing can be charged by implication. Hewitt v. State (1908), 171 Ind. 283, 86 N.E. 63. This argument by the State serves to further illustrate the deficiency in the indictment. No explanation is offered by the State as to how a wound can result in an overexposure to the elements. This interpretation given the indictment by the State varies with what to us seems a more rational interpretation  that Barbara Carter died as a combined result of a beating inflicted by the accused and of overexposure to the elements caused by the accused when he locked her out of the house when the temperature was eleven degrees.
The Indiana Supreme Court has interpreted the constitutional provision that the accused be apprised of the "nature and cause of the accusation against him" to require that the "gist of an offense shall be charged in direct and unmistakable terms." Hinshaw v. State (1919), 188 Ind. 147, 122 N.E. 418. In addition, a defendant is entitled to be informed specifically of the crime charged so that he may prepare an adequate defense. Loveless v. State (1960), 240 Ind. 534, 166 N.E.2d 864. The indictment charging Carter falls short of these standards. Carter's motion to quash should have been sustained.
*526 As a result of our decision that the indictment failed to state the offense with sufficient certainty, we need not decide whether the facts alleged therein constituted a public offense. Also, it is unnecessary to pass on Carter's second allegation of error raised in this appeal, that being whether the verdict was supported by sufficient evidence.
The judgment is reversed, and the cause remanded, with instructions to the trial court to quash the indictment.
LOWDERMILK and LYBROOK, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2210870 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:59.106434+00 ===

260 Cal.App.2d 649 (1968)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
DONALD PAUL BERRY, Defendant and Appellant.
Crim. No. 13652.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. One.
Mar. 29, 1968.
Bernay, Christensen, Goldberg & Kippen and Richard H. Christensen for Defendant and Appellant.
Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, William E. James, Assistant Attorney General, and William V. Ballough, Deputy Attorney General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
FOURT, J.
Donald Paul Berry appeals from a judgment of conviction, pursuant to a jury verdict, of three counts of committing lewd and lascivious acts upon the body of a child (Pen. Code,  288). Appellant was denied probation and sentenced to state prison on each count.
The record reflects the testimony of two little girls as prosecution witnesses. Carrie Jorgenson, a six-year-old first grade pupil, was frequently taken to the Berry home by her mother during 1964 and early 1965 to be cared for by appellant's wife, Millie. Customarily Millie cared for several children, in addition to her own family, while their mothers went to work.
Carrie testified that when she was left at the Berry home on Sundays, Millie took the older children to Sunday school and Carrie was left alone with "Don" and the younger children. Frequently on these Sunday mornings appellant would take Carrie into the bathroom or the Berry children's bedroom. Carrie and he would remove their clothing, and appellant would have Carrie lie on a rug which he placed upon the floor. Then appellant would kneel over her and insert his "thing" and "stuff would come out." On one occasion he placed his "thing" in her mouth and at times she also played with his "thing." She did not disclose these events to anyone for a *651 long while, although Don's "thing" hurt her, because he asked her to keep it a secret.
Janene Marie Forester, another child who had been cared for in the Berry home while her mother worked, was nine years old. She testified that she spent June 10 and 11, 1965, at appellant's house and on one of those days, while she and appellant were alone in the living room, he pulled up her skirt, knelt down and kissed her on the outside of her panties near the elastic band. On another occasion, appellant asked her to get him a beer from the garage, then followed her and there knelt down and kissed her on the mouth, inserting his tongue. He also rubbed his private parts against her. Although he told her to "keep it a secret," she told her mother about these events a couple of days later.
Carrie's mother did not learn about appellant's conduct with her daughter until some time later. Several times during each month from April through July of 1964 Carrie complained of inflammation in the vaginal area and her mother frequently examined her or applied medication. The inflammation would disappear upon medication only to recur, and her mother was unable to determine the cause. Finally, on the night of June 4, 1965, Carrie while taking a bath admitted to her mother that appellant had engaged in sexual conduct with her. Coincidentally, and upon reminiscence, Carrie's mother recognized that Carrie "hurt" every Sunday night when she came home from appellant's home. Carrie's mother recalled specifically that she had left her daughter at the Berry home only one Sunday during February of 1965 and on that day, February 7, 1965, Carrie had been inflamed and hurting.
Appellant testified in his own defense, and denied the acts complained of by Carrie and Janene. He said that his wife took care of several children in addition to Carrie and Janene during the period between May 1964 and June 1965 but he did not regularly care for the younger children on Sundays while she took the others to church. Appellant did not recall seeing Carrie during May 1964 and believed that he was working away from home on one of the Sundays, May 24, 1964, of which the prosecuting witness complained. On February 7, 1965, appellant left home around 8 a.m. and returned after 6 p.m. when he finished working on his truck with a friend. On June 7, 1965, another day included in the charges, appellant was home with his wife, who testified that on that day Janene spent less than an hour at the Berry home. *652
[1] Appellant contends that neither juvenile witness was properly qualified under Code of Civil Procedure, section 1880 subdivision 2 and that the failure of the court to swear each of the juvenile witnesses as adults constitutes reversible error. In addition, appellant claims that the dates of the commission of the offenses proved at trial were different from those originally alleged in the felony complaint and proved at the preliminary hearing. These contentions are without merit.
It was not incumbent upon the court to inquire whether these prosecuting witnesses understood the meaning of the adult oath. The court inquired of the older witness whether she knew what it meant to tell the truth and whether she would tell the truth as she promised; to both questions she answered "yes." The court also cautioned her that failure to tell the truth after so promising constituted the crime of perjury, and Janene said she understood and promised to tell nothing but the truth. The court also inquired of Carrie if she knew what it meant to tell the truth, what it meant not to tell the truth, and whether she would tell the truth if she promised the court to do so. To each of these questions she responded "yes," and when asked whether she would tell a lie she said "no."
The record, moreover, reflects that each of the prosecuting witnesses was competent. The younger girl knew her last name, her age, her birthdate, her class in school and the name of her teacher. She understood the court's admonitions and on direct examination she clearly described the surroundings and manner in which the acts were committed. She knew these events took place on Sundays while the Berry children were at church. The older girl displayed similar clear knowledge and understanding, clearly described the acts of appellant, and was aware of the dates and surrounding circumstances.
[2] It is not necessary that a juvenile witness entertain a religious belief or conviction, nor that the child have any detailed knowledge of the nature of the oath, but it is sufficient that the child understand that some earthly evil will befall if the truth is not disclosed (People v. Burton, 55 Cal.2d 328, 341-342 [11 Cal.Rptr. 65, 359 P.2d 433]). The younger child understood that she was under the judge's compulsion to tell the truth; the older girl understood that she would be committing a crime if she did not tell the truth.
[3] Finally, appellant, if he was dissatisfied with the answers, had the responsibility to request further inquiry into the witness's compunction to tell the truth before the *653 commencement of the child's testimony in chief. (People v. Burton, supra, 55 Cal.2d 328, 342.) Since defense counsel did not make such a request or object at the trial to the testimony of either prosecuting witness on the basis that she was not competent, the ground for objection must be considered waived. (People v. Singh, 182 Cal. 457, 484 [188 P. 987]; People v. Carpenter, 136 Cal.App.2d 726, 727-728 [289 P.2d 251]; People v. Wilder, 151 Cal.App.2d 698, 706 [312 P.2d 425].)
[4] Appellant's contention concerning the inadequacy of the court's oath-taking is a procedural matter similarly waived by failure to make timely objection and by proceeding with cross-examination of the witnesses. (People v. Thomas, 65 Cal.2d 698, 708 [56 Cal.Rptr. 305, 423 P.2d 233]; Tennant v. Civil Service Com., 77 Cal.App.2d 489, 498 [175 P.2d 568]; People v. Duffy, 110 Cal.App. 631, 635-636 [294 P. 496].)
[5] Finally, appellant contends that the dates of the offenses as alleged in the felony complaint were different from those proved at the preliminary hearing and appellant was prejudiced because he was unable to account for his whereabouts on the dates proved at trial. The felony complaint and preliminary transcript have not been made part of the record on appeal and appellant may not raise issues concerning matters outside the record. (People v. Fisher, 208 Cal.App.2d 78, 80-81 [25 Cal.Rptr. 242]; People v. Duchon, 165 Cal.App.2d 690, 694 [332 P.2d 373].)
The judgment is affirmed.
Wood, P. J., and Lillie, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9737520 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:27:40.472301+00 ===

Hunter, J.*
This is an action brought pursuant to IC 1971, 8-1-13-19 (Ind. Ann. Stat. § 55-4418a [1972 Supp.]), *131by the plaintiff-appellee, Public Service Company of Indiana, Inc., an Indiana public utility, to condemn all of the electric utility property owned by defendant-appellant, Decatur County Rural Electric Membership Corporation (REMC). The trial court entered an interlocutory order, overruling the defendant-appellant Decatur REMC’s amended objections to plaintiff-appellee’s complaint in condemnation and appointing appraisers. The overruling of those objections forms the basis of this appeal. Jurisdiction is based on IC 1971, 33-3-2-7(1) and (8), (Ind. Ann. Stat. § 4-214).
The general question presented to this Court for review is whether Public Service Company has the right to appropriate the property of Decatur REMC. The specific issues raised by the Appellant’s amended objections and those herein raised on appeal are:
1. Is IC 1971, 8-1-13-19 (Ind. Ann. Stat. § 55-4418a) (Section 18a of the Rural Electric Membership Corporation Act, hereinafter referred to as “Section 18a”) constitutional?
(a) Does it allow for an unconstitutional taking of Decatur REMC’s property without just compensation?
(b) Does it work to impair Decatur REMC’s contractual relations with the State of Indiana ?
(c) Does it confer special privileges and immunities upon the Public Service Company of Indiana, and thereby deny to Decatur REMC equal protection of the law?
(d) Does it unconstitutionally authorize the taking of property already devoted to a public use?
(e) Does it contravene the Supremacy Clause of the United States Constitution by frustrating the federal policy of rural electrification reflected in the Rural Electrification Act?
2. Are Public Service Commission approval and stockholder authorization prerequisites to a Section 18a condemnation?
3. Must a complaint filed pursuant to Section 18a of the REMC Act specifically include franchise rights as property taken?
*1324. Must an offer to purchase specifically include a value for franchise rights ?
Section 18a reads as follows:
“Municipality annexing territory served by electric utility— Purchase of property — Condemnation.—Whenever a municipality in which a public utility (including a corporation organized, or admitted to do business, under this act [§§ 55-4401 — 55-4426] is rendering electric utility service under a franchise, license or indeterminate permit or in which a municipally owned utility is rendering electric utility service, as the case may be (such public or municipal utility being hereinafter called the ‘franchised utility’), annexes additional territory and such annexed territory includes any territory in which the franchised utility was not authorized to render electric utility service immediately prior to such annexation but in which some other public utility (including a corporation organized, or admitted to do business, under this act) or municipally owned utility (such public or municipally owned utility being hereinafter called the ‘other utility’) was lawfully rendering electric utility service at such time, then the franchised utility and the other utility shall promptly negotiate for the purchase by the franchised utility of the property owned by the other utility within the annexed territory and used and useful by the other utility in or in connection with the rendering of electric utility service therein. In the event that such property has not been purchased by the franchised utility within 90 days after such annexation takes place, then the franchised utility may bring an action in the circuit or superior court of the county where such municipality (or the major part thereof in area) is located against the other utility, as defendant, for the condemnation of such property of the other utility. Until and unless such purchase or condemnation is effected, the other utility shall have authority to operate within the portion of the annexed territory in which it was lawfully rendering electric utility service immediately prior to such annexation. [Acts 1935, ch. 175, § 18a, as added by Acts 1953, ch. 48, § 2, p. 153.]” (Emphasis added.)
I
THE CONSTITUTIONALITY OF SECTION 18a
Decatur REMC’s allegation that Section 18a allows for an unconstitutional taking of its property is largely predicated *133on the principles enunciated by this Court in Kosciusko County REMC v. Public Service Commission (1948), 225 Ind. 666, 77 N. E. 2d 572. The Kosciusko case held, inter alia, that an REMC has a franchise property right which must be protected from illegal encroachments by other utilities. (See also, City of Greenfield v. Hancock County Rural Electric Membership Corp. (1971), 256 Ind. 15, 266 N. E. 2d 799.)
With the Kosciusko case as a premise, the appellants cite us to the general proposition that compensation for condemned property includes compensation for any franchise property rights incident thereto. (See Ft. Wayne Land & Imp. Co. v. Maumee Ave. Gravel Road Co. (1892), 132 Ind. 80, 30 N. E. 880). The appellants, also, however, concede that the right to just compensation for franchise rights may be contracted away by a public utility pursuant to 1C 1971, 8-1-2-92 and 93 (Ind. Ann. Stat. § 54-604 and 606 [1951 Repl.]). The pertinent provisions in those sections read as follows:
“Sec. 92. Every license, permit or franchise hereafter granted to any public utility shall have the effect of an indeterminate permit subject to the provisions of this act, and subject to the provisions that the license, franchise or permit may be revoked by the commission for cause and that the mimicipality may purchase the property of such public utility, as provided herein. Any such municipality is authorized to purchase such property and every such public utility is required to sell such property at the value and according to the terms and conditions as herein provided. “Sec._ 93. Any public utility accepting or operating under any indeterminate license, permit or franchise hereafter granted shall by acceptance of any such indeterminate license, permit or franchise be deemed to have consented to a future purchase of its property including property located in contiguous territory within six (6) miles of the corporate limits of such municipality by the municipality in which such utility is located, at the value and under the terms and conditions as provided in this act, and shall thereby be deemed to have waived the right of requiring the necessity of such taking to be established by the judgment of a court, and to have waived all other remedies and rights relative to condemnation, except such rights and remedies as are provided in this act and shall have been deemed to *134have consented to the revocation of its license, permit or franchise by the commission for cause. (Source: Acts 1913, c. 76, §. 102: as amended by Acts 1933, c. 190, §. 12).” (Emphasis added.)
Decatur REMC contends that it is not a public utility, relying primarily on the following language in the REMC Act, IC 8-1-13-18 (Ind. Ann. Stat. § 55-4418 (a) [1972 Supp.]) :
“Any corporation organized, under this act shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the public service commission for the purpose of fixing rates to be charged to patrons of such corporation for energy, and for such purpose said public service commission is given jurisdiction to proceed in the same manner and with like power as is provided by the ‘Public Service Commission Act’ in the case of public utilities.” (Emphasis added by appellants.)
Appellants conclude that the above is “a clear and unequivocal statement by the General Assembly that an REMC organized under the REMC Act is not a public utility within the meaning of the Public Service Commission Act.”
It is Decatur REMC’s position that it is not a public utility and that it possesses more than a mere “indeterminate permit,” but rather, franchise rights granted by the state. Therefore, appellant believes that the termination provisions, i.e., waiver of the right to just compensation for franchise rights, incidental to indeterminate permits are inapplicable here. Since there has been no waiver, Decatur REMC should receive just compensation for the taking of its franchise service rights.
Appellant’s argument is without substance. To begin with, this Court rejects Decatur REMC’s contention that it is not a public utility. The statutory language found in Section 18a and § 55-4418 (a), cited hereinabove, clearly establishes that the legislature conceived of no distinction between an REMC and other public utilities. The legislative intent was to apply the same rules and procedures found in these two statutory provisions to all utilities — to *135include REMCs. For example, Section 18a of the REMC Act specifically states:
“Whenever a municipality in which a public utility is rendering electric utility service . . . annexes additional territory and such annexed territory includes any territory in which the franchised utility was not authorized to render electric utility service — but in which some other public utility (including a corporation organized, or admitted to do business, under this Act) . . .” (Emphasis added.)
Ind. Ann. Stat. §55-4418(a), supra, provides that the procedures applicable to public utilities, pursuant to the Public Service Commission Act, should be equally applicable to an REMC.
The Kosciusko case, upon which appellant so heavily relies, unequivocally holds that REMCs are public utilities:
“By electing to be organized under this act, and by submitting to regulation it must be considered that REMC has devoted its property to a public use and is holding itself out as a public utility. In our opinion the entire purport of the Rural Electric Membership Corporation Act leads to the conclusion that it was for the purpose of affording a means of creating a public utility corporation such as REMC to engage in the electrical energy business, and, as it provides, to encourage the ‘fullest possible use of electric energy’ in its territory. (Emphasis added)” Kosciusko, supra, at 678.
Decatur REMC’s position is further undermined by the holdings in Southern Indiana Gas & Electric Co. v. Indiana Statewide Rural Electric Coop. (1968), 251 Ind. 459, 242 N. E. 2d 361, Morgan County Rural Electric Membership Corp. v. Public Service Company of Indiana (1970), 253 Ind. 541, 255 N. E. 2d 822, and Hendricks County Rural Electric Membership Corporation v. Public Service Company of Indiana (1971), 150 Ind. App. 503, 276 N. E. 2d 852. These cases state the well-established rule that the certificate of convenience and necessity held by an REMC constitutes no more than an indeterminate permit and is thus “subject to termination ‘according to law.’ ” (Morgan County, *136supra, at 826.) In the case at bar, Decatur REMC holds a certificate of convenience and necessity (granted in 1937) and, therefore, such certificate is subject to termination according to law. Section 18a of the REMC Act provides for such termination.
The Morgan County case is directly on point with the case at bar. This Court’s rejection of the Morgan County REMC’s argument is equally applicable to Decatur REMC's contentions, and Chief Justice Arterburn’s language best illustrates the futility of appellant’s argument:
“. . . The argument is then essentially that the right to serve a particular territory is a valuable property right for which compensation should be paid prior to any infringement or extinction.
“Appellant was granted its certificate of public convenience and necessity by the Public Service Commission in 1939. Appellant’s certification was, then, no more than an indeterminate permit. Southern Indiana Gas & Electric Co. v. Indiana Statewide Rural Electric Cooperative Inc. (1968), 251 Ind. 459, 242 N. E. 2d 361, Burns’ Ind. Stat. Ann. §§ 54-604, 54-105. As such appellant’s right to serve the area in question was subject to termination ‘according to law.’ One such means of termination was provided for in Burns’ §§ 55-4418a. That statute establishes the procedure whereby termination is effected. It clearly states that the property subject to purchase or condemnation is the used or useful property of the appellant connected with its rendering County, supra, at 825.”
“Appellant may continue to operate these facilities until they are acquired either by purchase or condemnation. It cannot be said, therefore, that appellant’s property is impaired or taken without just compensation.” Morgan County, supra, at 825.
Appellant’s allegation that Section 18a unconstitutionally impairs a valid contract as between the state and Decatur REMC is totally without merit. It has been established that Decatur REMC possesses nothing more than an indeterminate permit — one which may be terminated at any time pursuant to Section 18a of the REMC Act. The State has retained the right of termination, while Decatur REMC received a conditional franchise. In effect, *137Decatur REMC consented to the “impairment” of its “contract” with the state. Hence, there is no intrusion as contemplated by the appellants.
Appellants argue that Section 18a, in its application, unconstitutionally discriminates against them. It is their position that Section 18a of the REMC Act “purports” to apply equally to all public utilities, yet, in reality, applies unequally. Any utility appears to qualify as “the franchised utility” which serves the municipality at the time of annexation and as “the other utility” authorized to serve the annexed territory prior to annexation. Since the REMCs are only mandated to serve rural areas, i.e., communities having a population of less than 1,500, they will rarely, if ever, be the so-called “franchise utility.” Furthermore, appellants contend Section 18a provides for a constitutionally impermissible classification by failing to include utilities other than electric service. (Section 18a, in fact, deals only with electric service utilities.) Appellant alleges that the above-mentioned discriminations are violative of the equal protection clauses of Article 1, § 23 of the Indiana Constitution and the 14th Amendment to the United States Constitution.
Legislative classifications are not per se unconstitutional. In fact, legislation, by its very nature, is an enterprise requiring subject matter distinctions. However, arbitrary and capricious classification will not pass constitutional muster.
The Equal Protection Clause does not prevent a state from indulging in reasonable legislative classification. If it can be established that there is any rational basis for the classification, it will generally be sustained. State of Indiana ex rel. Miller et al. v. McDonald, et al. (1973), 260 Ind. 565, 297 N. E. 2d 826. A higher level of judicial scrutiny is required when there are fundamental rights or suspect classes involved. Miller, supra. A public utility has not heretofore been construed as a “suspect class,” nor *138is the privilege to provide electric service a fundamental right. Therefore, the classification which inheres in the application of Section 18a of the REMC Act may be sustained upon a showing of rationality or reasonableness.
There are rational grounds upon which the classifications created by Section 18a are based. There is a longstanding Indiana policy that two utilities should not render like service in the same municipality. The original enactment of the Public Service Commission Act reflects this fundamental policy:
“No license, permit or franchise shall be granted to any person, copartnership or corporation to own, operate, manage or control any plant or equipment of any public utility in any municipality where there is in operation a public utility engaged in similar service under a license, franchise or permit without first securing from the commission a declaration, after a public hearing, of all parties interested, that public convenience and necessity require such second public utility.” (Emphasis added.) IC 1971, 8-1-2-86 (Ind. Ann. Stat. § 54-601 [1951 Repl.]).
This statute has been construed to mean that the operation of two utilities providing the same service within the same municipality is contrary to the stated policy of the state. See: Public Service Commission v. State ex rel. Merchants Heat and Light Co. (1915), 184 Ind. 273, 111 N. E. 10; In re Northwestern Indiana Tel. Co. (1929), 201 Ind. 667; 171 N. E. 65; Batesville Telephone Co. v. Public Service Commission (1931), 46 F. 2d 226 (Court of Appeals, Seventh Circuit); Re Public Service Company of Indiana, Inc. (1947), 71 P.U.R. (n.s.) 45 (wherein the Public Service Commission granted the Public Service Company of Indiana the right to extend its service into a territory theretofore serviced by an REMC on grounds that public convenience and necessity require the avoidance of duplication).
REMCs were created to service rural Indiana. REMCs were organized “for the purpose of promoting and encouraging the fullest possible use of electric energy in the state by making electric energy available to in*139habitants of rural areas of the state at the lowest cost consistent with sound economy and prudent management of the business of such corporations . . .” IC 1971, 8-1-13-2 (Ind. Ann. Stat. § 55-4402 [1951 Repl.]).
It is only logical that once an area serviced by an REMC is incorporated into a municipality already serviced by an electric utility, it loses its rural identity. The justification for the continued existence of the REMC in such area no longer exists — its objective having been accomplished. This result is not only reasonable, but is fully within the ambit of statutory purposes and goals.
Appellant’s contention that Section 18a violates equal protection, because it applies only to electric utilities, is also without merit. It is the duty of the legislature to promulgate statutes regarding the operation of public utilities. A legislative decision to limit the subject matter of such a statute to electric energy is clearly reasonable and, hence, permissible, so long as the statute does not result in invidious discrimination against any one electric utility or any one group of the same.
We, therefore, hold that Section 18a of the REMC Act, on its face and in its application, is consistent with the notions of equal protection and, hence, does not offend the Constitutions of either the United States or Indiana.
Decatur REMC further alleges that Section 18a improperly authorizes the taking of property already devoted to a public use and, hence, is unconstitutional. We believe Section 18a is a permissible expression of legislative policy. In Morgan County REMC, supra, this Court stated:
“Our interpretation of § 55-4418a best meets with the realities of our society. The growth of municipalities will continue. Such growth of necessity results in annexation. What was once ‘rural’ becomes ‘urban.’ The purpose of the law is to make such growth and transition as fair and in a manner least likely to disrupt service to the public.” (Emphasis added) at 825.
*140[13] Section 18a represents a fundamental policy decision by the legislature. The exercise of eminent domain under Section 18a simply implements that policy; it is designed to serve the greater public interest rather than private interests. We can find no constitutional infirmity in the state’s delegation of its powers of condemnation to effectuate legitimate state policy.
Decatur REMC asserts that Section 18a unconstitutionally interferes with the federal policy of rural electrification reflected in the Rural Electrification Act, and, hence, violates the Supremacy Clause of the United States Constitution, Art. 6, cl. 2.
The Rural Electrification Act, U.S.C.A., Title 7, ch. 31, §§ 901, et seq., authorizes federal loans to REMCs for the express purpose of “furnishing electric energy to persons in rural areas.” (Emphasis added.) The Act defines “rural area” as “any area of the United States not included within the boundaries of any city, village or borough having a population in excess of fifteen hundred inhabitants.”
After a reading of the Rural Electrification Act, we are unable to discern any clash between the State of Indiana and the United States. As we have stated, the purpose for an REMC’s existence expires when the area which it serves becomes “urbanized.” Once an area, which was theretofore “rural,” is included within a municipality of 1,500 or more and becomes urban, it clearly falls outside the ambit of the Rural Electrification Act. Therefore, Section 18a in no way contravenes the Supremacy Clause.
II
PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION APPROVAL AND STOCKHOLDER AUTHORIZATION AS PREREQUISITES TO A SECTION 18a CONDEMNATION
It is Decatur REMC’s position that IC 1971, 8-1-2-84 (Ind. Ann. Stat. § 54-510 [1951 Repl.]) implicitly provides that a condemnation proceeding brought pursuant to Section 18a *141requires approval by the Public Service Commission and by the stockholders of Public Service Company of Indiana. IC 1971, 8-1-2-84 reads, in part, as follows:
“Any such public utility may purchase or lease the used and useful property, plant or business, or any part thereof, of any other such public utility at a price and on terms approved by the commission. Whenever, in the case of any such purchase, the amount to be paid'by the purchaser for the property, plant or business to be purchased shall be an amount in excess of five [5] per cent of the book cost to the purchaser of all the properties, plants and business owned by it at the time application is made to the commission for approval of such purchase, or whenever, in the case of any such lease, the book cost to the lessor of the property, plant or business to be leased shall be an amount in excess of five [5] percent of the book cost to the lessee of all the properties, plants and business owned by the lessee at the time application is made to the commission for approval of such lease, there shall be obtained from the holders of three-fourths of the voting stock of such purchaser or lessee their consent, authority and approval to such purchase or lease.”
We reject this argument for two reasons. First, 8-1-2-84 makes no mention of condemnation actions, but, rather, deals only with voluntary sales or leases. Second, Section 18a makes no reference to the requirements of 8-1-2-84. In the absence of explicit language to the contrary, we must assume that the legislature intended to exempt condemnation actions from the requirements of 8-1-2-84.
Ill
Finally, appellant argues that the Complaint in Condemnation is fatally defective for failure to specifically include franchise rights as property taken and that no good faith offer was made by Public Service Company in that value for franchise rights was not specifically included. As we have stated above, Decatur REMC had no right to compensation for any franchise due to the waiver inherent in the issuance of an indeterminate permit. Thus, *142we are unable to discern any foundation for appellant’s contention.
We commend counsel for both parties for their excellent briefs.
For all the foregoing reasons, the interlocutory order of the trial court overruling defendant-appellant’s amended objections is hereby affirmed.
Arterburn, C.J., Givan and Prentice, JJ., concur; DeBruler, J., concurs in result.
This case was transferred and re-assigned to this office June 25, 1973.

=== CASE 9737592 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:29:33.681284+00 ===

KAUFMAN, P. J.—
I reluctantly concur on the authority of Gomez v. Superior Court, 50 Cal.2d 640 [328 P.2d 976]. While I agree that the judgment must be reversed, I do not agree that the defendant should be acquitted as a matter of law as a result of double jeopardy. In the instant case, in addition to the defendant’s statement, there is the circumstantial evidence of the victim’s wallet which the police discovered after the offense, and the fact that the defendant first told conflicting stories about the wallet, but finally admitted he had removed the wallet from the body and thrown it from the car window to prevent anyone from connecting him with the *163decedent. While the prosecution is bound by the defendant’s statement, the jury, as the trier of fact, is not, as it may accept or reject the defendant’s statement as a whole or in part. If the jury completely rejected the defendant’s statement and concluded on the basis of the evidence relating to robbing the decedent of his wallet, and the shooting and killing of the decedent, the result would have to be murder in the first degree (Pen. Code, § 189); if the jury accepted the defendant’s statement as a whole, the result would have to be justifiable homicide.
I agree that there is no merit in the prosecution’s contention that the evidence indicates a murder in the second degree. The evidence in the record before us warrants a finding either of first degree murder or justifiable homicide. But for the Gomez case, the proper procedure would be to reverse the judgment with directions for a new trial, directing that the jury be given instructions only on murder in the first degree and justifiable homicide.
It cannot be said as a matter of law that there is no evidence in the record to show that defendant is guilty of murder in the first degree, a killing in the commission of a felony, to wit: robbery.
Respondent’s petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied January 23,1963.

=== CASE 3784363 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:05.042881+00 ===

The original action herein was upon an indemnity or fidelity bond issued by plaintiff in error to insure the defendant in error from loss by reason of the defalcation of certain of its employes. The American Vitrified Products Company, with its principal office at Akron, Ohio, had a number of factories and branches in various parts of the country. Carl E. Cook was cashier of the factory and sales office at Jackson, Mich., and on March 1, 1924, was so employed, and had been for many years prior thereto, his employment more than covering the period from December 1, 1922, to June 2, 1924. The indemnity bond sued on herein was executed February 9, 1924, and became effective March 1, 1924. Said bond provided that the insured was protected against "such pecuniary loss of money, funds or other personal property (including that for which the insured is responsible) as the insured shall sustain by any act or acts of fraud or dishonesty (including forgery, theft, embezzlement, wrongful abstraction or misapplication)." Cook's employment was covered in the policy up to $5,000.
The record discloses that Cook, for a considerable period, had committed acts of fraud and dishonesty against his employer, the American Vitrified Products Company, and for the period from December 5, 1922, down to June 2, 1924, when his accounts were checked, there appeared a shortage of over $4,000. On June 9, 1924, Cook committed suicide. His method of defalcation was as follows: The Products company maintained a $1,500 deposit, for sundry expenses, in the People's National Bank of Jackson, Mich., upon which account Cook was *Page 280
authorized to check when said checks were countersigned by Walker, the office manager. Cook had no authority to indorse checks or other commercial paper payable to the defendant in error. About December 5, 1922, Cook began the practice of depositing customer's checks, given in payment of accounts due the Products company, in the petty cash fund in the Peoples National Bank of Jackson, taking part thereof in cash for himself and depositing the balance to the credit of the Products company, and would afterwards cover this shortage by depositing in the People's National Bank of Jackson to the credit of the Products company certain checks subsequently received from other customers, then sending to the home office of the Products company in payment of the original shortage his own check on the petty cash fund account, along with numerous other customers' checks. He thus showed payment of the account of the customer who had first paid, and a part of whose money he had appropriated to himself, and this shortage was made good with the company by paying the same with the money received from another customer. In short, he misapplied checks coming into his possession to cover up shortages theretofore existing, and paid the debt due the Products company with its own money, using one customer's money to pay on the account of another.
It seems to be undisputed that the amount of the shortages prior to March 1, 1924, was $3,408.34; that after March 1, 1924, Cook appropriated funds in the amount of $966.12, which the Products company never received either in paymet of shortages existing prior to March 1st or otherwise, for *Page 281
which amount of $966.12 the indemnity company admits its liability. The question then becomes whether there is a liability under this bond for the dishonesty and fraud of Cook which took place prior to March 1, 1924, and which it is conceded amounted on that date to $3,408.34.
We think the principle herein involved is the same as in the case of Golden Seal Assurance Society v. Ætna Casualty Surety Co., 207 A.D. 628, 202 N.Y. S., 674, wherein it was held:
"Where dues in a fraternal benefit corporation, collected by its secretary in any month, were not payable at the home office until the second month thereafter, held, in an action on a fidelity bond, that secretary's defalcation occurred when secretary originally converted corporation's money, though the defalcations were covered up from month to month by making them apparently good by payments out of collections for the succeeding month."
To the same effect may be cited the cases of First NationalBank of Nashville v. National Surety Co., (C.C.A.), 130 F., 401, 66 L.R.A., 777, and Supreme Council Catholic Knights ofAmerica v. Fidelity  Casualty Co. of N.Y., (C.C.A.), 63 F., 48, both opinions being rendered by Lurton, J., afterwards a member of the Supreme Court of the United States.
In the liability of sureties on the bonds of defaulting public officials it is quite generally recognized that the defaults of a prior term are not chargeable against the sureties on an official bond for a subsequent term.
In Walker v. State, 176 Ind. 40, 95 N.E. 353, it was held: *Page 282
"A county treasurer who misappropriates public money during his first term is liable upon his official bond therefor; and his repayment of the fund so misappropriated from the revenues received during his second term will not relieve his first term sureties or impose any liability therefor upon his second term sureties."
In the case of City of Detroit v. Weber, 29 Mich. 24, in the majority opinion rendered by Cooley, J., it was held that a defaulting agent cannot make good his default as between himself and his sureties, on the one hand, and his principal on the other, by taking the principal's money for the purpose.
In Sidner v. Alexander, 31 Ohio St. 378, the Supreme Court of this state held:
"Where a sheriff who was his own successor, had received money in his official capacity during his first term of office, which was in his hands when he gave bond and qualified for his second term, and subsequently failed, on demand, to pay the money to the party entitled thereto, the sureties on his official bond for the second term are not liable for such default."
In the opinion in that case at page 384, it is said:
"When the demand was made, and the sheriff refused to pay, he was guilty of a breach of official duty, and, by relation, this operated a breach of the condition of the official bond in force at the time the money was received, and for which the sureties on the bond for the second term, which was subsequently executed, are not liable."
Other cases to the same effect might be cited in support of this theory. Bissell v. Saxton, *Page 283 77 N.Y., 191; Inhabitants of Township of Freehold v. Patterson,38 N.J. Law, 255; Township of Paw Paw v. Eggleston, 25 Mich. 36;Inhabitants of Rochester v. Randall, 105 Mass. 295, 7 Am.Rep., 519; Street v. Laurens, 5 Rich. Eq., (S.C.), 227; Heuitt
v. State ex rel. Brown, 6 Har.  J. (Md.), 95, 14 Am. Dec., 259; United States v. Boyd, 46 U.S., (5 How.), 29,12 L.Ed., 36; Proctor Coal Co. v. United States Fidelity Guaranty Co., (C. C.), 124 F., 424; T. M. Sinclair  Co. v.National Surety Co., (1906) 132 Iowa 549, 107 N.W. 184;United States v. Eckford's Executors, 1 How., 250,11 L.Ed., 120; Walker v. State, (1911) 176 Ind. 40, 95 N.E. 353; Boardof Education v. Robinson, (1900) 81 Minn. 305, 84 N.W. 105, 83 Am. St. Rep., 374; Lowry v. State, ex rel. Hull,64 Ind. 421; Parker v. Medsker, (1881) 80 Ind. 155; Ohning v.City of Evansville, 66 Ind. 59; Goodwine v. State ex rel.Fleming, (1881) 81 Ind. 109; United States v. Morgan, (D.C.), 28 F., 48, (District Court, S.D., N.Y., June, 1886), affirmedUnited States v. Morgan, (C. C.), 35 F., 489, decided 1888; Van Sickel v. Buffalo County, 13 Neb. 103, 13 N.W. 19,42 Am. Rep., 753; County of Buffalo v. Van Sickle,16 Neb. 363, 20 N.W. 261; Myers v. United States, I McLean, 493, Fed. Cas. No. 9,996; Trustees of Schools v. Smith, 88 Ill. 181; Baylies, Sureties and Guarantors, p. 150, Section 9; Vivian,Treas., v. Otis, 24 Wis. 518, 1 Am. Rep., 199.
Our attention is called to the case of American Bonding Trust Co. of Baltimore v. Milwaukee Harvester Co., 91 Md. 733,48 A. 72, in which case it was held:
"Defendant, a surety company, executed to *Page 284
plaintiff a bond by which it agreed to make good such pecuniary loss as plaintiff might sustain during a certain period by reason of any fraudulent or dishonest act of plaintiff's agent, in connection with his duties, amounting to embezzlement or larceny. The agent paid over to plaintiff all the money collected during the period covered by the bond, but he directed a part of the same to be credited on other accounts owing to the plaintiff, without knowledge by the plaintiff that the money collected by the agent from certain accounts was so applied to the payment of other accounts for which the agent was also liable. Held, that this action amounted to a fraudulent conversion by the agent of the money collected, and that the defendant is liable therefor under the bond."
Other cases may be cited in support of this theory, but as applied to the facts as disclosed by this record we cannot regard this rule as controlling.
We hold that Cook committed an act of dishonesty and fraud toward his employer, the Products company, when he first misapplied funds by failing to turn over to it the money received by him in payment of the accounts; that the Royal Indemnity Company would not be liable for any act of Cook which was done before the bond was executed, because the bond contains nothing which is retroactive in character, but is rather prospective; that the misappropriation of funds after the date of the bond, with which to pay his prior shortages, did not constitute a new pecuniary loss to the Products company under the terms of the Royal Indemnity Company bond, for the reason that the *Page 285
Products company had already sustained a pecuniary loss. The form of paying one customer's account out of the money collected from another customer did not change the amount of the loss, for such loss already existed. The actual loss suffered by the Products company after the effective date of the indemnity bond was the additional amount that Cook misappropriated not used to pay prior defalcations, and for this amount the indemnity company acknowledges itself liable.
As to the construction to be given an indemnity bond against loss sustained by reason of the fraud or dishonesty of an employe, the language of Spear, J., in Livingston  Taft,Trustees, v. Fidelity  Deposit Co., 76 Ohio St. 253,81 N.E. 330, fairly states the rule. On page 264 (81 N.E. 332) he says:
"Being contracts of indemnity against loss, such contracts should be liberally construed in favor of the object sought to be attained, and where a clause is susceptible of two interpretations which seem equally fair, that should be preferred which affords the greater indemnity, but, like other contracts, they should receive a reasonable construction in order to carry out the presumed intention of the parties as expressed by the language used."
This announcement is not in conflict with Royal Indemnity Co.
v. Northern Ohio Granite  Stone Co., 100 Ohio St. 373,126 N.E. 405, 12 A. L. R., 378, which was an action upon a bond given under a building contract, nor with Great American MutualIndemnity Co. v. Jones, 111 Ohio St. 84, *Page 286 144 N.E. 596, 35 A. L. R., 1023, which was an action on an accident policy.
We are of opinion that the doctrine announced in Golden SealAssurance Society v. Ætna Casualty  Surety Co., supra,First National Bank of Nashville v. National Surety Co., supra, and Supreme Council Catholic Knights of America v. Fidelity Casualty Co. of N.Y., supra, and the cases, above cited in support of that view of the law, should be adopted as the rule in this state. Entertaining that view, it becomes necessary to reverse the judgment of the Court of Appeals in its judgment of affirmance of the court of common pleas. This cause is remanded for further proceedings in accordance to law.
Judgment reversed.
MARSHALL, C.J., ALLEN, KINKADE, ROBINSON and MATTHIAS, JJ., concur.
JONES, J., not participating. *Page 287

=== CASE 3784364 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:05.229716+00 ===

In our judgment the decision of this case hinges on the question of estoppel. Assuredly the bonds and mortgage were not absolutely void. On the other hand several irregularities are claimed but all but two may be dismissed without further consideration. The two that must be noticed are: (a) The method by which the bonds were sold and (b) the issuance thereof before the lapse of thirty days after the passage of the ordinance on July 8, 1939, authorizing them, which period must transpire before the ordinance could become effective. City ofMiddletown v. City Commission, 138 Ohio St. 596,37 N.E.2d 609.
But these irregularities could not prevail to defeat the validity of the bonds in the hands of bona fide purchasers for value before maturity if the recital in the bonds was such as would work an estoppel. Nearly all, if not all, of the bonds are in the hands of purchasers of that kind. We must, therefore, look to the recital in the bonds which reads as follows: "It is hereby certified and recited that all acts, conditions and things necessary to be done precedent to and in the issuing of these bonds in order to make them the legal, valid and binding obligations of the village in accordance with their terms, and in authorizing the execution and delivery of the indenture securing these bonds, have been done and performed and have happened in regular and due form as required *Page 262
by law; that the fiscal officer of the village of Amherst has, on its behalf, received payment in full for said bonds, and that said bonds are not governed by or subject to any constitutional, statutory or other limitation upon the amount of the bonded indebtedness prescribed by law for the village."
Since mortgage revenue bonds are not amenable to the Uniform Bond Act (City of Middletown v. City Commission, supra) much that is stated in State, ex rel. Alden Corp., v. Village ofSolon, 132 Ohio St. 362, 7 N.E.2d 550, is inapposite. However some of the authorities cited in the latter case bear generally upon the question of estoppel by recital because in the absence of statute one must look to the common law.
At the outset it should be borne in mind that if the village is estopped the plaintiff taxpayer is likewise estopped.Warfield v. Anglo  London Paris Natl. Bank, 202 Cal. 345,260 P. 881; New Orleans v. New Orleans Waterworks Co.,142 U.S. 79, 35 L.Ed., 943, 12 S.Ct., 142; Fahey v. City of Bloomington,268 Ill. 386, 109 N.E. 292. So we must carefully consider the action taken by the village and its effect.
The village council had authority to inquire into the facts covered by the recital and, even though the facts recited later proved inaccurate, there was nothing in the bonds themselves to disclose the irregularities. The recitals were calculated to justify the belief to an innocent purchaser that the bonds were regularly issued. Now, a general recital that bonds are issued in conformity to legal and statutory requirements and that all things have been done, prior to and in issuance thereof, necessary to make them valid, is sufficient to afford protection to bona fide purchasers for value before maturity, provided the municipal officers causing the bonds to be issued have express or implied authority to issue them, and provided further the defects are merely irregularities which do not render the *Page 263
bonds void. See 86 A. L. R., 1084, annotation V D, and cases cited.
We are therefore of the opinion that the plaintiff is estopped from asserting such irregularities to defeat the bonds.
The judgment of the Court of Appeals is therefore affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.
WEYGANDT, C.J., TURNER and ZIMMERMAN, JJ., concur.
MATTHIAS and HART, JJ., dissent.
BETTMAN, J., not participating.

=== CASE 3784365 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:05.281566+00 ===

While counsel for the prisoner and for the state both discuss the weight of the evidence relating to the higher degree for which the prisoner was convicted, we confine ourselves wholly to the legal question presented, viz.: Was there error in the court's charge to the jury? In considering this question the proof offered, respectively, by the state and the defendant, can be briefly stated. About 2:20 a. m., September 18, 1927, the defendant, Freeman, had parked his auto on a street in Dayton. Horn, a policeman of that city, observing the parked auto of the defendant, rode up to it on his motorcycle and stopped beside Freeman's car. What transpired in the killing of the policeman is developed by the testimony of an eyewitness and by circumstances attending the homicide. The state offered as a witness one Pappas, who testified that at some distance away he perceived the officer on the running board of the car, a gun in his right hand and a flash light in his left; that the officer told Freeman, who was at the wheel of his car, to come out, and then walked around to his motorcycle; that Freeman left the car and started toward the officer. Pappas testified that the defendant *Page 252
and the officer were both leaning over the motorcycle; he could not then see the gun, but a moving of the defendant's hands towards the policeman, and heard the defendant say to the officer: "Stick them up — I'll kill you." He then heard a shot fired and saw the officer crunch to the ground. He ran over at once, caught the officer in his arms as he fell, and placed his head upon his knee. From this position the officer fired five shots at the fleeing defendant from Freeman's pistol. The peculiar circumstance in the entire transaction is that, while the officer possessed a gun, no shot was fired from that gun, but every shot was fired from the pistol of the defendant that somehow had been secured by the officer.
The defendant gave testimony tending to prove that the officer searched the car, obtained the defendant's gun, and ordered him out of the car; that when he got out the officer presented this gun to his body, and that he, the defendant, in order to protect himself from death and great bodily injury, attempted to grasp his pistol in the hands of the officer, and that in a scuffle, the gun was accidentally discharged. The testimony of the defendant, if believed, would tend to show that he did not kill the officer "purposely and wilfully," as defined in the statute, but that if any killing was done by him it was done accidentally and unintentionally in this scuffle. Even under the defendant's testimony, the transaction as related by him might support the conclusion, that, although unintentional, the homicide was caused while resisting arrest.
Whether the state's theory of the killing, or the defendant's, was true was a question for the jury. *Page 253
Was the defendant entitled to have the court charge upon a lesser degree than murder in the first degree under the state of proof offered by him?
Counsel for defendant, before argument, requested a specific charge that, under the evidence, he might be found guilty of a lesser degree of murder than the degree charged in the indictment. This the court did not do; it charged the jury that they should find him guilty of murder in the first degree or acquit.
The court said, after charging on the elements of first degree murder:
"On the other hand, members of the jury, if you do not find him guilty of murder in the first degree, either with or without a recommendation of mercy, then your duty would be to acquit the defendant in this case."
At the close of the general charge, counsel for the defendant excepted to the failure of the court to charge on a lesser degree than murder in the first degree. In its general charge with reference to murder in the first degree the court plainly indicated that Freeman must be found guilty of murder in the first degree whether the pistol was or was not intentionally discharged. The court indicated the jury might so convict by charging, "Whether the trigger was pulled by Officer Horn or by Roy Freeman makes no difference, if you find from the evidence in the case that the gun was discharged while Roy Freeman was resisting arrest."
If the killing was unintentional and not "purposely or wilfully" done, if the trigger was pulled by Officer Horn without any causal intention on the part of the defendant, it would not have been murder in the first degree; but if the killing was done *Page 254
under such circumstances, and the jury believed it was so done, and was not done in lawful self defense, the offense charged might be reduced to manslaughter for the killing of an officer while resisting arrest. When different degrees are included in the offense charged, the jury may find the defendant guilty of an inferior degree included in the offense (Section 13692, General Code); and if the evidence tends to support such inferior degree, the court should charge concerning it. True it is that the jury may have disbelieved the defendant, since the manner of killing was circumstantial. It might have found that in fact the pistol that the officer had on the running board of the car was his own, and had in the meantime been returned to the officer's pocket; that the pistol that was actually fired was the defendant's pistol, fired by him after he came out of the car and confronted the officer; and that after the firing of the gun by defendant and in the scuffle, the officer may have wrested the pistol from Freeman and fired after him in his retreat. However, the court should have charged the defendant's theory of the case. The rule has often been established by this court that where the evidence justifies it, the lesser degrees of an included offense must be charged; if there is no evidence tending to prove the lesser degree, the court need not charge in that respect.
The later cases in this court announcing this principle areBandy v. State, 102 Ohio St. 384, 131 N.E. 499, 21 A. L. R., 594, and Windle v. State, 102 Ohio St. 439, 132 N.E. 22. InPeople v. Koerber, 244 N.Y. 147, 155 N.E. 79, the Court of Appeals held:
"Refusal, in felony murder, to instruct jury as to *Page 255
lower degrees of homicide, and giving instruction to convict for murder in first degree or to acquit, is proper only where no possible view of facts would justify any other verdict, except a conviction of the crime charged or an acquittal."
See, also, People v. Moran, 246 N.Y. 100, 158 N.E. 35.
In the course of its general charge the court said to the jury:
"It was not William C. Horn so much with which we are concerned in this case. * * * The shot that shoots down an officer reverberates with the echoes of anarchy, and the flame that comes from the firing of that pistol gives suggestion of chaos," etc.
Bearing in mind that it was claimed by the defendant that whatever he did was done in self-defense, and that the pistol was, in any event, unintentionally and accidentally discharged, this comment of the court was prejudicial, and, coming from the bench as it did, was calculated to inflame and prejudice the minds of the jury. Besides, the comment contained an implication that this particular shot that shot down this officer fell within the condemnation of the court and was such a shot that "reverberates with the echoes of anarchy and * * * gives suggestion of chaos." Certainly we all agree that an intentional criminal act in shooting down one of our public officers is a crime against the government; so to a lesser degree is the shooting down of any citizen; but what we may think or say as individuals may not be permitted in the trial of a criminal case where the charge of the court should be confined to the questions of law and fact presented on the trial. Coming from the bench, at the close of the trial, remarks *Page 256
of this character were extremely prejudicial, especially so in a case where "purpose or wilfulness" and intentional killing were in issue.
The judgments of the lower courts are reversed and the cause remanded to the trial court for a new trial, or for further proceedings according to law.
Judgment reversed and cause remanded.
ALLEN, KINKADE, ROBINSON and MATTHIAS, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9737521 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:27:40.477441+00 ===

Opinion Concurring in Result
DeBruler, J.
I cannot keep in step with the majority of the Court, when it concludes from the language of IC 1971, 8-1-13-18, being Burns § 55-4418 (a) and IC 1971, 8-1-13-19, being Burns § 55-4418a, that the Legislature conceives of no distinctions between the cooperative public utility and other public utilities. It appears to me from these enactments that they clearly delineate the jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission over an REMC, and contain no expression or intendment whatsoever that an REMC be regulated in every respect the same as other utilities. Burns § 55-4418a grants jurisdiction to the Public Service Commission to fix rates which may be charged by an REMC for energy. Nothing more. Burns § 55-4418 (a) merely calls the REMC a “public utility” and subjects it to the loss of territory annexed by a city when that city is being served by some other “public utility”. That statement would not warrant the conclusion which arises from the majority opinion as I read it, that the Legislature intends that the rural electric cooperatives be considered “public utilities” and therefore subject to the regulatory scheme contained in the Public Service Commission Act.
Neither do I agree that the prior cases of this Court or the Public Service Commission Act itself add any support to the conclusion reached by the majority. Even the majority in Southern Indiana Gas & Electric Co. v. Indiana Statewide Rural Electric Coop. (1968), 251 Ind. 459, 242 N. E. 2d 361, *143(DeBruler, J., dissenting) would be surprised to see their opinion cited as supportive of so sweeping a conclusion. There, the majority found that Statewide was required to seek Public Service Commission approval of its plan to generate electricity, since the original grant of authority in the original articles of incorporation approved by the Public Service Commission to do so, had been lost by non-use; and it was therefore concluded that Statewide should seek Public Service Commission approval for what was conceived in the majority as an expansion of the authority granted in the original articles of incorporation. In no way could the holding in that case support the conclusion that the REMC is a “public utility.”
My dissent in the Statewide case led to my concurring in result in the case of Morgan County REMC v. Public Service Company of Indiana (1970), 253 Ind. 541, 255 N. E. 2d 822. There, it was my unexpressed view that by enacting Burns § 55-4418a, the Legislature had directly affected the nature of the right of the REMC to serve in annexed areas, and that it had a right to do so in these circumstances. I did not agree that the REMC held only an indeterminate permit as defined in the Public Service Commission Act. I still contend, as I did in my dissent in the Statewide case, that it is up to the Legislature to decide whether the rural electric cooperatives shall be subjected to the full regulatory scheme of the Public Service Commission Act. To date, they have not done so.
Note. — Reported in 301 N. E. 2d 191.

=== CASE 2210878 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:59.201868+00 ===

260 Cal.App.2d 512 (1968)
WILLIAM S. HART, JR., Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES, Defendant and Respondent.
Civ. No. 30762.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Five.
Mar. 27, 1968.
N. E. Youngblood and Morris Lavine for Plaintiff and Appellant.
Harold W. Kennedy, County Counsel, and Mitchell L. Lathrop, Deputy County Counsel, for Defendant and Respondent.
STEPHENS, J.
The factual background of this appeal is taken from the brief of the appellant, omitting transcript references:
"This is an action for declaratory relief, forfeiture, and an accounting, which arises out of the Last Will and Testament of William S. Hart, Sr., who died in Los Angeles County on June 23, 1946, leaving a Will executed September 9, 1944, through which defendant County of Los Angeles was designated as the primary beneficiary under two trusts [consisting of] ... ranch property commonly known as The Hart Ranch (or Horseshoe Ranch) at Newhall, California, containing approximately 220 acres, together with other personal property consisting of cash and the residue and remainder of the estate which ultimately represented a sum amounting to approximately $900,000.00."
"Plaintiff William S. Hart, Jr., is the only issue of William S. Hart, Sr., deceased, who left no surviving spouse, as a result of which, and in accordance with the provisions of *514 Section 222 of the Probate Code of the State of California, plaintiff William S. Hart, Jr. would have been entitled to the entire estate of his father William S. Hart, Sr., had said William S. Hart, Sr. died intestate."
"Subsequent to the death of William S. Hart, Sr., his Last Will and Testament dated September 9, 1944 was contested by plaintiff William S. Hart, Jr., without success, and a Decree of Distribution was ultimately made thereon, which decree of Distribution was entered on or about December 2, 1955 awarding to the defendant County of Los Angeles the sole and exclusive management, supervision and control of all of the above mentioned real and personal property derived through the Last Will and Testament of William S. Hart, Sr. pursuant to and under the two separate trusts created thereby."
"It is the contention of plaintiff William S. Hart, Jr. in this proceeding that defendant County of Los Angeles has not done and performed the terms and conditions on its part to be done and performed under the Decree of Distribution entered December 2, 1955 and the Last Will and Testament of William S. Hart, Sr., and the two trusts created therein, or in accordance therewith, as the direct and proximate result of which it is contended that defendant County of Los Angeles has forfeited whatever right or interest it otherwise would have had in and to said real and personal property of said estate, and is not legally entitled to keep and retain any portion thereof."
"* * *"
"Under the Last Will and Testament of William S. Hart, Sr. dated September 9, 1944 it was provided:"
'... If the County, or its successors in interest or estate, shall fail, neglect or refuse to perform each or any of the other conditions hereby imposed, the said property shall, immediately upon the happening of either or any of said events, revert (emphasis ours), and shall go and be distributed, to the State of California for the same uses and purposes and upon the same conditions imposed upon the State of California as are herein set forth and imposed upon the County.'
"In the Second Amended Complaint it is alleged that plaintiff is informed and believes that defendant State of California, designated as an alternate beneficiary or "trustee" herein, will not accept the within property or trusts, as the result of which plaintiff is entitled thereto as if said decedent had died intestate. *515"
"A. The First Cause of Action is for Declaratory Relief, under which plaintiff-appellant seeks to have the Court adjudicate his rights and those of the defendant County of Los Angeles, including particularly the question as to whether or not defendant County of Los Angeles has failed to do and perform the terms and conditions on its part to be done and performed under the provisions of the Last Will and Testament of William S. Hart, Sr., the two trusts created thereby, and the Decree of Distribution entered December 2, 1955 in action No. P-257566."
"B. The Second Cause of Action seeks to have the Court adjudicate a forfeiture of all right, title and interest which the defendant-respondent County of Los Angeles may otherwise have had to any property heretofore derived or to be derived from the Estate of William S. Hart, Sr., and that all said property should revert back to the Estate of William S. Hart, Sr. to be administered as if said decedent had died intestate. The alleged basis for such claimed forfeiture is that defendant-respondent County of Los Angeles has failed to do and perform the terms and conditions on its part to be done and performed under the Last Will and Testament of William S. Hart, Sr., the two trusts created thereby, and the Decree of Distribution entered December 2, 1955."
"C. The Third Cause of Action seeks an accounting from defendant- respondent County of Los Angeles for all property and moneys heretofore received by said defendant-respondent from or through the Estate of William S. Hart, Sr., upon the ground that the County of Los Angeles has forfeited any interest therein and plaintiff-appellant, as the surviving son and sole heir at law of decedent William S. Hart, Sr., is a party interested in said estate, as provided in Section 222 of the Probate Code of the State of California."
"Defendant County of Los Angeles demurred to the Second Amended Complaint upon the ground that the Second Amended Complaint does not state facts sufficient to constitute a cause of action, 'in that the said cause of action is not brought by the real party in interest', which demurrer was urged by said defendant County of Los Angeles in connection with all three causes of action, and on December 8, 1965 an order was made as follows:"
'Demurrer is sustained without leave to amend on the ground that even assuming that the State of California, as the alternate trustee, refuses to serve as such, it being a public trust, said trust cannot fail for want of a trustee and the *516 Court will appoint a trustee, if necessary to carry out the purposes of the trust. In any event the property cannot revert to the plaintiff as an heir at law. (See Estate of Hart, 151 CA 2d, 271, 286.)'
"Thereafter and on January 14, 1966 an order was made that said action be dismissed with prejudice. This appeal followed."
[1] A complaint that is not brought by the party who has standing to sue is subject to general demurrer (2 Chadbourn, Grossman & Van Alstyne, California Pleading,  1192), and if it would not be possible to state a cause of action in the plaintiff, no matter in what capacity the suit is brought, then the general demurrer should be sustained.
This action was filed by plaintiff in his capacity as the sole legal heir of the decedent. His claim is that if the county's action resulted in a forfeiture of the property in question, and if the state would not accept the gift over in case a forfeiture occurred, then the property would revert back into the estate and vest in him. If this is an accurate statement of the law, then plaintiff has stated a cause of action. This is not, however, the law under the existing facts. [2] The county holds the property, both real and personal, as trustee of a charitable trust for the benefit of the public in general. (Estate of Hart, 151 Cal.App.2d 271, 284 [311 P.2d 605].) The courts endeavor to protect the public's interest in trusts of this nature, and will not allow such to fail because of the actions of the trustee. Instead the court will appoint a successor trustee if it is established that the appointed trustee is not performing his duties in conformity with his obligation. The trust property will not be allowed to revert to the grantor or his heirs unless the grant or devise clearly manifests such an intent. (In re Los Angeles County Pioneer Soc., 40 Cal.2d 852, 865-866 [257 P.2d 1].) This principle of law applies where the trustee is a political subdivision. (Estate of Hart, supra, at p. 286.) [3] If some of the provisions of the trust require performance by a political entity as trustee and no willing political entity can be found, the doctrine of cy pres, liberally applied in the charitable context, may be invoked to carry out the manifest intent of the testator. [4] Here there can be no question but that the gift over to the state, and a specific provision in the will that the son was not provided for therein because he had been amply provided for during the testator's life (see Estate of Hart, supra, at p. 274), indicate the testator's intent that the property was to *517 continue in trust for the benefit of the public and that it was not to return to the son. The general demurrer should have been sustained as the plaintiff did not state a cause of action in himself. The question then becomes: Might the plaintiff have been able to amend his complaint to state a cause of action in himself in some other capacity? It is to this question that we now direct our attention.
[5] The State of California has enacted, with minor variation, the Uniform Supervision of Trustees for Charitable Purposes Act (Gov. Code,  12580-12596). This act requires that the Attorney General supervise the activities of trustees administering trusts of a charitable nature.plaintiff cites Government Code, section 12583  [fn. 1] for the proposition that the Attorney General has no power to bring a suit to compel compliance with the terms of the trust against the county. He argues that, as representing the cestui qui, he then must have standing as a member of the public at large to bring this suit.plaintiff fails to consider Government Code, section 12591. That section, in part, reads: ".... The powers and duties of the Attorney General provided in this article are in addition to his existing powers and duties. ..." Even though the county is exempt from the reporting provisions of the act, they are not immune from suit by the Attorney General any more than they would have been at common law before the enactment of the uniform act. (Pratt v. Security Trust & Sav. Bank, 15 Cal.App.2d 630, 640 [59 P.2d 862].)  [fn. 2]
The judgment is affirmed.
Kaus, P. J., and Aiso, J. pro tem.,  [fn. *] concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. Government Code, section 12583: "This article does not apply to ... any state, ... or to any of their agencies or governmental subdivisions. ..."
[fn. 2]  2. City of Hermosa Beach v. Superior Court, 231 Cal.App.2d 295 [41 Cal.Rptr. 796] has been examined, and is not contra to the holding in the instant matter.
[fn. *]  *. Assigned by the Chairman of the Judicial Council.

=== CASE 9737522 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:27:44.200266+00 ===

Mr. JUSTICE DIXON delivered the opinion of the court: The defendant, James Lewis, was charged with unlawful sale of heroin by two separate indictments. He was found guilty of both charges and he was sentenced by the Circuit Court of Rock Island County to concurrent terms of 15 to 30 years. The two cases were consolidated for appeal by order of this court. The first issue on appeal is whether defendant’s constitutional right to due process and a fair trial was violated by the trial court’s refusal to allow discovery of the name and address of the informer who participated in and witnessed the alleged offenses. (In case no. 72-85) On June 2, 1972, Illinois Bureau of Investigation Special Agent Grover Webb and a female informer went to the Armstrong residence in Rock Island for the purpose of making a controlled narcotics purchase. Webb testified that the informer suggested that he go to the Armstrong house to purchase narcotics and that she was paid by and under the control of the I.B.I. Agent Webb further testified that when they entered the house the informer introduced him. After introductions the informer first approached Mrs. Armstrong but there was no sale. Then he and the informer then went out to the porch where the informer asked the defendant to sell him some heroin. The defendant then gave the informer a tin foil packet which later turned out to contain heroin and Webb gave the defendant $50.00. Mrs. Valeria Armstrong testified that the informer was Nancy Wyerus who knew her well enough to know that she no longer used heroin, that she and Nancy used to “shoot it together”, last year sometime, that Webb and the defendant were never alone on the porch and that before departing Nancy told her that she had not been able to make a purchase. The defendant testified that no sale was made. (In case No. 72-85) Webb testified that on June 3, 1971 he and the same informer again went to the Armstrong residence to make a purchase. That he, the irifbr'mer and the defendant were alone in the kitchen. At defendant’s request the informer called Patricia Armstrong (a daughter of Valeria) into the kitchen whereupon defendant reached into her blouse, removed a'foil packet "which he gave to Webb in exchange for $100.00. The packet contained' heroin. Patricia Armstrong testified that she had never seen Webb before the day of the trial and that on June 3 defendant was never at her home. The defendant denied ever being in the home on June 3 and denied a sale. Prior to both trials the defendant’s attorney filed a motion wherein he sought to learn the identity of the informer-participant. The motion was denied. At the first trial on cross-examination of Webb, the defense was not permitted to elicit the informer’s name, after a showing by the State that there had been threats to the life of the informer. The facts in the case before us clearly establish that Valeria Armstrong, a defense occurrence witness had a close personal acquaintanceship with the informer Nancy Wyerus long prior to the offenses charged herein but the defendant did not. Defendant asserts that the privilege of non-disclosure did not exist in this case, that the prosecution’s refusal denied him due process of . law, that he was denied his constitutional right to meet the witness against him face to face and to have process to compel attendance of witnesses in his behalf. Ill. Const., art. I, sec. 8. , Could the privilege of refusing to divulge the identity of the informer be properly exercised in this case?  It is a general rule, usually referred to as “the informers privilege”, that the government is privileged to withhold from disclosure (notwithstanding its relevance) the identity of persons who furnish information relating to violations of law to officers charged with enforcement of that law. The privilege is founded on public policy, and seeks to further and protect the public interest in effective law enforcement. (Annot., 1 L.Ed.2d 1998.) There is an exception to the general rule, which is that if disclosure of the informer’s identity is necessary to show the innocence of one accused of crime .that the rule must yield to a stronger one which says that one is not to be condemned when his innocence can be established. Annot., 83 L.Ed. 155.  Defendant cites Roviaro v. United States, 353 U.S. 53, 1 L.Ed.2d 639. In People v. Mack, 12 Ill.2d 151, 165, our supreme court first discussed Roviaro in the following language, “The Roviaro case also pointed out that the privilege is not absolute and added to the already established exceptions those cases where disclosure is required by fundamental fairness, e.g., where the disclosure of the identity is relevant and helpful to the defense of the accused, or is essential to a fair determination of the cause. Accordingly, since the informer against Roviaro had helped set up the commission of the crime, * * * an¿l because he had been present at its occurrence [emphasis supplied], the court con-eluded that nondisclosure was mánifestly unfair, pointing out that the informer was in fact a participant in the crime and that conversations with Roviaro, (heard by a concealed police officer,) which only the informer could amplify or contradict, had been used as evidence to secure the conviction.” (In Mack, the' facts showed that the informer neither participated in the crime nor was he present.) In People v. Durr, 28 Ill.2d 308, the supreme court again recognized the rationale of Roviaro but found that the facts of Durr were distinguishable since the informer was not “so involved in the commission of the offense that his availability to testify was essential to fundamental fairness. In People v. Wilson, 24 Ill.2d 425, the informer was a “key witness” present at the sale. The defense was entrapment. The informer had been sent beyond the jurisdiction of the court. The court held that the testimony of the informer as to what was said was critical and that the ruling in denying defendant’s motion to compel her production deprived defendants of a fair trial. Wilson was followed in People v. Williams, 40 Ill.2d 367 (same facts). Also, see People v. Jarrett, 57 Ill.App.2d 169; People v. Castro, 10 Ill.App.3d 1078. In People v. Williams, 38 Ill.2d 150, 152-153, the court stated that the principles of Roviaro were recognized “* * * when the informer is a material witness on the issue of guilt or innocence of the defendant at the trial.” “[W]hen the informers testimony may bear upon the question of guilt or innocence rather than upon probable cause, the government’s interest in protecting its sources of information must yield to the defendant’s right to a trial based upon all the relevant evidence”. Cleary, Handbook of Illinois Evidence (2d ed.), sec. 10.29 says, “The privilege is based upon the assumption that the identity of the informer is not relevant to the issues in the case. If this assumption is unfounded in the particular case, as when the informer was a participant in or witness to the alleged crime and hence might give testimony helpful to the accused, * * * the privilege is recognized as being inapplicable” 76 A.L.R. 2d 282 states the privilege of non-disclosure must give way and disclosure of the identity of an informer is required where * * * (286) the informer is able to testify directly about the very transaction constituting the crime. Also see McCormick, Evidence (2d ed.), sec. 111; 21 Am. Jur. 2d Criminal Law, sec. 332; 58 Am. Jur. Witnesses, sec. 534 (1972 Cumulative Supplement); Jones on Evidence (6th Ed.), sec. 21; 39; Illinois Evidence Manual, Gard (1972 Supp.) Rule 442; 23 C.J.S. Criminal Law, sec. 954b; Nedrud, The Illinois Law of Criminal Investigation, part A, sec. 4.5; Hunter, Trial Handbook for Illinois Lawyers (4th ed.), sec. 17:6; Supreme Court Rule 412 (j)(ii), Committee Comments.  And, as was stated in Roviaro, “The desirability of calling John Doe as a witness, or at least interviewing him in prepartion for trial, was a matter for the accused rather than the government to decide.”  We conclude that under the circumstances the trial court committed prejudicial error in permitting the People to withhold the identity of its undercover employee in the face of the demands by the accused for her disclosure. The judgments of the Circuit Court of Rock Island County are reversed and the causes remanded for proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion. Reversed and remanded.

=== CASE 9737523 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:27:44.205073+00 ===

Mr. PRESIDING JUSTICE ALLOY dissenting: I believe that the decision of the trial court permitting invocation of the informers privilege in the present case should be upheld. There are grave policy questions involved in this case and in two companion cases being filed simultaneously — People v. Weathers, post, p. 776 and People v. Flippo, post, p. 774 — and if any change or modification in the Illinois rule is made, it should be made only by the Illinois Supreme Court. The effect of the majority opinion would be to destroy the informer’s privilege in all cases in which the so-called informer is present or may be a witness at the time of the commission of the narcotics violation. I do not believe that the majority position is consistent with the United States Supreme Court decision in Roviaro v. United States, 353 U.S. 53, 1 L.Ed.2d 639, 77 S.Ct. 623, nor does it bear any direct relationship to any other applicable decision of the United States Supreme Court or of the Illinois Supreme Court. The so-called “informer’s "privilege” is, in reality, the privilege of the government to withhold from disclosure the identity of persons who furnish information of violations of law to law enforcement officials. In the public interest for effective law enforcement, the privilege recognizes the obligation of citizens to communicate their knowledge of the commission of a crime to the proper authority, and, by preserving their anonymity, encourages them to perform that obligation. (People v. Mack, 12 Ill.2d 151, 164.) As employed, the “privilege” has been extended to include not only the citizen who merely furnishes information, but, also, to embrace persons who, in assisting law enforcement officials, help the authorities establish the commission of a crime by a defendant, notably in narcotics cases, (E.g., People v. Banks, 116 Ill.App.2d 147, 253 N.E.2d 631.) The privilege to which we have referred, however, is not absolute. The court in Roviaro v. United States, 353 U.S. 53, 1 L.Ed. 2d 639, 77 S.Ct. 623, in basing its decision on fundamental requirements of fairness, held that “Where the disclosure of an informers identity * * * is relevant and helpful to the defense of an accused, or is essential to a fair determination of a cause, the privilege must give way.” (353 U.S. 60-61, 77 S.Ct. 628.) The Roviaro case was treating with a problem of the general character we have before us involving the right of the government to withhold the identity of an informer who helped set up, and participated in, a crime involving narcotics. It is the main thrust of defendant’s argument before us that the decision is to be read as establishing a rule that disclosure must be made when an informer is present at the time of sale. I believe it is apparent from reading the case, that Roviaro neither intended nor propounded such an inflexible rule. After stating the problem, the Supreme Court in that case stated, “We believe that no fixed rule with respect to disclosure is justifiable. The problem is one that calls for balancing the public interest in protecting the flow of information against the individual’s right to prepare his defense. Whether a proper balance renders nondisclosure erroneous must depend on the particular circumstances of each case, taking into consideration the crime charged, the possible defenses, the possible significance of the informer’s testimony, and other relevant factors.” (353 U.S. at 62, 1 L.Ed. 2d at 646, 77 S.Ct. at 628-629.) The court thereafter, in the Roviaro case considered the circumstances of the case and the possible significance of the informer’s testimony and concluded, in balancing the various factors, that the informer’s identity should have been disclosed in that case. We are, therefore, confronted here, not with the application of a fixed rule, but a determination of whether disclosure should have been required under the particular circumstances in the records of the cases before us. Defendant, relying upon Roviaro and People v. Williams, 40 Ill.2d 367, contends that the circumstances require that the identities of the informer or “special employee” be disclosed. It is my conclusion that the circumstance which led to the result in the Roviaro and Williams cases have no compelling parallels in the cases before us. This is particularly true since defendant’s denial that he had committed the crimes removed any issue of entrapment. (See: People v. Jones, 73 Ill.App.2d 55.) It is also significant that the informer did not testify and, also, that the informer was not the purchaser of the narcotics in the sale which forms a basis of the conviction. In the Roviaro case, where the issue was decided with reference to a charge that the accused had illegally transported narcotics, the informer was the sole outside participant (with the defendant) in the crime. The conviction of the accused rested on the testimony, of two law officers. One of the officers had been in the surveillance car which followed the automobile of the informer, in which the latter and the accused were riding. The other officer was concealed in the trunk of the informer’s car, where he eavesdropped on the conversation of the accused and the informer, a circumstance which caused the court to comment that the officer’s testimony as to the conversation emphasized the unfairness of non-disclosure in that case. Thus, under such circumstances, the accused was prevented from cross-examining the only person with whom he had dealt and the only person who knew all that transpired. In the cases before us, by way of contrast, defendant did not deal with the informer alone. On the contrary, the evidence in each case showed a direct sale of narcotics to the agents who testified, and each was available to defendant for cross-examination concerning the transactions. People v. Williams, 40 Ill.2d 367, did involve a sale of narcotics to a policewoman in the presence of an informer. The principal issue on appeal, however, did not center around the disclosure of identity, but on the circumstances that a known informer had been sent outside the jurisdiction of the court and was thus rendered unavailable to the accused as a witness. In addition, the testimony of the policewoman created an issue as to whether the narcotics had been sold to the policewoman, as charged in the indictment, or to the informer. The essence of the court’s decision was that the deliberate removal of the informer from the jurisdiction of the trial court was a violation of the accused’s Sixth Amendment right to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor. (See: United States v. Wolfson, 322 F.Supp. 798, 819.) Because of this basic unfairness and the conflict of evidence peculiar to the Williams case, it was held that the accused was entitled to a new trial in which he could compel the attendance of the informer. Similar or comparable unfairness on part of the government did not occur in the cause before us. The ony circumstance common to both cases is that defendant’s denials that he sold the narcotics created a conflict with the testimony of the narcotics officers. In my opinion, this single' circumstance is insufficient to require disclosure of the true name of the informer. For many years its has been a basic tenet of criminal law that the testimony of one witness alone, if positive and if the witness is credible, is sufficient to convict, even though the testimony is contradicted by the accused. (People v. Catlett, 48 Ill.2d 56.) No distinction has been made in the narcotics cases. (People v. Anthony, 28 Ill.2d 65; People v. Banks, 116 Ill.App.2d 147.) As observed by the court in the United States v. McCorkle (7th Cir), 413 F.2d 307, where an agent testified to the sale of narcotics and defendant denied it, it was determined that the court was entitled to narrow the issue to one of credibility. I, therefore, see nothing in Williams or Roviaro which abrogates this principle, or stands for the proposition that the credibility of a narcotics agent must be held to be shrouded with doubt merely because an informer participated with him in the crime. In the context of defendant’s contention, it is clear that neither Williams nor Roviaro establish that the existence of a conflict in the testimony of the accused and a witness for the prosecution, creates a circumstance which requires that the identity of an informer be disclosed. To hold otherwise would effectively nullify the “informer’s privilege” and conceivably could nullify effective Narcotics Act enforcements. In the Williams case, additionally, the conflicting testimony created an issue as to whether the accused had sold the narcotics to the policewoman or to the informer, an issue which the officers in the surveillance car could neither corroborate nor deny. In the cases before us, the issue was whether the agent had purchased narcotics from a defendant or had even been to defendant’s house. Obviously, the testimony of the surveillance officers to the effect that the respective agents and special employee were observed entering defendant’s residence, had a certain corroborative value. The efforts made not to disclose the identity of an informer are obviously based not only on the public desire to make use of such informer by preserving his anonymity, but also, to guard against his removal or destruction. The prosecution’s interest in protecting the anonymity of an informant has been manifest in other cases decided in this court, such as People v. Rogers, 6 Ill.App.3d 1092, 286 N.E.2d 365, where defendant’s testimony was that the informer had provided the heroin which was the basis of the charge of illegal sale by defendant. The informer was not called by the prosecution, even though this was the only effective way in which the State could meet such defense testimony. The Rogers case is an illustration of an entrapment defense in which the public interest in maintaining the anonymity of the informer outweighed any potential value in assuring the conviction in a particular case under consideration. It is also noted that the so-called “informer’s privilege” has been incorporated in the Illinois Supreme Court rules relating to criminal prosecutions in Rule 412 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1971, ch. llOA, §412(j) (ii)), where it is specified that a disclosure of an informant’s identity shall not be required where his identity is a prosecution secret and failure to disclose will not infringe the constitutional rights of the accused. It is further provided in that Rule that disclosure of identity should not be denied as to witnesses who are to be produced at a hearing or trial. Recognition of the value of retention of the so-called informer’s privilege has, therefore, been codified by our Supreme Court by Rule and should be implemented, where appropriate, as in the instant case. In McCray v. Illinois, 386 U.S. 300, 18 L.Ed.2d 62, 87 S.Ct. 1056, the United States Supreme Court had before it an Illinois case involving a motion to suppress evidence which evidence was the basis of defendant’s conviction. Defendant contended that his constitutional rights were violated, in that he did not receive a fair trial, in violation of the Federal Constitution in the Due Process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment and the Sixth Amendment right to confrontation of witnesses. Defendant asserted that this resulted from the failure of the Illinois Court to force the disclosure of the identity of an informer upon whose statement the sworn testimony of the arresting officers was based. While this action involves a question of probable cause to sustain an arrest of a narcotics suspect and a search of his person, it was, truly, the effective basis for the conviction of such defendant, when heroin was found by the arresting officers in defendant’s possession. This judgment of conviction was affirmed by the Supreme Court of the United States. We need not speculate as to what the Supreme Court actually meant by the Roviaro decision. In the course of the McCray opinion, the Supreme Court again discussed the Roviaro case and noted (18 L.Ed.2d at 70) that what Roviaro made clear was that the Supreme Court was unwilling to impose any absolute rule requiring disclosure of an informer’s identity, even in formulating evidentiary rules for federal criminal trials. The Supreme Court also stated (18 L.Ed.2d at 71): "We are now asked to hold that the Constitution somehow compels Illinois to abolish the informer’s privilege from its law of evidence, and to require disclosure of the informer’s identity in every such preliminary hearing where it appears that the officers made the arrest or search in reliance upon facts supplied by an informer they had reason to trust. The argument is based upon the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment and upon the Sixth Amendment right of confrontation * * The Supreme Court points out very clearly that neither the Due Process Clause nor the Sixth Amendment right to confrontation of witnesses is violated nor was defendant deprived of any rights to cross-examine the arresting officers themselves because of their refusal to reveal the informer’s identity. It was correctly pointed out that if this argument would be followed no witness on cross-examination could ever constitutionally assert a testimonial privilege, including a privilege against compulsory self-incrimination guaranteed by the Constitution itself. The court stated that it has never given the Sixth Amendment any such construction and declined to do so. The rationale of the majority opinion in the instant case, if applied to the so-called probable cause cases (where evidence which could convict is sought to be suppressed), could be just as logically applied to such cases. If the same argument and principles would be applied, the informers privilege would in effect cease to exist. If a distinction is attempted between the situation such as existed in the McCray case, where the arrest and seizure of the heroin on the person of the defendant was the essence of the case as against defendant, and cases such as the type we have in the causes now under consideration, we find no fair distinction between cases such as those before us and the situation in the McCray case. At least in the cases before us, the defendant would actually have seen the informer and be in position to determine whether the informer could possibly have been involved in an entrapment problem or some other situation which could be raised as a matter of defense. In the cases involving the unknown informer, a defendant is in position where he knows nothing of the informer and presumably is completely deprived of any information which might be helpful to him in preparing his defense. Other questions necessarily would arise in connection with such attempted distinction. How far would the rule requiring disclosure of the identity and the address of an informer be extended? Is it to be extended to the informer who simply takes an agent to the home at which the suspect was to be seen, and where the informer does not enter? Does it apply to an informer who simply introduces an agent to a suspect? Does the fact that the informer sees the agent going into the residence make him a witness to the narcotics crime which ensues? Does the fact that the informer sees the agent talking to the defendant make him a witness to the crime and require that his identity be disclosed? Does this apply to the numerous cases where an informer accompanies the officers to the scene where a suspect is apparently engaged in the process of transferring or selling narcotics, and where the informer simply points out the suspect and the officers proceed with an arrest in the absence of the informer, who may still be within view? As we have indicated, serious policy questions are involved, and, as stated in Roviaro, the question of fairness to a defendant must be weighed in the light of all of the facts and circumstances and of the public policy to be applied in the effort to prevent the destruction or removal of an informer if his true identity is disclosed. In none of the cases before us has there been any contention that there was any entrapment nor did the informer testify nor was a sale made to an informer which would form the basis of a conviction. In all of the cases the defendants contended that no sale was made, and in most instances, even denied that the agent was present or had even been seen by the defendant. No contention is made that the informant would be called as a witness by defendant or that anything could be disclosed by the informer which would be other than cumulative of the testimony of the officer testifying in the case. It is apparent from the cases which have been heard in this court that the proliferation of narcotics violations has been of such nature as to pose a serious national problem of such magnitude as to call forth all of the ingenuity and resources of law enforcement authorities in an effort to cope with this problem. It is apparent also that the violators keep abreast of decisions with respect to the issues with which we are confronted and seek to adapt their activities to trends in enforcement procedure. By way of illustration, in the Lewis case, we note that the narcotics which were sold to the officer, in one instance,' were obtained from the brassiere of a young lady who was called in by defendant, and, who herself, was not involved in the sale of the narcotics but simply acted as a repository for the narcotics to be on call by the defendant. It is apparent, therefore, that a search warrant based on information from an informer to search the residence and the person of the defendant Lewis, as a suspect, would not have brought forth any narcotics, since the young lady, as a walking repository of the narcotics would not have been subject to search in such case. We cite this simply to indicate, not only the ingenuity of defendants in seeking to avoid detection, but also the nature of the problem of dealing with narcotics and the apparent need for the aid of informers as one means of trying to cope with the widespread narcotics traffic. The Supreme Court of the State of Illinois in its Rule 412(j) (ii) has recognized the value of retaining the informers privilege, and, in the Committee Comments following such Rule 412, it is specifically stated that "the value of informants to effective law enforcement is so highly regarded that encouragement of their use, through protection of their identity, has resulted in the development of one of the few privileges accorded to the State. The public intrest in protecting the sources of information concerning the commission of crimes is served by providing for the non-disclosure of the identity of informants except when compelling circumstances require it.” The Illinois rule (Rule 412) is a practical and effective implementation of a fair rule to be applied with respect to the informer’s privilege. It provides that, if the informer testifies, his identity must be disclosed, whether he testifies at a hearing or a trial. It is noted that the rule specifically refers to preliminary or probable cause hearings as well as the trial. The rule retains the general language authorizing nondisclosure of the identity if the standards of Roviaro are met. As indicated in Roviaro, no fixed rule should be applied with respect to disclosure of identity of informants. It calls for a balancing of public interest in protecting the flow of information as against the ind.v.dual’s right to prepare a defense. Basically, the proper ba.ance should take into consideration the crime charged, possible defenses, possible significance of the informer’s testimony, and other relevant factors. As indicated in United States o. Day, 384 F.2d464, in a concurring opinion of Circuit Judge McLaughlin, Roviaro places the discretion in the trial judge in weighing and balancing the conflicting interests of law enforcement and the individual’s right to prepare his defense. Justice McLaughlin concludes that the trial judge becomes the “arbiter of fundamental fairness” on the question of disclosure of an informer. He also points out that a decision of non-disclosure is justified in a situation where any testimony by an informer, even if it may be helpful, may not be decisive on the ultimate issue of guilt or innocence and where its weight is not greater than the public interest in fighting illegal sales of narcotics. As stated by Justice McLaughlin, disclosure based on a “mere supposition” would completely block the use of an informer in fighting illegal narcotics sales. 384 F.2d 464, 469. I believe that the Illinois Supreme Court has established a fair rule in Illinois in Rule 412(j)(ii). If an informer testifies, his identity must be disclosed. Under a factual situation as exists in Roviaro, if the sale leading to conviction is made to the informer, and the informer does not testify, then his identity should be disclosed. If an informer, however, is simply present or a witness to a part of a narcotics violation, but does not testify, although the purchasing officer does testify, then the trial judge, as the “arbiter of fundamental fairness”, in balancing public interest against defendant’s right to preparation of his defense (in cases such as we have before us) should properly be permitted to approve non-disclosure of the informer’s identity. It is believed that this is now the law of Illinois, that it is expressed in Rule 412(j)(ii), and that it should be upheld.

=== CASE 2210888 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:59.322624+00 ===

260 Cal.App.2d 611 (1968)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
ALEXANDER JOSEPH MUSZALSKI, Defendant and Appellant.
Crim. No. 6142.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. Four.
Mar. 29, 1968.
Jerry G. Wright, under appointment by the Court of Appeal, for Defendant and Appellant.
Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, John T. Murphy and William D. Stein, Deputy Attorneys General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
DEVINE, P. J.
Appellant was convicted of first degree murder for the killing on August 4, 1965, of his wife, Nancy Muszalski; and of attempted murder for the shooting of his father-in-law, Frank Paloutzian. Appellant's wife had separated from him and was living with her parents. There was an interlocutory decree of divorce; a final decree would have been available in about a month. Appellant blamed his wife's parents for the separation and for preventing a reconciliation. They had accused him of being a "free- loader" because his wife was working and he was going to college, and because they said he bought nothing for her.
Following the separation from his wife in March of 1964, appellant made many attempts at reconciliation. At times the two cohabited; at other times, they were seen together by neighbors. On the day before the homicide, appellant talked with his wife on the telephone about three hours. He testified she told him she was still very much in love with him and wanted to come back to him, and that maybe if he had a good job her parents would not feel so bad if she came back, but she didn't think she was strong enough to break with her parents.
On the fatal day, appellant asked his mother to telephone Nancy, but she got Nancy's brother, Ray. Appellant's mother told her son that Ray said Nancy did not love him and could not "stand the bloody sight of him." Appellant did not appear to be upset. On this same day, appellant's mother had a conversation with appellant's attorney, who told her that attempts at reconciliation seemed to be no use. She testified that she related this, too, to her son. She advised him to forget Nancy and he said he would.
That morning appellant made an appointment to see a priest. He told the parish housekeeper that he wanted a reconciliation. He seemed upset and said it was urgent.
At dinner he appeared to his mother to be normal. At about *615 7 o'clock he phoned a friend, told him of his three-hour conversation with Nancy, said she had been undecided what to do because she wasn't sure how her folks would take it, and said he would abide by whatever decision she made.
Appellant went to the priest's house, but had to wait because of an emergency appointment which had been made with others by the priest. He left after a wait of about 45 minutes, at about 8:15.
He intended, he testified, to visit friends, but after recalling one of them would not be home, he decided to go to the Paloutzian home, to get everybody together and to see "who was lying or not." He arrived at about 8:30. He parked around the corner from the home because he thought Nancy's parents would call the police. One reason for this conclusion was an episode of August 26, 1964. On that day, appellant had come to the same home, had pointed a screwdriver at Nancy's throat and had said, "I'll kill you if you don't come out with me." Nancy's mother had grabbed the screwdriver; whereupon, appellant picked up a kitchen or butter knife and dragged Nancy across the street. He was met by a policeman, who had been summoned.
After parking his car, appellant testified, he walked towards the house, then recalled that Paloutzian was bullheaded and went back and got a gun from the car, thinking he could force everybody to talk and find out who was lying.
When Paloutzian came to the door, appellant told him he had a job as supervisor over five women at a cannery and that this was the lunch hour. (This was false; he did not have the job, although he may have had prospects for one.) He said he wanted to talk to Nancy, that if she said she didn't love him he would go away and wouldn't bother her any more. Appellant looked perfectly normal to Paloutzian. He kept his right hand in his pocket. The two talked for several minutes. Then Paloutzian called Nancy.
Just what was said when Nancy appeared is uncertain.paloutzian testified that she started to say, "Bunny [appellant's nickname], you know I don't love you." Appellant testified that, following his colloquy with Paloutzian about seeing Nancy and Paloutzian's statement that she did not want to see him and did not love him, he, appellant, said he told Paloutzian that Nancy had told him just the opposite and that he wanted to talk to everyone to see who was lying. Nancy appeared. Appellant testified that she said, "Bunny, it's a lie" (that is, appellant's charge). It would seem likely *616 that these were Nancy's words because Mrs. Paloutzian, her mother, so reported to the police, and they put this into their investigating report.
Appellant pulled a snub-nosed revolver from his right-hand pocket. Paloutzian yelled to his son, "Ray, he's got a gun. Call the police." Appellant then fired twice through the screen door, hitting Paloutzian in the right chest, one bullet going through the shoulder and lodging in the left arm. Appellant then crashed through the screen door, ripping the center panel. The door bounced open and appellant brushed past Paloutzian as he fell to his knees. Appellant then ran towards the hallway and was grabbed by Mrs. Paloutzian, who was injured trying to stop him.paloutzian then heard a noise in the hallway and another shot. As Paloutzian made his way down the hall, to Nancy's bedroom, he found his wife holding Nancy up. Appellant was standing against the door and Paloutzian attempted to tackle him with his uninjured arm. Appellant twisted away and ran through the living room into the kitchen where he broke open the latched door and ran off.
The victim, Nancy Muszalski, was shot through the head. She had been pinned in a corner of the room by the door. Mrs. Paloutzian saw appellant "right over her" (Nancy) immediately after the shot was fired.
When appellant was arrested about two and a half hours after the homicide, he denied any knowledge of it, said he had been hiking and told the police they had better look around for some "narcotic friends" of his wife's brother. He was wearing light blue-gray denim trousers that had been cut off above the knee; at the time of the homicide he had worn full length trousers. There was no blood on the denims.
Appellant's testimony about the fatal event following his decision to force everyone to talk, continues. He rang the bell, heard Nancy's father say, "It's Bunny, you better leave, Nancy," and then the door was opened. As he spoke with her father, the gun was in his right-hand pocket, but he was smoking a cigarette with his right hand. When he put the cigarette out, he placed his hand in his pocket with the gun, "because I didn't know where else to put my hand." When Nancy spoke, his "muscles tightened up," and the gun went off twice. It blew a hole in his pants pocket. He walked, then ran into the house, went directly to where Nancy was, "pointed the gun at her and shot her." He left by the back door, got in his car, and drove off. He became lost, pulled into an orange grove, placed the gun to his head and pulled the trigger four *617 or five times, but the gun didn't fire. He broke the hammer of the gun and threw it out the window. He then drove to a gas station where he changed his pants. He threw the ruined pants into the receptacle at the gas station. He testified that he had no intent to kill Nancy or her father. Appellant remembers pulling the trigger when he shot Nancy in the head, but he doesn't know why he did it.
Before discussing the points of law, we observe several points in appellant's testimony, and his acts or statements, which doubtless made it difficult for the jury to rely on his credibility. First, there is the false denial made to the police. Then there is the fact that appellant threw away the pants which probably were bloody from Paloutzian's tackling of appellant when Paloutzian was covered with blood. Appellant's testimony that he threw the pants away because he discovered the hole in the pocket and they were worthless, would be hard to accept. So would appellant's testimony that he saw no blood on them. The pants were never found.
The shooting from inside the pocket not only contradicted Paloutzian's testimony, but also is inherently improbable. Since Paloutzian was struck in the shoulder, the gun, if in the pocket, would have to have been pointed upward. The gun was not an automatic, so there had to be a separate pulling of the trigger (and not a single "tensing of the muscles") for each of the two shots at Paloutzian.
Appellant testified he tried to shoot himself but the gun didn't work. But live ammunition had been discharged at the corner of the Paloutzian home. It required pushing of a button and knocking to eject bullets from the cylinder.
Appellant could not remember the full name or the address (other than Glendale) of the man from whom he had taken the gun as a sort of security for a loan, although he also testified that the man "was a pretty good friend of mine."
Instructions on the Felony-Murder Rule
The prosecutor relied for a first degree conviction not only on the proposition of a premeditated killing, but also on the theory that the killing had occurred during the commission of burglary. The burglary, as stated by the district attorney, was appellant's entry into the house with the intent to kill his wife or to assault her with a deadly weapon. [1] The felony-murder rule has been construed to include burglary even though the felony element of the burglary is an integral ingredient of the homicide itself. (People v. Talbot, 64 Cal.2d *618 691, 703 [51 Cal.Rptr. 417, 414 P.2d 633]; People v. Hamilton, 55 Cal.2d 881, 901 [13 Cal.Rptr. 649, 362 P.2d 473].)
There could be advantage to the prosecution in the felony-murder rule because the deliberation otherwise necessary to produce first degree murder (for example, if the whole episode had occurred on a front lawn) would not be necessary, but only the intention, present on entry into the home, to kill or to assault with a deadly weapon. (People v. Mason, 54 Cal.2d 164, 168 [4 Cal.Rptr. 841, 351 P.2d 1025].)
[2] Appellant protests that there was faulty judicial application of the rule in two respects: the felony asserted to have been intended at the time of entry was not specified or defined adequately, and the jury was not instructed that the asserted burglary must be proved beyond reasonable doubt.
It is true that the intended felony which would be an ingredient of burglary was not specified in the judge's instructions to the jury which defined burglary in its statutory terms. But the district attorney made it plain what his theory of felony-murder was. In his opening argument to the jury, he said: "When that defendant walked inside that door, after shooting Mr. Paloutzian, he had on his mind that he was going to shoot Nancy with this pistol, he was going to commit an assault with a deadly weapon upon Nancy."
"And an assault with a deadly weapon is an unlawful attempt, coupled with the present ability, to commit a violent injury on the person of another with a deadly weapon."
"No question that a gun is a deadly weapon. A deadly weapon is a weapon that can be used to cause great bodily injury or death."
"His intention when he walked in that door was to use that gun upon Nancy. Because there would be no other reason for him to crash through the door and to trap her in the bedroom."
"So when he walked through that door with the intention of shooting his wife, of committing an unlawful attempt upon her with this deadly weapon, this present ability--he had the gun with him--the minute that he walked through that door with this on his mind, that he was going to use that gun on her, then he committed a burglary."
Whether the intended felony was assault to commit murder (Pen. Code,  217) or assault with a deadly weapon (Pen. Code,  245), is not of prime importance under the particular circumstances of this case. Both are felonies, and they give evil character to the entry of a building and in particular, of *619 a home. [3] The purpose of the felony-murder rule is to deter persons from killing, even negligently or accidentally, by holding them strictly responsible for all killings they commit during the perpetration, or attempted perpetration, of any of the enumerated felonies. (People v. Talbot, supra, 64 Cal.2d p. 704.)
[4] Appellant's next proposition is that because the jury was instructed on the elements of the felony of assault with a deadly weapon, the jury may have believed that the assertedly burglarious entry was related to an assault with a deadly weapon to be committed on Paloutzian, not on Nancy. The killing of Nancy, then, would not be committed in the perpetration of the burglary, for the object of the burglary would have been completed. The killing of Nancy would be an independent action, to be judged by the laws of homicide exclusive of that of felony murder.
The facts of the case and the manner of presentation by the prosecutor make this theory wholly improbable. Entry had been unnecessary for the shooting of Paloutzian. If appellant thought that his action on Paloutzian was incomplete and he intended to enter in order to kill him (or to shoot him a third time), he could have effected this purpose easily, for Paloutzian, already felled or falling, was just inside the door. It was Nancy, not Paloutzian, whom appellant pursued from the moment of entry. Here, again, the case takes form, not only from all of the facts, but also from the prosecutor's argument, in which, as appears from the portion quoted above (at page 618), he refers to appellant's having "on his mind that he was going to shoot Nancy" when he "walked inside that door, after shooting Mr. Paloutzian" (italics added).
[5] Then, appellant argues that it is possible that only a misdemeanor was intended. He cites People v. Failla, 64 Cal.2d 560 [51 Cal.Rptr. 103, 414 P.2d 39], wherein a conviction of burglary was reversed for failure to define and to specify the acts which, if intended, would transform an entry into burglary. In that case, the conduct of appellant showed that the intended sexual acts following entry might have been a felony, a misdemeanor, or even no crime at all. In the case before us, the possible intended misdemeanor suggested by appellant is the exhibiting of a gun in a rude, angry or threatening manner, in violation of Penal Code, section 417. This theory was not advanced by appellant at the trial. Nor is it put forward in appellant's opening, but only in his closing brief on appeal. *620
We find the theory to be without merit on appeal. There was no testimony of appellant that upon his breaking through the door and entering, following the shooting of Paloutzian, he merely intended to brandish the weapon before his wife. Obviously, if appellant earlier had the intention of doing no more than bringing about a family conference or confrontation, by the display of the gun if necessary, this purpose would have ended with the shooting of Paloutzian. Appellant's acts show his intention as he broke through the screen of the door. He followed the victim, his gun drawn. He shook off the arms of her mother. He did not say anything, threatening or otherwise, to his wife, but, according to his own testimony, he just walked into the house and then ran directly to where she was, pointed the gun at her and shot her.
No instruction relating to the theory of a misdemeanor as having been intended was proposed, a circumstance which we note, not because the failure to request the instruction would preclude raising the point on appeal if the evidence had warranted the instruction (People v. Wilson, 66 Cal.2d 749, 759 [59 Cal.Rptr. 156, 427 P.2d 820]), but as merely one indication that the theory of commission of a misdemeanor was not present at the trial. Nor, apparently, was such a theory argued to the jury (no doubt it would have been regarded fatuous and would have reacted against defendant) for, although we do not have the defense argument, we find no rebuttal of this theory in the prosecutor's reply. In People v. Wilson, supra, conviction was reversed for failure to instruct upon the possible misdemeanor because (among other points) the appellant testified, as appellant here did not, that he entered his wife's apartment with the intent to scare visiting men with a shotgun, testimony which was supported by the fact that he allowed one man to leave unmolested and the fact that he shot others in what he considered to be self-defense. Here, the pursuit of the victim was immediate and unrelenting.
[6] Appellant's next point is that although the jury was instructed on reasonable doubt, there was no instruction that the initial crime, burglary, which was asserted to make the homicide a murder in the first degree must be proved beyond a reasonable doubt. It was held in People v. Whitehorn, 60 Cal.2d 256, 264 [32 Cal.Rptr. 199, 383 P.2d 783], that a defendant is entitled to such an instruction on request. If, however, defendant did not request the instruction, as in the case before us, it is not perfectly clear from the Whitehorn *621 case whether the court must give it on its own motion. In Whitehorn, the court affirmed the conviction, saying that the jury must have understood that the requirement of proof of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt applies not only to proof of guilt of homicide but also to proof of circumstances which show that the murder was of the first degree, namely, to the proof that the murder was committed in the perpetration of forcible rape. This holding was based upon the facts that the court gave a general instruction as to reasonable doubt, one setting forth the felony-murder rule, and an instruction that if there was a reasonable doubt as to whether the murder was of the first or second degree, it must give appellant the benefit of the doubt. All of these instructions were given in the present case.
Diminished Capacity; Instructions
[7] The court instructed the jury on manslaughter in the terms of the statute, that is, that "voluntary manslaughter is the unlawful killing of a human being without malice upon a sudden quarrel or in the heat of passion." (Involuntary manslaughter was also defined, but the matter is not related to the appeal.) The court gave proper instructions on sudden quarrel or heat of passion. But the court did not, in its instructions on manslaughter, make reference to diminished capacity. Nor did the court make such reference in its instructions on malice with reference to murder. There was given, however, at the defendant's as well as the People's request, the instruction which was then an approved one, CALJIC No. 73-B, which read (it has been amended since) as follows: "You are reminded that a person might be legally sane, as we define the term in dealing with the question of criminal responsibility, and yet be in an abnormal mental or nervous condition; and because of such condition he might be less likely or unable to have or to hold a specific intent or a certain state of mind, which is an essential ingredient of a certain crime. We have received evidence bearing on the mental and nervous condition of the defendant at the time of the alleged commission of the crime charged. Such evidence may be considered by you in determining whether or not defendant did any act charged against him and, if so, whether or not, at that time, there existed in him the specific mental factor and intent which must accompany that act to constitute a certain crime or degree of crime. You do not have before you any issue as to defendant's legal sanity." *622
This case was tried about three months before the decision of People v. Conley, 64 Cal.2d 310 [49 Cal.Rptr. 815, 411 P.2d 911], in which definite suggestions for instructions on the subject of diminished capacity were given, including the possibility of establishing lack of malice by "[s]howing that due to diminished capacity caused by mental illness, mental defect, or intoxication, the defendant did not attain the mental state constituting malice" (p. 325, fn.). Appellant contends that it was prejudicial error for the court to fail to give this instruction, although it was not requested and although it had not been formulated by the Conley case, because this was the law even before Conley.
The failure of defense counsel to request the instruction is not important, because the matter of capacity is clearly relevant to the distinction among the classes of homicide. (People v. Henderson, 60 Cal.2d 482, 489-490 [35 Cal.Rptr. 77, 386 P.2d 677]; People v. Anderson, 63 Cal.2d 351, 366 [46 Cal.Rptr. 763, 406 P.2d 43]; People v. Aubrey, 253 Cal.App.2d 912 [61 Cal.Rptr. 772]; People v. Farr, 255 Cal.App.2d 679, 686 [63 Cal.Rptr. 477].)
We must consider the evidence to see if there was prejudicial error in the omission. We observe at the start that there was no testimony whatever about the use of alcohol or of drugs by appellant; wherefore, cases of alcoholic amnesia (e.g., People v. Conley, supra, 64 Cal.2d 310), or alcoholic disorganization of the mental process (e.g., People v. Ford, 65 Cal.2d 41 [52 Cal.Rptr. 228, 416 P.2d 132]), or the alcoholic factor added to psychosis (e.g., People v. Henderson, supra), or acute drunkenness (People v. Aubrey, supra), are not comparable. Nor was unconsciousness asserted, as it was in People v. Conley, supra, and People v. Anderson, supra.
Diminished capacity could have resulted only from mental disease or mental defect. There was no evidence of organic trouble, as in People v. Steele, 237 Cal.App.2d 182 [46 Cal.Rptr. 704] (cerebral arteriosclerosis). There was no sudden change in personality, as in People v. Goedecke, 65 Cal.2d 850 [56 Cal.Rptr. 625, 423 P.2d 777]; nor of paranoia, as in People v. Gorshen, 51 Cal.2d 716 [336 P.2d 492], and People v. Moore, 257 Cal.App.2d 740 [65 Cal.Rptr. 450]; nor was the killing utterly bizarre, as in People v. Nicolaus, 65 Cal.2d 866 [66 Cal.Rptr. 635, 423 P.2d 787].
There was testimony from appellant's mother that he had been studying long hours, but this had ended some months before the tragedy. The mother testified, too, that he cried for *623 some three hours, but this was many months earlier. The essence of the testimony of the lay witnesses was that appellant was exceedingly eager to have a reconciliation.
Following the assault episode in August 1964, appellant went to the county hospital and endeavored to commit himself so that he wouldn't do things of that nature, for he was afraid he would act out his threats under the present stress. Their diagnosis on admission was possible schizophrenic action, but their final diagnosis was simple adult maladjustment with possible homicidal and suicidal tendencies. He was released.
There was but one expert witness, Dr. Vernon John Miller, a psychiatrist. His testimony was derived from two conferences with appellant, the total time being about an hour and fifteen minutes, together with information furnished by defense counsel. A synopsis of the testimony is: Appellant is a very dependent individual who had a prior history of poor control of his acts; he was most dependent on his wife and had an abnormal fear of losing her; he was an unstable person, this going back to his pre-adolescent years; he probably suffered from an acute dissociative reaction (this was not defined); pathologically dependent persons, as he, want constant reassurance; they are hostile at the dependent relationship; they may threaten with weapons; the wife's abrupt appearance on the scene and her emphatic verbal rejection probably triggered the shooting by this very disordered individual.
The witness was of the opinion that appellant did not intend to fire the gun at his wife at the time he did so. But the expert was working with hypotheses which the jury no doubt rejected. The first was that the shots fired at Paloutzian were through appellant's pants pocket, for he had been given that information by appellant or the attorney. The expert had not read the police report, and was not sure whether he had read the transcript of the preliminary hearing. Appellant at no time admitted to the expert firing at anybody. Moreover, the expert had no information about appellant's attempted deception of the police when he was arrested.
But most important is the fact that when the expert interviewed appellant on two occasions, on the subject of the actual killing of Nancy, appellant broke down, did not care to discuss it, and could not talk appreciably about it, so the expert did not press the matter. The doctor had a real question whether appellant could recall the alleged crime. He *624 could remember some details but everything had gone vague as far as recalling whether he shot his wife or whether he shot anyone else.
Actually, appellant testified to these matters in detail. He gave a specific account of his actions up to the ringing of the doorbell, including an account of how he got the gun, after thinking about it, on a return to the automobile. He told of his decision as to where he would park. He described the positions of the persons in the living room as he passed the window. He heard Nancy's father tell her to leave the room, and later call her back. He related his conversation with Paloutzian. He described the shooting of Paloutzian although, the jury no doubt thought, falsely.
Then, although he says everything "got vague" after Nancy spoke, he testified that he remembers entering the house, though not tearing the door screen. He testified: "I remember pointing the gun at my wife and pulling the trigger." He remembers someone trying to hold him.
When the expert was confronted, on cross-examination, with that part of appellant's testimony showing recall of the actual pointing of the gun and pulling the trigger, he replied that the emotional turmoil within the defendant interfered with adequate reasoning, so that the words spoken by Nancy triggered the two attacks. But it is apparent that the expert's prepared conclusion, as presented originally to the jury, was founded in part on premises which were unsound.
We shall relate the expert's conclusions with the two propositions advanced by the prosecution. For the felony-murder rule to apply, there was required only the specific intent, upon entry of the home, to assault the victim with a deadly weapon. Upon the considerations expressed below in connection with deliberation, but with stronger reason because of the lesser reflection required under the felony-murder rule, we conclude that if there was error in the court's instruction as given in this pre-Conley trial, it did not cause a miscarriage of justice.
The mental illness or defect referred to in the cases is one which takes away, even though temporarily, the capacity to form a specific intent to commit a crime which requires such intent, or to have the malice required for murder or the deliberateness required for first degree murder when malice is not supplied by the felony-murder principle. The thrust of the expert's testimony was, as we read it, mainly towards showing that an overwrought, dependent person was triggered into *625 action without use of his ordinary thinking process, by the victim's remark which rejected him. He acted on an impulsive basis. This has to do more with heat of passion (on which the jury was correctly instructed) than with mental defect. Appellant testified to his intention to threaten the family, if necessary, to effect his purpose. He had the capacity, by his own statement, to form this intent. If he had this capacity, why did he not have the capacity to form the intent to kill? The jury impliedly found that he had the specific intent to kill Paloutzian, because they were instructed that this is a necessary element of the crime of attempted murder. He may have been "triggered" by a remark. This circumstance involves the classical subject of adequate provocation to reduce a homicide to manslaughter, wherein the heat of passion must be such as would naturally be aroused in the mind of an ordinary reasonable person or in the mind of a person of ordinary self-control. (People v. Brubaker, 53 Cal.2d 37, 44 [246 P.2d 8].) The jurors were free to consider the expert's testimony on this subject, on which they were given the usual instructions.
Early in the trial defense counsel told the court that his whole defense was that of provocation. No doubt the Conley definition would have been given had the trial been held a few months later. When we consider, as the jury doubtless did, the earlier assault and the willingness of appellant, despite that episode, to confront Paloutzian with a loaded gun; the improbability of his account of the shooting of Paloutzian; the stalking of the victim; the manner of the killing, the falsity of the statements to the police; the throwing away of the pants and of the gun--we cannot say that there has been a miscarriage of justice.
Asserted Misconduct
[8] Appellant charges that the district attorney was unfair in his arguments to the jury. There was but one objection, however, and that to an insignificant remark. On overruling of the objection, no request for admonition was made. The point has been waived. (People v. Wein, 50 Cal.2d 383, 396 [326 P.2d 457].)
Appellant also objects to argumentative questions asked of the expert by the judge. On objection, the jury was admonished by the judge that he had no opinion as to defendant's guilt or innocence, that he was merely asking questions for clarification. *626
Jury having been waived on the penalty trial, the judge imposed a sentence of life imprisonment.
The judgment is affirmed.
Rattigan, J., and Christian, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9737524 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:27:45.969935+00 ===

Fitzgerald, J.
Defendant-appellant was driving a truck south on Greenfield avenue. He attempted to turn left into a driveway on Greenfield but collided with a car driven by Abraham Mukalla. A passenger in the car was killed. Defendant was tried with Mr. Mukalla on a charge of negligent homicide,* was convicted by a jury in the recorder’s court of the city of Detroit, and now appeals that verdict to this Court.
Two issues are derived from the trial proceedings. Defendant called Mr. Billings, as an expert mechan*245ical and traffic accident reconstruction engineer, to testify as to Ms opinion of the speed of defendant Mukalla’s vehicle at the time of the accident. Mr. Billings did not see the accident, hut he had measured skid marks, noted the weights .and load weights, of the vehicles, their relative positions, and the condition of the pavement, intending to use this information as the basis for his opinion.
We must consider whether this expert witness may give his opinion as to speed of a vehicle where he has conducted several tests which form the basis of that opinion, and also inquire as to whether speed was material to the issue being tried in this case, i.e., defendant’s negligence.
Defendant was charged with negligence in making a left turn in front of Mr. Mukalla’s automobile. Mr. Billings was called as an expert by defendant to show that Mr. Mukalla was driving at a high rate of speed when he collided with defendant who was then in the process of turning.
Expert opinion is generally admissible, when a proper foundation has been prepared, to assist the jury in understanding and interpreting those relevant facts or circumstances peculiar to the particular ease which could not be readily evaluated by the inexperienced layman. See Dudek v. Popp (1964), 373 Mich 300. The facts for consideration in the present case, as known to the jury and evaluated by Mr. Billings, include the length of the skid marks (69 feet), the condition of the pavement (dry), the weight of both vehicles (defendant’s truck, 10,510 lbs., empty; Mr. Mukalla’s automobile, 3,801 lbs.), the additional weight of the defendant’s oil tank (approximately 4,500 lbs.) and the fact that the oil tank was dislodged and fell into the street as a result of the accident.
*246There are no Michigan decisions directly considering the allowance or denial of non-eyewitness expert opinion on the issue of speed in criminal prosecutions, hut we are not constrained to state that, thus, such testimony is never admissible in criminal cases. Rather, we believe that it should be admissible whenever speed is a material factor to the case being tried even as to the ultimate issue (G-CR 1963, 605) where the jury, because of its inexperience, would require it to effectively interpret complicated facts in issue, and where the expert is competent, has conducted scientifically recognized tests based on the facts presented, and does not invade the province of the jury by testifying as to the cause of the accident or liability therefor.
Our willingness to accept such expert opinion evidence as to speed when it is properly presented is reinforced by reference to a number of sources: See 2 "Wharton’s Criminal Evidence (12th ed), § 553, p 416; 9C Blashfield, Cyclopedia of Automobile Law & Practice, § 6231, p 382; and by reference to the Michigan law applicable to civil cases. See Dudek v. Popp, supra; but see Washburn v. Lucas (1964), 373 Mich 610, and cases cited therein for suggested restrictions on expert opinion evidence as to causation made by an investigating officer.
There is no question as to the competence of Mr. Billings to testify as an expert witness on the issue of speed. However, we cannot reach the problem of whether this is necessary testimony, given the facts as presented to the jury for their interpretation, and noting that the relevant issue was the negligence of the defendant, for the trial court never ruled on the issue. We turn to the record for the following discussion, conducted out of the presence of the jury, after the trial court had first denied *247defendant’s counsel permission to ask Mr. Billings Ms opinion as to speed:
“The Court: Now let me ask you a question * * * you claim that you have a case from some other state which would justify the court in admitting that sort of testimony, is that right? But you have nothing in Michigan, is that right?
“Defendant’s counsel: The law in the State of Michigan, as I was able to find was this. Now I found absolutely nothing with respect to speed in a criminal action. But I refer to Grillespie, the 2nd Edition, at Section 510 [discussion of general admissibility of expert opinion, not necessarily as to speed].
“The Court: Have you been able to find in any case in Michigan, any case in Michigan, civil or criminal, where any party was allowed to testify as to his opinion as to the speed of a vehicle when he did not see it in motion?
“Defendant’s counsel: I will bring it in.
“The Court: You have one?
“Defendant’s counsel: Yes, sir.
“The Court: Let’s see it.
“Defendant’s counsel: I was looking for criminal. I’ve got criminal from other jurisdictions.”
The discussion continues:
“The Court: I would like to see either one of them.
“Defendant’s counsel: I will bring them in, sir.” And:
“The Court: I was always of the opinion, and I know there are some cases where the Supreme Court said that you have got to see the car in motion a reasonable distance, in order to qualify yourself to give any opinion as to the speed, I know there is such a case, see.
*248“Defendant’s counsel: Absolutely. That is with respect to lay witnesses to give opinion evidence, and I can give yon the case on that.
“The Court: I don’t want to see it, because I know it is there.
“Defendant’s counsel: Of course this is not a lay witness.
, “The Court: All right. You show me a case where they permitted anybody, expert or lay, to testify as to the speed of a car where they didn’t see the car ■in motion.
“Defendant’s counsel: All right.
“The Court: How can we get it? That’s what I am waiting to see.
“Defendant’s counsel: Just a moment, I will call •my office. I need help.”
The court reporter notes that a recess was taken, and that after the recess there was considerable discussion off the record. The trial resumed with an entirely different witness. The record does not show whether counsel for defendant did meet his burden to advise the court and we are bound to that record on this appeal. People v. Fred W. Thomas (1967), 7: Mich App 519. We cannot say that the trial coui’t erred in . his initial, and apparently only, exclusion of the opinion. The court gave counsel a broad opportunity to bring- in cases, civil or criminal, and even from other jurisdictions, to assist the court in deciding this issue. Such cases do exist. If further discussion was had on this point, which does not appear in the record, and the court did rule unfavorably on counsel’s argument and cases presented, then counsel should have noted this on the record before calling his next witness. We cannot do it for him.
There was a defense counsel for each of the 2 defendants as they were tried jointly. The second issue on.appeal arises when defendant called Mr. Bloom, an eyewitness, concerning the speed of Mr. *249Mukalla’s car. Counsel for Mr. Mukalla cross-examined Mr. Bloom and the following exchange occurred:
“Mr. Mukalla’s counsel: When was the next time anybody approached you about this accident?
“Mr. Bloom: Then the investigators—
“Mr. Mukalla’s counsel: (interposing) ‘Investigators’. I want that out.
“Defendant’s counsel: I beg your pardon?
“Mr. Mukalla’s counsel: I want that out.
“Defendant’s counsel: You want that ‘out’?
“Mr. Mukalla’s counsel: Yes. What investigators?
“Mr. Bloom: I don’t know what investigators.
“Defendant’s counsel: I would like a ruling.
“The Court: Did somebody come and ask you about it?
“Mr. Bloom: Yes, they knocked on my door. They knocked on all the doors in the apartment, all the tenants.
“Mr. Mukalla’s counsel: It was an insurance company investigator wasn’t it?
“Mr. Bloom: I don’t know. They didn’t identify themselves.
“Defendant’s counsel: Your Honor, this was an abortive attempt to create a mistrial, what you just heard come out of that man’s mouth.
“Mr. Mukalla’s counsel: No. I am trying to show something a lot worse than a mistrial.”
The questioning continued concerning Mr. Bloom’s contact with this unnamed person, to wit:
“Mr. Mukalla’s counsel: You don’t know the company he represents, but you do recall speaking to someone, is that correct?
“Mr. Bloom: Definitely, definitely,”
*250In addition:
“Mr. Muhalla’s counsel: And you don’t recall the name of this particular company, is that true?
“Defendant’s counsel: (interposing) Oh, your Honor!
“Mr. Bloom: I don’t know what he represented.
“Defendant’s counsel: Tour Honor, I have a motion to make and I think the jury should be excused.”
The court discussed this for a moment, not excusing the jury, then proceeded:
“The Court: I don’t want any further reference made to an insurance company, Counsel.
“Defendant’s counsel: It is repeated over and over again.
“The Court: There is no testimony here that there was any insurance company involved or investigating. The witness said that a man who he didn’t know came and asked him about the accident.
“Mr. Bloom: That is correct, your Honor.”
The questioning then shifted in emphasis as follows:
“Mr. Muhalla’s counsel: You did see [defendant’s counsel], you state, a couple of weeks * * *
“Mr. Bloom: (interposing) No, a couple of days ago.
“Mr. Muhalla’s counsel: ‘A couple of days ago’, and did you see any other attorneys?
“Mr. Bloom: Yes, I saw * * *
“Mr. Muhalla’s counsel: (interposing) Let me point to the attorney # * *
“Defendant’s counsel: (interposing) No, wait a minute.
“Mr. Muhalla’s counéel: (continuing) Did you ever see this gentleman before? Do you want to stand up, Mr. Sullivan?
“Defendant’s counsel: (interposing) Your Honor!
“Mr. Bloom: Yes.
“Mr. Muhalla’s counsel: Your answer is cyes’? that’s all, That’s what I thought.
*251“The Court: Gentlemen, just a minute. I will exclude the answer and the question. It is not proper and it is not material to the trial of this case. Up to now, at least.”
Following discussion wherein the court reaffirmed this exclusion, questioning continued:
“Mr. Mukalla’s counsel: Were you told of any civil eases pending?
“Defendant’s counsel: I object to this as being immaterial.
“The Court: I will sustain the objection.”
Counsel retired with the court for a moment, and returned to proceed with the trial.
We have included this testimony in order to clarify the second issue made by defendant on this appeal; that the trial court erred when defendant’s motion for a mistrial was not ruled upon when the parties returned to chambers as noted above.
A mistrial is alleged wherein:
(1) The counsel for Mr. Mukalla referred to pending civil litigation;
(2) Testimony was given as to the investigation by an insurance company; and
(3) An inference was made as to wrongdoing by the insurance company and its attorneys in dealing with Mr. Bloom.
These 3 issues as derived from the portion of the transcript concern alleged prejudicial behavior by Mr. Mukalla’s counsel, but they do not strike this Court as being of harm to defendant’s right to a fair trial. The trial court recognized the ability of Mr. Bloom to wander about in hearsay fields and he effectively reprimanded both the witness and Mr. Mukalla’s counsel whenever necessary. That heinous word “insurance” is not so prejudicial in criminal cases that its mere mention will compel *252this Court to order new trials where damages are not in issue. These colloquies by the counsel for Mr. Mukalla were not pleasant or conducive to exemplary trial advocacy, but we cannot say that they were injurious or prejudicial to defendant, considering their limited occurrence in a prolonged trial. Lake Oakland Heights Park Association v. Township of Waterford (1967), 6 Mich App 29.
Affirmed.
McGregor, J. concurred with Fitzgerald, J.
CL 1948, § 750.324 (Stat Aim 1968 Cum Supp § 28.556).

=== CASE 9737525 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:27:45.974336+00 ===

Lesinski, C. J.
(dissenting). The record in this case discloses that a qualified expert in the field of mechanical and traffic accident reconstruction engineering was not allowed to give his expert opinion as to the speed of a codefendant’s vehicle at the time of the accident.
The expert was not an eyewitness, but he did have the facts presented upon which he could form an expert opinion, namely, the length of the skid marks (69'), the condition of the pavement (dry), the weight of both vehicles (defendant’s truck, 10,510 lbs. empty; Mr. Mukalla’s automobile, 3,801 lbs.), the additional weight of the defendant’s oil tank (approximately 4,500 lbs.), and the fact that the impact of the collision dislodged the oil tank onto the street.
The record discloses that the issue before the trial judge relative to the admission of the expert’s testimony centered on the admissibility of expert evidence on the question of speed of a vehicle in a criminal case.
The trial court requested counsel for defendant to provide citations to cases either from Michigan or other jurisdictions. The record does not show that defendant’s attorney was able to supply the trial judge with citations to his satisfaction. After defendant’s counsel requested help of his office, a recess *253was taken. After the reeess, a considerable discussion was bad off tbe record, after wbicb tbe case proceeded without tbe testimony of tbe expert witness as to bis opinion as to the speed of tbe co-defendant’s vehicle, or any objection to tbe court’s refusing to allow it.
Immediately, tbe failure to make objection to tbe court’s refusal to allow tbe testimony of tbe expert witness as to speed raises tbe issue of whether under such circumstances tbe issue is properly preserved for appeal.
While appellate courts will not generally review matters on appeal which have not been properly preserved below, they have not hesitated to do so under circumstances in wbicb failure to review tbe issue could result in a miscarriage of justice. See People v. Elliott (1948), 322 Mich 313.
Tbe principle that error not properly preserved will not be reviewed is sound. It is primarily intended to protect tbe trial and avoid unnecessary new trials. It is intended to call error or possible error to tbe attention of tbe trial judge with tbe view of avoiding tbe error or correcting it if possible during trial or by instructions.
In tbe instant case, tbe defendant sought to advise tbe court of bis right to tbe testimony of tbe expert. Tbe trial court was fully apprised of tbe issue. Unfortunately, neither tbe defendant’s lawyer nor tbe trial judge found tbe existing law wbicb would have validated tbe defendant’s request. This does not alter tbe defendant’s right to tbe testimony if it was in order.
Although tbe record is silent as to tbe nature of tbe conversations wbicb were bad off tbe record, tbe sequence of events leads this writer to conclude that at this point tbe trial judge must have again affirmed bis refusal to allow the expert witness’ testimony as *254to the speed of the codefendant’s vehicle. The writer will not normally indulge in such presumptions, particularly in criminal matters. Here, however, putting all the facts together, one must conclude that resolution of the issues was had off the record and that consequently the defendant’s attorney did not register his objection on the record. At this point in the proceedings; it was the trial court’s duty to rule on the. record upon the matter which was pursued, so as to allow counsel an opportunity to respond on the record to same if he so desired. While normally failure to object can be said to be acquiescence or waiver, under the circumstances of this case this cannot be said to be true.
Further, the writer recognizes that after having pursued the issue, as had the defendant’s counsel, that the bar of this State is generally timid to register its objection on the record, for fear of incurring the wrath of the trial judge in the balance of the trial. As unfounded as this reason for this reluctance may be, it is, nonetheless, a reality.
Under all the circumstances of this case, the issue has sufficiently been preserved for appeal.
The propriety of the testimony of the expert next determines its admissibility.
■ The defendant was on trial for the offense of negligent homicide, CL 1948, § 750.324, as amended by PA 1965, No 38 (Stat Ann 1968 Cum Supp § 28.556). One of the elements which must be proven by the people beyond a reasonable doubt to sustain a conviction under the statute is the negligence of the defendant which resulted in a homicide.
In the case before us, reducing the issue to a minimum, the jury was called upon to’ determine if the defendant made an improper left turn into approaching traffic.
*255The defendant’s left turn was not a prohibited turn. Defendant’s left turn was improper and consequently negligently made only if he interfered with oncoming traffic based on reasonable observations.
Under these circumstances, the issue of speed of the codefendant’s car is of primary importance. It is not a question of whether the codefendant was negligent as a result of speeding. However, co-defendant’s speed is important in determining whether the defendant acted properly under the traffic conditions as they existed.
The point of travel and speed of the codefendant would be indicative of what the defendant observed or should have observed when he formed his judgment to make his turn.
The issue in this case on which the expert’s testimony was sought is such that a jury could not have formed a proper judgment without something more to assist it in determining the codefendant’s speed.
The established facts which would have formed the basis of the expert opinion were such as move this writer to say that the expert testimony was competent and material to the issue ©f defendant’s negligence and of vital importance to the defendant.
Provided all the facts that are necessary are established and a proper foundation is laid, the use of expert witness’ testimony by a defendant in a case such as this is proper and should have been allowed.
In this case we do not resolve the issue of whether the prosecution can initiate the proof of guilt by such evidence.
This case should be reversed and remanded for a new trial.

=== CASE 9737526 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:27:46.559965+00 ===

HANSON, Presiding Judge.
This criminal prosecution was commenced by the filing of an indictment in Minnehaha County on November 22, 1965, charging the defendant, Vernon H. Rude, and five other persons with the crime of embezzlement. A plea of not guilty was entered and defendant was found guilty of every count alleged in the indictment. Judgment and sentence were entered on November 28, 1967. Thereafter, the trial court granted defendant's motion to vacate the judgment and on December 28, 1967 entered its order vacating and setting aside the verdict, judgment and sentence against the defendant, Vernon H. Rude, because his name did not appear in the body or charging part of the indictment. The state has appealed.
As this appeal is concerned entirely with the form and content of the indictment it is set forth in full:
*552"STATE OF SOUTH DAKOTA) IN CIRCUIT COURT l SS COUNTY OF MINNEHAHA j SECOND JUDICIAL COURT
STATE OF SOUTH DAKOTA Plaintiff vs. LESTER W. FLAKE, CHAN DUNCAN, ADOLPH PREHEIM, VERNON H. RUDE, IVIL LOOKABILL, and JOHN E. NELSON, Conjointly, Defendants
Cr. 65 — 142 INDICTMENT FOR VIOLATING SECTION 13.4003 of the SOUTH DAKOTA CODE OF 1939.
"The Grand Jury of the County of Minnehaha, State of South Dakota, duly selected, empaneled, sworn and charged to investigate alleged public offenses in certain corporations in Minnehaha County, aforesaid, upon their oath present:
"That Lester W. Flake, Chan Duncan, Adolph Preheim, Ivil Lookabill, and John E. Nelson, conjointly, in 'said Minnehaha County, State of South Dakota, on or about the times hereinafter set forth, then and there did wilfully, unlawfully, feloniously and fraudulently appropriate and convert to a use not in the due and lawful execution of their trust, as hereinafter set forth, certain personal property, to wit: good and lawful money of the United States, in amounts as hereinafter set forth, and which said personal property was then and there owned by and the property of Commonwealth Investment Corporation, a corporation organized and existing according to the laws of the State of South Dakota, of Sioux Falls, South Dakota, by causing disbursements to be made from the assets of the said Commonwealth Investment Corporation to Tri-State Thermo Panel *553Inc., a corporation organized and existing according to the laws of the State of South Dakota, of Sioux Falls, South Dakota, and all of which said defendants were at all times as hereinafter set forth stockholders of the said Tri-State Thermo Panel, Inc., and as a group did own a substantial amount of the stock of the said TriState Thermo Panel, Inc., and the defendants, by virtue of their offices as directors of the said Commonwealth Investment Corporation, did jointly enter into and did jointly and intentionally pursue a course of conduct that was designed to and did appropriate personal property from the said Commonwealth Investment Corporation, as follows:
COUNT 1
On the seventeenth day of March, 1964, in the amount of $5,000.00.
COUNT 2
On the twenty-fifth day of March, 1964, in the amount of $5,000.00.
COUNT 3
On the thirtieth day of March, 1964, in the amount of $5,000.00.
COUNT 4
On the sixteenth day of April, 1964, in the amount of $5,000.00.
COUNT 5
On the seventh day of May, 1964, in the amount of $6,000.00.
Said appropriations were by the defendants made to appear as though they were loans made in the normal *554course of business from Commonwealth Investment Corporation to Tri-State Thermo Panel, Inc., but in fact were appropriations to the defendants themselves, the defendants being at all times substantial stockholders of the said Tri-State Thermo Panel, Inc., and the said defendants being at said time each a director of the said Commonwealth Investment Corporation, and a stockholder thereof, contrary to Section 11.0805 of the South Dakota Code of 1939, and the said personal property then and there and at said times, was in the possession and under the custody and control of the Defendants by reason of their employment as directors of Commonwealth Investment Corporation, and in virtue of their trust as such directors, the said defendants did then and there and by said means conjointly commit the crime of embezzlement, contrary to the form of the statute, in such case made and provided, to wit, Section 13.4003 of the South Dakota Code of 1939 and against the peace and dignity of the State of South Dakota.
Dated this 19th day of November, 1965. Endorsed: 'A true Bill' this 19th day of November, 1965.
Herbert A. Mikkelson Foreman of the Grand Jury in and for Minnehaha County, South Dakota"
,Although defendant Rude's name appears in the title or caption of the indictment it is not repeated in the body or charging portion along with the names of the other conjointly charged defendants. The omission is not satisfactorily explained, but it is needless to speculate on whether or not it was inadvertent or intentional. The question is whether or not it constitutes a jurisdictional defect or is merely a defect in form not tending to prejudice the substantial rights of the defendant on the merits. If jurisdictional, the defect was not waived by a plea, of not guilty or by defendant's failure to assert the same by motion, demurrer, or by objection to reception of evidence at the trial. *555SDC 1960 Supp. 34.3515 expressly allows an objection to the jurisdiction of the court over the subject of the indictment or "that it does not describe a public offense" to be taken at the trial under a plea of not guilty and in arrest of judgment.
With reference to the requisites, form, and sufficiency of indictments and informations our statutes pertinently provide as follows:
"The indictment or information shall contain the title of the action, the name of the court in which it is presented or filed, and the names of the parties". SDC 1960 Supp. 34.3007.
"The indictment or information must be direct and certain as it regards:
(1) The party charged;
(2) The offense charged;
(3) The name of the thing or person upon or against whom the offense was committed." SDC 1960 Supp. 34.3008.
"The indictment or information is sufficient if it can be understood therefrom:
(3) That the defendant is named * *.
(6) That the offense charged is designated in such a manner as to enable a person of common understanding to know what is intended". SDC 1960 Supp. 34.3010.
As the trial court reasoned, defendant Rude's name does not appear anywhere in the body of the indictment. All reference to "defendants" or "said defendants" can only logically be construed to apply and refer to the defendants named in the charging portion of the indictment rather than its title. For the same reason the multiple defendant indictment cannot be compared to single defendant information and indictments such *556as the one involved in State v. Hurley, Mo., 251 S.W.2d 617, where the single defendant is named and designated in the caption as "defendant" and the charge clearly and certainly refers to him as "the defendant".
The constitutional right of an accused to demand and be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation against him requires every essential element of the crime to be clearly and certainly charged. This requires that "the indictment or information must describe accused in such a direct and certain manner as to identify him as the person charged, and if accused's name does not appear in the indictment or information, particularly in the part which charges the offense, the charge is fatally defective." 42 C.J.S. Indictments and Informations § 127, p. 1015. See also 27 Am.Jur., Indictments and Informations, § 79, p. 641; Vol. 4 Wharton's Criminal Law and Procedure, § 1780, p. 592; Culpepper v. State, 173 Ga. 799, 161 S.E. 623, 79 A.L.R. 217; Slusher v. Commonwealth, 267 Ky. 140, 101 S.W.2d 663; Chow Bing Kew v. United States, 9 Cir., 248 F.2d 466; State v. Finch, 218 N.C. 511, 11 S.E.2d 547; and King v. State, 55 Tex.Cr.R. 146, 115 S.W. 585. Any expression of opinion in State v. Fullerton Lumber Co., 35 S.D. 410, 152 N.W. 708, to the contrary is hereby overruled.
The state's failure to allege Rude's name in the body of the indictment, or to identify him with reasonable certainty as one of the defendants therein by reference or otherwise, constitutes a jurisdictional defect. Although the defect appears on the face of the indictment, it was not waived by a plea of not guilty and could be asserted by him in arrest of judgment according to the permissive provisions of SDC 1960 Supp. 34.3515 because the indictment failed to describe or charge a public offense against him.
Affirmed.
ROBERTS and HOMEYER, JJ„ concur.
BIEGELMEIER and RENTTO, JJ„ dissent.

=== CASE 9737527 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:27:46.563754+00 ===

*557BIEGELMEIER, Judge
(dissenting).
In State v. Fullerton Lumber Co., 1915, 35 S.D. 410, 152 N.W. 708, three corporations and several individual defendants were named as such in the title as Rude is named defendant in the present case; defendant Jordan's name was omitted in the charging part of the indictment as defendant Rude in this action; later in the indictment Jordan's name appears only to name him as one of the agents and employees of the Fullerton Lumber Company.
In Fullerton, as the court opinion states, "the name of James Jordan was omitted from one place in the body of the indictment (the charging part) where the other defendants are named, although his name appears as a defendant in the title of the cause, and also at another place in the body of the indictment. Because of these omissions, these two defendants objected to the trial proceeding as against them, and now contend that they are not included as defendants in the case, that it cannot be said, from the indictment, that the grand jury intended to make them parties to the action, and that, as to them, such omissions are fatal to the indictment."
It will be seen therefore that defendant Jordon in Fullerton raised an objection at the trial that was not raised in the present appeal. Nevertheless, this court held that under code sections there cited and quoted and presently the same that the "defects complained of appear upon the face of the indictment, and, the defendants not having demurred thereto, they were precluded from raising the question at the trial" or on appeal. In addition to the code provisions cited in the majority opinion see also SDC 1960 Supp. 34.3514 as to grounds of demurrer and SDC 1960 Supp. 34.3677, functions of motion in arrest of judgment.
We should follow not depart from or overrule the law announced in the Fullerton opinion which does not permit a defendant, as here, to sit back for nearly two years from indictment to trial and, after conviction by a jury of all five counts in the indictment, then raise objection at so late a time. The statutes and constitutional provisions therein involved being the *558same as those today, I believe our decision should be the same. It was sound law when written and remains sound now. Therefore, I am compelled to dissent.
I am authorized to ’state that RENTTO, J„ joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 9737528 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:27:47.903179+00 ===

*530RENTTO, Judge.
This proceeding involves a claim made under our Workmen's Compensation Law. The claimant alleged that her husband died as a result of injury by accident arising out of and in the course of his employment by the American Colloid Company. After hearing, the Deputy Industrial Commissioner made findings of fact and conclusions of law sustaining her claim and awarded her the statutory compensation for death and costs. The petition for review filed by the employer and insurer was denied after which they appealed to the circuit court. It affirmed the decision of the Commissioner. From that judgment the employer and insurer appeal.
On January 18, 1965, the decedent, while installing a flashing under the roof of the Colloid Company Plant near Belle Fourche, South Dakota, slipped off a plank catwalk and fell about 10 feet onto a steel beam injuring his left shoulder and his back in the region of the left scapula. On examination it was determined that he had sustained a fracture of his left clavicle, probable fractures of his first and tenth ribs on the left side and internal injuries in his chest. This latter condition was never confirmed in subsequent examination. He was suffering intense pain in his left shoulder and his chest beneath the left scapula for which he was given medications and fitted with a clavicle splint and rib belt. He was not hospitalized because he insisted that he could rest better at home.
Later in January and again in February he returned to the attending doctor's office several times complaining of pain. On these visits his belt and brace were readjusted and he was given pain relievers and other medications, including antibiotics for a traumatic pleurisy. On one visit an x-ray of his chest was taken. This revealed a healthy chest except for a heart that was mildly enlarged and evidence of a hiatal hernia. He was not hospitalized until he returned complaining of pain on February 4th from which confinement he was released on February 6th. On that occasion an electrocardiogram was taken which was negative, but the tracing was abnormal suggesting an acute posterior infarct, but other findings were not such as are found *531with an acute coronary. During this hospitalization he showed marked improvement and was permitted to return to his home.
Because of severe pains in his left chest he visited his doctor the following day. He was then hospitalized and remained there until February 15th. During this stay he complained of tenderness in the back in the vicinity of his left shoulder blade. An x-ray was taken, but it did not reveal anything not previously seen. His doctor found his heart to be regular and normal and when released he was in good condition. He next called on his doctor on March 3rd at which time he was feeling better, but was not permitted to return to work. He still had some pain in his back and shoulder. He died unexpectedly at his home on March 6th.
Decedent was 5 ft. 2 in. tall and weighed about 200 pounds while employed by the Colloid Company. He had never had a heart ailment and during the time he and the claimant were married his health was good. He had consulted doctors only twice during that time and on both occasions it was concerning his excess weight. As a result sometime prior to his employment by Colloid he had lost about 30 pounds. From the time of his injury to his death he lived a life of comparative inactivity, doing no work. The day he died he slept until about noon, visited a relative in the afternoon and did some light shopping. That evening while watching TV which seemed to amuse him, he called to his wife, who was in another room, that he was fainting away. Apparently he was dead when she got to him. He was then 54 years of age. The autopsy revealed that an acute coronary thrombosis was the cause of his death.
On this appeal it is contended that the Commissioner erred in finding that there was a causal relationship between the decedent's death and the accident of January 18, 1965. Without such relationship the decedent's death would not arise out of and in the course of his employment. As supporting the finding of causation claimant urges the testimony of decedent's attending doctor. His opinion was that decedent's death "was due to a contusion of the heart sustained when he fell." Appellants urge that this opinion should be disregarded because the *532record does not support the premise on which it is based. Other medical testimony disputed this opinion and there was none corroborating it.
The value of an opinion of an expert witness is dependent on and entitled to no more weight than the facts upon which it is predicated. It cannot rise above its foundation. Oviatt v. Oviatt Dairy, Inc., 80 S.D. 83, 119 N.W.2d 649; Joffer v. Crusy's Power Brake & Supply, Inc., 83 S.D. 191, 156 N.W.2d 189; W. Horace Williams Company, Inc. v. Serpas, 5 Cir., 261 F.2d 857. Obviously such opinion has no probative force unless the premises upon which it is based are shown to be true.
The primary fact on which the attending doctor's opinion is based is that there was a contusion to decedent's heart. This is without support in the record. The electrocardiogram which was taken at his suggestion does not show a contusion to the heart, nor does the autopsy report. The validity of this evidence the doctor does not dispute. Moreover, he admitted on cross-examination that there was nothing in the record to sustain his assertion that decedent's heart had been bruised when he fell.1 Consequently, his opinion furnished no medical support for the finding of causal relationship. In this connection it is of significance that the commissioner's memorandum of decision indicates he did not rely on or give any weight to the doctor's opinion in finding that the required causal relationship existed.
Based on the postmortem examination there was medical evidence that decedent had suffered two myocardium infarcts. One of these occurring near the time of his death and being the cause of it, while the other had occurred sometime before and *533at the time of his death was in the healing stage. In arriving at a finding of causality the Commissioner begins with the premise that decedent had never been afflicted with a heart condition or exhibited any symptoms of a heart ailment prior to the date of his accident.
From this he proceeds by finding: "That as a result of his accident said decedent suffered continuous and painful symptoms of cardiac impairment dating from the date of his injury to the date of his death." The medical testimony does not refer to any of the symptoms he exhibited as "symptoms of cardiac impairment". To determine what the Commissioner has reference to we may properly refer to his memorandum of decision. Christiansen v. Strand, 81 S.D. 187, 147 N.W.2d 415. They are therein designated "bridging symptoms" and stated thus:
"the severe blow to the left clavicle suffered at the time of the accident; reoccurring chest and back pains; weakness; faintness; painful breathing; gray pallor; nausea, and such which no doubt strained the capabilities and placed an undue and terrific strain on decedent's heart and eventually resulting in his death."
In coming to this conclusion the Commissioner was apparently influenced by statements contained in a medical treatise which he had consulted.
He further found: "That as a proximate result of said injury decedent suffered fwo episodes of coronary artery occlusion resulting in myocardial infarcation which caused his death." From his memorandum of decision it is clear that in arriving at this result he inferred that the first infarct was suffered on February 4th, and that it probably caused the second which resulted in his death. Neither of these inferences is supported by medical testimony.2 In making these two findings without the *534aid oí medical experts, we think the Commissioner went beyond his proper and permitted sphere.
Establishing the precipitating cause of coronary thrombosis is difficult. Medical testimony to prove this issue is always desirable and in most cases indispensable. It is generally found in any well prepared presentation. Usually the resolution of this question is for the medical experts and triers of the facts. Peterson v. Ruberoid Company, 261 Minn. 497, 113 N.W.2d 85; Blecatais v. Manchester Gas Company, 103 N.H. 542, 176 A.2d 711, Thornbrough Well Servicing Company v. Brown, 223 Miss. 322, 78 So.2d 159. In Howe v. Farmers Cooperative Creamery of Madison, 81 S.D. 207, 132 N.W.2d 844, involving a back injury, we said: "Where there is no obvious causal relationship, the testimony of a medical expert may be necessary to establish the causal connection." See also Lohr v. Watson, 68 S.D. 298, 2 N.W.2d 6.
Concerning medical testimony generally in 2 Larson's Workmen's Compensation Law, § 79.54, we find this statement: "reliance on lay testimony and administrative expertise is not justified when the medical question is no longer an uncomplicated one and carries the fact-finders into realms which are properly within the province of medical experts." In our view the causal relationship in the circumstances here present is not obvious, nor do we think the medical question involved an uncomplicated one. It is not one which falls within the common experience and capability of lay persons, nor within their capacity to judge in the absence of expert medical assistance.
Writing concerning this issue in Campbell v. City of Chamberlain, 78 S.D. 245, 100 N.W.2d 707, a heart case where the question was whether decedent's work contributed to his death caused by a coronary occlusion, we said: "A finding that it did so contribute must rest on the testimony of professionals because the field is one in which laymen are not qualified by learning, or experience, to express an opinion." That observation is equally applicable here. The rule that Workmen's Compensation Acts must be liberally construed applies to the law, not to the evidence offered to support a claim. Berg*535ren v. Gustafson Construction Company, 75 S.D. 497, 68 N.W.2d 477. Accordingly, we hold that the finding of causal connection is without credible evidentiary support.
In arriving at the questioned findings the Commissioner referred to and apparently relied on statements in a medical treatise urged upon him in claimant's brief. This work and the statements in question were not mentioned during the hearing of this matter. Our rule is that medical books or treatises are not admissible to prove the truth of statements therein contained. Ross v. Foss, 77 S.D. 358, 92 N.W.2d 147. To the extent that statements contained in this medical treatise were relied on by the Commissioner his conduct violated this rule. It placed before him medical evidence, the truth or applicability of which the appellants had no opportunity to challenge by cross-examination or otherwise.
The claimant under our law had the burden of establishing that her husband's death arose out of and in the course of his employment by the American Colloid Company. Mehlum v. Nunda Cooperative Association, 74 S.D. 545, 56 N.W.2d 282. Because this was not done the judgment of the circuit court is reversed.
ROBERTS and BIEGELMEIER, JJ., concur.
HANSON, P. J„ and HOMEYER, J„ dissent.
. On cross-examination the testimony of the attending doctor concerning the claimed contusion was:
“Q. And on February 4th an electrocardiogram was taken and it showed no contusion. A. You are referring to the electrocardiogram.
“Q. The electrocardiogram. A. Apparently not.
“Q. And there is nothing in the autopsy to show any contusion or bruise to the heart is there? A. No.
“Q. There is nothing here to sustain your opinion as to contusions to the heart, is there? A. No.
“Q. In any medical finding there is nothing. A. No.”
. The doctor who performed the postmortem examination, as a witness for the claimant, testified:
“Q. And so the first infarct, the date of which is not known, there is no way to reasonably, medically show the date of that infarct, in your opinion? A. Not quite like that.
“Q. In any event, that one wouldn’t be the one producing the cause of death. A. It wouldn’t be the direct cause of death.
“Q. The direct cause was that second clot? A. Yes, the second one is the direct one, but what we have trouble finding is without the first one would the second one cause death? This we don’t know. God knows, we don’t.”

=== CASE 9737530 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:27:50.474768+00 ===

Vandek Wal, J.
Defendant, his wife and others were charged with conspiracy to promote a lottery.1 On arraignment defendant filed a written waiver of his right to a jury trial and pleaded guilty to an added count of keeping and occupying a building for gambling purposes.2 The court accepted the plea of guilty after questioning the defendant to determine that the plea was voluntary and not induced by any promise of reward. At that time the court permitted the prosecuting attorney, with the concurrence of the Livonia police department, to dismiss the case as against Evelyn Hollman.
On the day defendant was to be sentenced his attorney made a motion to withdraw his plea of guilty in order to proceed with a full jury trial. The ground offered for the motion was that defendant was, in fact, innocent but had pleaded guilty at the behest of his wife who was allegedly too ill to withstand the pressures of a trial. The motion was *234denied, and defendant was found guilty of keeping and occupying a building for gambling purposes, placed on probation for one year, and fined $500 in costs.
Defendant appeals the denial of Ms motion to withdraw his plea of guilty and seeks an order for a trial on the merits.
In order to protect the substantial constitutional rights involved, the courts of this jurisdiction have generally been sympathetic to criminal defendants who wish to withdraw their plea of guilty at any time before sentence.
“It has been repeatedly held by this Court that a defendant in a criminal case may withdraw Ms plea of guilty at any time before sentence is imposed.
“ ‘We have no question that at any time before sentence the plea of guilty may be changed by the court to one of not guilty.’ People v. Utter (1920), 209 Mich 214, 224.
“ ‘A considerate procedure of long recognition in this jurisdiction admits of withdrawal of a plea of guilty at any time before sentence.’ People v. Piechowiak (1936), 278 Mich 550, 552.
“ ‘A plea of guilty may be withdrawn at any time before sentence.’ People v. Wexner (1937), (syllabus) 280 Mich 696.
“ ‘The first question has been ruled upon by this court on two occasions recently, and it is now the settled rule in this State that a plea of guilty may be withdrawn at any time before sentence.’ People v. Stone (1940), 293 Mich 658, 661.
“ We are committed to the doctrine that a defendant may withdraw his plea at any time before sentence has been imposed.’ People v. Vasques (1942), 303 Mich 340, 342.” People v. Sheppard (1947), 316 Mich 665, 667, 668. *235See, also, People v. Hollingsworth (1953), 338 Mich 161, 163, 164, and People v. Anderson (1948), 321 Mich 533, 535, 536.
There is a sound policy argument behind the numerous cases permitting the withdrawal of a plea of guilty before sentence.
“The rationale behind these cases is apparent. The right to trial by jury in criminal cases is a substantial constitutional right, as are the attendant rights of confrontation, cross-examination, et cetera. "While these rights may be waived by the defendant, the law has erected many safeguards to protect him against his own ignorance, or folly, and against the pressures that might be applied by others. In the case in which the defendant has pleaded guilty, and then desires to avail himself of his constitutional guarantees, the law will not punish him for his indiscretion.” People v. Banning (1950), 329 Mich 1, 7.
Permission to withdraw a plea of guilty must be liberally granted, especially where, as in the instant case, no trial has commenced and the record shows circumstances that cast grave suspicion upon the veracity and voluntariness of the guilty plea. "We hold that it was an abuse of discretion to deny defendant’s motion to withdraw his plea of guilty.
The effect of defendant’s waiver of his right to a jury trial was nullified by his subsequent motion for a trial by jury. At any time prior to trial and sentencing, courts must be patient with indecisive defendants concerning their basic constitutional right to a trial by jury.
The first count of the information was never dismissed.
Reversed and remanded for a full trial to determine defendant’s guilt or innocence on both counts specified in the information.
*236T. Gr. Kavanagh, J., concurred with Vander Wal, J.
OL 1948, §§ 750.372, 750.505 (Stat Ann 1954 Eev §§ 28.604, 28.773).
CL 1948, § 750.302 (Stat Ann 1954 Eev § 28.534).

=== CASE 9737531 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:27:50.479773+00 ===

Levin, J.
(dissenting). Defendant asserts he pleaded guilty to an added lesser offense in consideration of the prosecutor’s agreement to dismiss charges against his wife who was ill at the time (and, presumably, also in consideration of dropping the more serious offense originally lodged against the defendant himself). The agreement is not denied by the prosecutor, nor is it asserted that the prosecutor has not carried out his end of the bargain.1 The charges against the defendant’s wife were dismissed.
The overwhelming weight of established authority is that a kept,2 as distinguished from an unfulfilled,3 *237promise of charge concession does not affect the voluntariness of a guilty plea.
Even though I believe a guilty plea in response to the pressure of the bargaining process is inherently involuntary and the plea bargaining practice inconsistent with the sound administration of justice,4 we are bound to accept the law as we find it and leave to higher authority the decision whether and when to change it. We are not justified in making exceptions in individual cases.
Defendant asks us to confound the matter by establishing a distinction, which does not appear heretofore to have been recognized,5 between a prom*238ise of a charge concession to the defendant himself (which would not affect the voluntariness of the plea) and a promise of such a concession for the benefit of defendant’s wife. The assumption that a defendant’s will is more likely to be overborne by a threat to incarcerate his wife than a threat to incarcerate the defendant himself is both quixotic and fanciful.6 There is no basis for a distinction in favor of even the chivalrous accused, assuming it could be established his guilty plea was motivated by such selfless sensitivities.
Our Supreme Court has held that one seeking to withdraw a guilty plea even before the pronouncement of sentence must state a “persuasive reason” why the withdrawal should be permitted. People v. Zaleski (1965), 375 Mich 71, 81.7 The reasons offered by the defendant here are that his plea was induced by his wife’s ill health, her desire to avoid trial and the pressure on him to agree to the previously mentioned plea arrangement.
But pressure on defendants is the essence and the sine qua non of negotiated plea arrangements. If negotiated pleas are valid, then (unless the courts are to evolve a body of law concerning the various *239degrees of pressure which properly can he brought to bear on defendants)8 such pressure on defendants is permissible. Thus, under existing law, the defendant here has advanced no judicially recognized reason for allowing him to withdraw his plea,9 and the trial judge did not abuse his discretion in refusing to allow the defendant to withdraw his plea.
There is no real distinction between a defendant’s attempted renunciation of the plea contract before sentencing and after sentencing. If a plea arrangement is involuntary before sentencing, it would not become voluntary upon sentencing; and if it is voluntary after sentencing, then it must have been voluntary before sentencing. It cannot reasonably be asserted that the fact of negotiation and bargain*240ing is a “persuasive reason” for allowing the withdrawal of a plea before sentencing and not after.
If guilty pleas are to mean anything they must, upon acceptance by the trial court, be the legal equivalent of conviction. The probable guilt or innocence of the defendant is irrelevant on a motion to withdraw a guilty plea, whether before or after sentence.10
The establishment of a more liberal standard for plea withdrawal before sentencing than afterwards could only be justified if we fear that defendants might withdraw their pleas after sentence because of disappointment concerning the severity of the sentence. That should, however, be of no concern if all inducing promises have been kept, because then no defendant could properly be disappointed. In this connection, we should apply standards which we unhesitatingly apply in civil cases where it is asserted that one has been misled by another.11 If all such promises have not been kept, then the defendant is entitled to withdraw his plea as a matter of right.12
Here the promises made to the defendant were kept. Although I personally believe a plea of guilty in response to a promise of charge reduction, whether kept or unfulfilled, is involuntary because induced *241by the promise, under existing precedent a plea in response to a kept promise may not be withdrawn. Controlling authority also requires that a “persuasive reason” be advanced by one seeking to withdraw his plea, whether before or after sentence. Merely beause the request for withdrawal of the plea is prior to sentence does not require the trial judge to grant such request. The fact that the plea in this case was motivated by a kept promise is not under present law a reason entitling the defendant to withdraw the plea. The trial judge’s failure to find a reason justifying withdrawal of the plea where there was none is not an abuse of discretion. There is no error.
ln its brief the prosecution claims there were 62 witnesses endorsed on the information and there is a serious question whether they will all still be available at the time of the trial which this court has ordered. No attempt was made by the defendant either in the motion to withdraw his plea or at the time of hearing thereon to establish that the prosecution would not be prejudiced if the motion were granted.
The various opinions in Shelton v. United States (CA 5, 1957), 242 F2d 101, reversed 246 F2d 571 (en banc), reversed per curiam on solicitor general’s confession of error (1958), 356 US 26 (78 S Ct 563, 2 L Ed 2d 579), express conflicting arguments concerning the propriety of plea bargaining, but the majority opinion on the en bano rehearing in Shelton clearly represents the view now prevailing. For a recent comprehensive collection of the authorities, see Commonwealth v. Maroney (1966), 423 Pa 337 (223 A2d 699), upholding a plea bargain in a murder case in a State where capital punishment may be imposed.
The American Bar Association’s Project on Minimum Standards for Criminal Justice, Standards Relating to Pleas of Guilty, p 60, et seq., and the President’s Commission on Law Enforcement and Administration of Justice, Task Force Eeport: The Courts (1967), pp 9, 10 (The Challenge of Crime in a Free Society, pp 134, 135) both state that the prevailing view is that plea bargaining is sound. The President’s commission declined to take a position on the propriety of plea bargaining (pp 10, 13) while the proposed ABA standards approve the practice (p 60).
The recent decision in United States v. Jackson (1968), 390 US 570 (88 S Ct 1209, 20 L Ed 2d 138), may, however, portend a change in controlling law. In that ease the court held unconstitutional a death penalty provision which could be imposed only by the jury, and which thus could be avoided by waiving jury trial and pleading guilty, on *237the ground that it chilled exercise of the constitutional right to a jury trial and needlessly encouraged waiver of the right. For a recent decision rejecting plea bargaining, see Application of Buccheri (1967), 6 Ariz App 196 (431 P2d 91).
See In re Valle (1961), 364 Mich 471, 475; Machibroda v. United States (1962), 368 US 487, 493 (82 S Ct 510, 7 L Ed 2d 473, 478).
See my separate opinion in People v. Byrd (1968), 12 Mich App 186, and opinion in People v. Earegood (1968), 12 Mich App 256.
While a promise not to prosecute a defendant’s wife in exchange for an extrajudicial confessional statement by the defendant has been held to render the statement inadmissible as involuntarily made (Crawford v. United States [CA 5, 1955], 219 F2d 207), a different standard is generally applied in determining whether a gmlty plea is voluntary. In the plea situation, it has been held that a kept promise of charge reduction in favor of defendant’s pregnant wife did not vitiate the plea (Cortez v. United States [CA 9, 1964], 337 F2d 699, certiorari denied 381 US 953 [85 S Ct 1811, 14 L Ed 2d 726]); similarly, see Allen v. Rodriguez (CA 10, 1967), 372 F2d 116; McGuffey v. Turner (DC Utah, 1967), 267 F Supp 136. See, also, United States v. Finney (WD Pa, 1965), 242 F Supp 112, holding that a kept promise not to foreclose on the defendant’s father’s house in consequence of the forfeiture of defendant’s bond did not affect the voluntariness of his plea. For a discussion concerning promises for the benefit of relatives of the defendant, see 29 Am Jur 2d, Evidence, § 562, and for a review of the authorities pro and con, see Annotation: Police statements that if suspect confesses his relatives will be released from custody or not be arrested, as rendering confession involuntary, 80 ALR2d 1428.
There is no real distinction between the confession and plea situations — if a confession induced by a promise is involuntary, so, too, is a plea. Some of the highest appellate courts in the land, however, insist there is such a distinction, despite the fact that a guilty plea dispenses with the need for any trial at all (Kercheval v. United States [1927], 274 US 220, 223 [47 S Ct 582, 71 L Ed 1009]), while the clearest confession of guilt wmuld not necessarily have that severe or definite a consequence.
The same rule has been applied where the promise is for the benefit of defendant’s fiancee. “If a defendant elects to sacrifice himself for such motives, that is his choice.” Kent v. United States (CA 1, 1959), 272 F2d 795, 798.
In People v. Davis (1964), 372 Mich 102, and People v. Case (1951), 310 Mich 526, the Supreme Court affirmed denials of motions to withdraw guilty pleas before sentencing in cases where the defendants pleaded guilty to negotiated lesser charges. Earlier statements indicating that prior to sentence a guilty plea may bo withdrawn as a matter of right (seo e. g. People v. Stone (1910), 293 Mich 658; People v. Vasquez (1912), 303 Mich 310, 312), have been overruled sub silentio by such and other later decisions of our Supreme Court. In People v. Bencheck (1960), 360 Mich 130, where the court (prior to the holding in Zaleslci) said the trial judge’s discretion to permit withdrawal of a guilty plea should be “exercised with great liberality” before sentence and that on an assertion of innocence the trial judge should grant a request not “obviously frivolous” to withdraw a guilty plea, the defendant’s plea was not negotiated as he pleaded guilty to the offense charged (statutory rape).
If we are to do so, there are more compelling cases than this one. See Commonwealth v. Maroney, supra. Compare McClure v. Boles (ND W Va, 1964), 233 F Supp 928, with Hulett v. Sigler (D Neb, 1965), 242 D Supp 705, Allen v. Rodriguez, supra, and State v. Lampson (1967), — Iowa — (149 NW2d 116), concerning “promises” or “threats” regarding recidivist charges as an inducement to plead guilty.
In People v. Pulliam (1968), 10 Mich App 481, our Court acknowledged that People v. Zaleski, supra, signaled a “demarcation of sorts from the old concept that a guilty plea might be withdrawn with impunity at any time prior to sentence”, stating the grounds assigned for the withdrawal of the guilty plea “must have substance”, must be “persuasive” and “nonfrivolous” even where the request to withdraw precedes sentence. The grounds assigned in Pulliam were prosecutorial promises of sentence concessions, restrictions on defendant’s ability to prepare his defense and threats against witnesses. The Pulliam Court said the assigned grounds for withdrawal were not “frivolous” or “nonpersuasive.” However, the Pulliam Court did not consider wdiether a prosecutorial promise of sentence concession obliges the trial judge to grant a motion to withdraw a guilty plea. In Pulliam the defendant had been sentenced and the sentence had been set aside for reasons unrelated to the appeal. Thus the motion to withdraw the guilty plea followed the vacation of the first sentence, and it was, no doubt, claimed (although this does not appear in the report of the case) that the promised concession had not been fulfilled at the first sentencing. The Pulliam Court confirmed the trial judge’s finding that the allegations in support of the motion to withdraw the plea of guilty were not true. That fact finding distinguishes Pulliam from In re Valle, supra, in wdiieh case the Supreme Court held an unkept promise by the prosecutor of sentence concession required setting aside the plea after sentencing.
People v. Zaleski (1965), 375 Mich 71, 83; Kercheval v. United States (1927), 274 US 220, 223 (47 S Ct 582, 71 L Ed 1009); Williams v. Kaiser (1944), 323 US 471, 475 (65 S Ct 363, 89 L Ed 398); Rogers v. Richmond (1961), 365 US 534, 544 (81 S Ct 735, 5 L Ed 2d 760). But see People v. Dunn (1968), 380 Mich 693.
“It would have made no difference that the promise was conditional, if the condition itself was in essence a misrepresentation.” Dillon v. United States (CA9, 1962), 307 F2d 445, 450 (prosecutor testified he had agreed to make sentence recommendation in exchange for guilty plea “if asked” to do so by judge; but the judge stated it was not his practice to request recommendations). See, also, Reddick v. State (Fla App, 1966), 190 So 2d 340; Smith v. O’Grady (1941), 312 US 329, 334 (61 S Ct 572, 85 L Ed 859); United States v. Lester (CA 2, 1957), 247 F2d 496, 501; State v. Cochran (1933), 332 Mo 742 (60 SW2d 1).
In re Valle, supra, and Machibroda v. United States, supra.

=== CASE 2210904 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:59.494352+00 ===

13 Ill. App.3d 923 (1973)
301 N.E.2d 63
WILLIAM V. PYE, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
JACK MARCO, As Acting Director of the Environmental Protection Agency, et al., Defendants-Appellants.
No. 12319.
Illinois Appellate Court  Fourth District.
August 23, 1973.
Rehearing denied September 26, 1973.
*924 William J. Scott, Attorney General, of Springfield, (John W. Russell, Special Assistant Attorney General, of counsel,) for appellants.
James M. Drake, of Springfield, for appellee.
Reversed and remanded.
Mr. PRESIDING JUSTICE CRAVEN delivered the opinion of the court:
The named state officers, defendant-appellants, appeal the issuance of a temporary injunction by the circuit court of Sangamon County enjoining them from approving charges seeking the discharge of the plaintiff from his employment by the state Environmental Protection Agency or from removing him from the payroll. We reverse.
Essentially, there are no factual issues in this interlocutory appeal. However, a somewhat detailed and chronological statement of the facts and circumstances attendant upon this litigation is necessary for an understanding of the case.
Plaintiff William V. Pye was appointed to his position with the Environmental Protection Agency in February of 1972. His position is under "jurisdiction B" of the Personnel Code being a position to which persons must hold appointment upon the basis of merit and fitness. (See Ill. Rev. Stat. 1971, ch. 127, par. 63(b) 104(a).) No question is raised as to the appointment and the classification.
On June 18, 1973, the defendant Marco, as acting director of the Environmental Protection Agency, requested the defendant Jones, as director of personnel, to take such steps as would be necessary to immediately terminate the employment of Pye. This request was by letter and some seven pages of charges or reasons for discharge accompanied the request. Essentially, it was asserted that the plaintiff did not possess the management abilities required of a division manager in the Environmental Protection Agency. The plaintiff was then manager of the Land Pollution Control Division and the Water Pollution Control Division of the Environmental Protection Agency.
These charges were "approved"' by the director of personnel and the *925 plaintiff was given notice thereof and was given notice of "separation-discharge for cause" effective June 19, 1973.
On June 20, 1973, the plaintiff filed an application for a temporary restraining order and a temporary injunction seeking an order of the circuit court, without prior notice to the defendants and without bond, restraining and enjoining the defendants from discharging the plaintiff pending a determination of the legal and alleged constitutional issues set forth in the seven page verified complaint. The requested temporary restraining order was issued on the date of the filing of the complaint. It was issued without notice and without bond.
On June 20, 1973, the defendants sought and obtained a modification of the temporary restraining order. By its terms, the modification permitted the defendants to grant plaintiff a "preliminary administrative hearing" on the charges for discharge and to relieve the plaintiff of his duties but to continue him on the payroll. In the context of this record the so-called "preliminary administrative hearing" was to be a hearing to determine whether the defendant director of personnel was to approve the charges. Thus, upon the defendants making such a motion we take it to be conceded that the prior act of approval of the charges was vacated or withdrawn. We so hold. We make such observation to indicate that the director of personnel could not have a "preliminary administrative hearing" to determine whether he should approve charges which, in fact, he had previously approved.
The record before us includes a transcript of a purported administrative hearing held on July 12, 1973. A hearing officer announced that the hearing was to be pursuant to the court order modifying the temporary restraining order and that it was being held to allow plaintiff "to respond to charges served upon him". The hearing officer then announced that he would accept any evidence, comments or opinion that any interested party might wish to offer. From that beginning, the hearing developed difficulties with reference to procedure and substance and ultimately the so-called "preliminary administrative hearing" terminated. The plaintiff returned to the circuit court of Sangamon County. On July 13, 1973, the court entered an order finding that the hearing, a transcript of which was before the court, did not satisfy constitutional requirements of due process. The court then ordered the issuance of a temporary injunction enjoining the defendant state officers from approving any charges for discharge of the plaintiff. Further, the defendants were enjoined from removing the plaintiff from the payroll until the further order of the court. The interlocutory appeal we now consider is from that order.
The parties have discussed the requirements attendant upon dismissal from public employment. We are urged to conclude that the minimal *926 requirements of substantive and procedural due process are not found in the applicable statutory provisions of the Personnel Code nor in the rules of the Department of Personnel. The parties have likewise discussed the requirement in the area of public employment that termination of protected employment must comport with due process. It is urged that the following cases are applicable to this proceeding: Board of Regents of State Colleges v. Roth, 408 U.S. 564, 33 L.Ed.2d 548; Morrissey v. Brewer, 408 U.S. 471, 33 L.Ed.2d 484; Goldberg v. Kelly, 397 U.S. 254, 90 S.Ct. 1011, 25 L.Ed.2d 287; Perry v. Sindermann, 33 L.Ed.2d 570; and Connell v. Higginbotham, 403 U.S. 207, 91 S.Ct. 1772, 29 L.Ed.2d 418.
 1 We hold that the minimal standards for termination of public employment as outlined in the foregoing cases are found in our statutory provisions.
Illinois Revised Statutes 1971, chapter 127, paragraph 63(b) 111, provides that no officer or employee under jurisdiction B shall be removed or discharged except for cause upon written charges approved by the Director of Personnel and after an opportunity to be heard in his own defense if he makes written request to the Civil Service Commission within 15 days after the serving of written charges upon him. Paragraph 63(b) 108, chapter 127, Ill. Rev. Stat. 1971, provides that the Director of the Department of Personnel shall prepare and submit to the Civil Service Commission certain proposed rules and that if such rules are not disproved within 30 days after submission, they shall become effective and have the force and effect of law. Certain rules and regulations have been adopted pursuant to this procedure and those rules and their interpretation seem to be at the root of the difficulty in this case.
In substance, the rules seem to contemplate that upon receipt of approved charges for discharge, the employee shall leave the premises, all salaries and benefits of the employee shall be stopped, and that he may "appeal" to the Civil Service Commission, provided that such "appeal" is requested in writing within 15 days of receipt of such approved charges. Thus, it would appear that the plaintiff is correct in his contention that the rules provide for discharge upon receipt of the approved charges and prior to hearing to determine the validity of and an evidentiary basis for such charges. The "appeal" could result in reinstatement in the event of success by the employee.
 2 It is axiomatic that the authority of an administrative agency or department to adopt rules and regulations is limited by statutory language under which the rules are to be adopted. To the extent that any such rule, although adopted in conformity with the rule making procedure, is in conflict with the statute, it is invalid. In this case, the statute says clearly and explicitly that no officer or employee shall be removed *927 or discharged except for cause and after an opportunity to be heard in his own defense if he requests such a hearing. The rules cannot detract from that statutory right.
 3, 4 Thus, the approval of charges by the director of personnel does not, as of the moment of that approval, constitute the discharge of an employee under jurisdiction B. Discharge comes only after a hearing in conformity with the cited statutory provisions. In this connection, we note the authority of the appointing agency to suspend for 30 days and the authority of the Civil Service Commission to suspend for an additional time period. We also note that the final administrative decisions of the Civil Service Commission are subject to the provisions of the Administrative Review Act by reason of Ill. Rev. Stat. 1971, ch. 127, par. 63(b) 111(a).
In view of the foregoing, the plaintiff did have and still has adequate administrative procedures available to him to determine the evidentiary basis for and the sufficiency of the charges seeking his removal.
 5 The circuit court of Sangamon County was in error in issuing a temporary injunction upon the facts and circumstances of this case. Its action in so doing is reversed and this cause is remanded to that court with directions to dismiss the complaint for want of equity. The motion for stay of the injunction taken with the case need not be considered.
Reversed and remanded with directions.
TRAPP and SIMKINS, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2210911 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:59.582036+00 ===

13 Ill. App.3d 588 (1973)
301 N.E.2d 151
OLIVE WOLTERS KUH, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
HENRY F. WILLIAMS et al., Defendants-Appellants.
No. 56942.
Illinois Appellate Court  First District (5th Division).
July 27, 1973.
*589 *590 Gary H. Palm, of Legal Aid Bureau, of Chicago, (Robert H. Smith, Senior Law Student, of counsel,) for appellants.
Carl L. Klein, of Oak Lawn, for appellee.
Reversed and remanded.
Mr. JUSTICE ENGLISH delivered the opinion of the court:
This is an action on a note brought by plaintiff, the payee, against defendants, the co-makers, wherein judgment was entered by confession. The default in payment was alleged to have occurred on September 15, 1964. Defendants' motion asking that the judgment be opened, that the proceedings be stayed, and that leave be given to file their answer was denied. Defendants appeal from that order.
Judgment was entered by confession on January 26, 1971. On April 27, 1971, defendants filed a motion to open the judgment alleging that the first notice they had of its entry was on or about February 24, 1971, when they received from their bank a copy of a garnishment summons which *591 had been served upon it. Defendants' motion further alleged that they had good and meritorious defenses to plaintiff's claim, in that: (1) there was no consideration given for the note in question; (2) defendants had been induced to sign the note when plaintiff represented to them that the note was a mere formality creating no obligation to pay; and (3) defendants were entitled to a counterclaim against plaintiff by way of a set-off for the reasonable value of services performed by defendant Henry Williams as an employee of plaintiff in her tavern. The motion to open the judgment was supported by an affidavit of each defendant asserting his or her personal knowledge of the facts alleged and was accompanied by a verified answer which defendants asked leave to file.
On April 27, 1971, plaintiff filed an answer to defendants' motion asserting that: (1) defendants had not been diligent as required by statute, as more than 60 days had elapsed since defendants first consulted with their attorney; (2) defendants had no defense on the merits and their counterclaim was barred by the Statute of Limitations; and (3) defendants had made three payments on the note after its execution.
Defendants' motion was placed on the contested motion calendar and set for argument on May 19, 1971, at which time, and again on October 18, 1971, counsel presented legal arguments in support of their respective positions. On the latter date, the trial court denied defendants' motion.
 1 Under Supreme Court Rule 276 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1969, ch. 110A, par. 276), a motion to open a judgment by confession must be supported by an affidavit and accompanied by a verified answer which defendant proposes to file. This was done in the instant case. The rule further states that if the motion and affidavit disclose a prima facie defense on the merits to the whole or a part of plaintiff's demand, the court shall set the motion for a hearing. This also was done in the present case.
The rule goes on to provide:
"If, at the hearing upon the motion, it appears that the defendant has a defense on the merits to the whole or a part of plaintiff's demand and that he has been diligent in presenting his motion to open the judgment, the court shall sustain the motion either as to the whole of the judgment or as to any part thereof as to which a good defense has been shown, and the case shall thereafter proceed to trial * * *." (Emphasis added.)
Rule 276 treats meritorious defenses and counterclaims differently, in that the rule further provides:
"If a defendant files a motion supported by affidavit which does not disclose a defense to the merits but discloses a counterclaim against the plaintiff, and defendant has been diligent in presenting his motion, the trial court may permit the filing of the counterclaim *592 and to the extent justice requires may stay proceedings on the judgment by confession until the counterclaim is disposed of." (Emphasis added.)
Since, to succeed, defendants must have shown diligence in presenting their motion as regards either meritorious defenses or counterclaims, we shall first examine the issue of defendants' diligence.
 2, 3 Judgment was confessed on January 26, 1971. Defendants first had notice thereof on February 24, 1971, when they received a copy of a garnishment summons which had been served upon their bank. The motion to open the judgment was filed on April 27, 1971. Although the time between the entry of the judgment and the filing of the motion to open was three months, there was a lapse of only two months from the time of actual notice of the judgment until the motion to open was filed. We find that such a two-month period does not show defendants so lacking in diligence as to justify barring them from asserting their alleged meritorious defenses and counterclaim. And this we believe to be especially true when, as in the instant case, a postponement of two months, as it were, could not have been prejudicial to plaintiff, since she, herself, had not brought suit on the note until six years after defendants' alleged default. See Alter & Associates, Inc. v. Zylvitis, 36 Ill. App.2d 195, 183 N.E.2d 750, where the court found no lack of diligence in the filing of a motion to open a judgment four and a half months after its entry. The reason stated, which we consider sound in both law and public policy, was that the question of a meritorious defense is of more importance than the question of defendant's diligence or lack thereof in moving to open the confessed judgment.
Since we find that defendants' action was not lacking in diligence, it remains only to be determined whether allegations of a meritorious defense or a valid counterclaim were presented.
 4-6 In determining whether allegations of a meritorious defense have been presented, the court must accept as true those facts asserted by defendants in their affidavits. (National Blvd. Bank v. Corydon Travel Bureau, 95 Ill. App.2d 281, 238 N.E.2d 81.) This being the case, we find that defendants' motion, as supported by their affidavits, raised two meritorious defenses. They denied not only that they had received consideration for the note, but also asserted that they had been induced by plaintiff to sign the note as a mere formality. Want of consideration and fraud in obtaining the execution of an instrument are both valid statutory defenses to an action upon a note. See Ill. Rev. Stat. 1969, ch. 98, pars. 10 and 11.
 7, 8 Plaintiff filed a verified answer to defendants' motion to open, but the allegations in such an answer cannot properly be considered in *593 ruling upon defendants' motion, since a court is to determine only whether the motion and supportive affidavits disclose a prima facie defense. The trial court may not try the merits of the case on the affidavits or counter-affidavits as such a procedure would encroach upon the right to trial by jury. Gleneke v. Lesny, 130 Ill. App.2d 116, 264 N.E.2d 803; Larsh v. Green Gold Farms, Inc., 68 Ill. App.2d 113, 214 N.E.2d 924.
As to the counterclaim, defendants alleged that they were entitled to set off against plaintiff's claim the reasonable value of services rendered by defendant Henry Williams to plaintiff from about 1955 to about 1960. Plaintiff argues that this counterclaim is barred by the Statute of Limitations.
 9, 10 It is true that if defendants had brought a separate suit for the reasonable value of such services, the action would be barred by Ill. Rev. Stat. 1969, ch. 83, par. 16, which allows for the commencement of a civil cause of action on an unwritten contract only within five years of the time it accrued. However, section 18 specifically provides a different limitation if such a claim is asserted by way of a counterclaim. That section reads:
"Set-off or counter claim.
A defendant may plead a set-off or counter claim barred by the statute of limitation, while held and owned by him, to any action, the cause of which was owned by the plaintiff or person under whom he claims, before such set-off or counter claim was so barred, * * *."
That section was applied by the court in Carnahan v. McKinley, 80 Ill. App.2d 318, 224 N.E.2d 297, in holding that a set-off or counterclaim can be pleaded as long as it was not barred by the appropriate statute of limitations at the time the principal cause of action first accrued to plaintiff. Here, plaintiff's cause of action is alleged to have accrued as of September 15, 1964. With that date as the measuring point, defendants' counterclaim for services prior to September 15, 1959, would be barred, but the amount claimed for services rendered thereafter could still form a basis for set-off.
 11, 12 If a proper counterclaim is asserted and defendant had been diligent in so doing, the court has the statutory discretion to open a judgment by confession to permit its filing. In the instant case, we have found that a proper counterclaim was diligently presented, and conclude that the trial court abused its discretion in refusing to permit it to be filed. However, even if there had been no abuse of discretion in regard to the filing of the counterclaim, defendants diligently raised two meritorious defenses, and, once raised, the court had no discretionary authority, but was required to allow the motion to open judgment and proceed *594 to trial. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1969, ch. 110A, par. 276 (quoted above); Scheinfeld v. Muntz TV, Inc., 67 Ill. App.2d 8, 214 N.E.2d 506.) We therefore find that the trial court erred in denying defendants' motion to open the judgment by confession.
Defendants' motion to strike plaintiff's brief, which was taken with the case, is denied.
The judgment of the Circuit Court is reversed and the cause is remanded with directions to open the judgment and proceed to trial.
Reversed and remanded with directions.
DRUCKER, P.J., and LORENZ, J., concur.