=== CASE 2225768 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:54.873838+00 ===

343 Mich. 111 (1955)
72 N.W.2d 169
PAQUIN
v.
VAN HOUTUM.
Docket No. 6, Calendar No. 46,444.
Supreme Court of Michigan.
Decided October 3, 1955.
*113 Warner, Norcross & Judd (Harold S. Sawyer and Joseph B. White, of counsel), for plaintiff.
Linsey, Shivel, Phelps & Vander Wal, for defendant.
KELLY, J.
A jury awarded plaintiff and appellee, Victor J. Paquin, $7,199.50 damages, finding that he had been induced by the fraudulent misrepresentations of the defendant and appellant, Martin Van Houtum, to purchase defendant's soft drink bottling concern in the city of Grand Rapids.
Defendant appeals, and the 8 questions he alleges are involved can be grouped in 4 divisions as follows:
1. Verdict contrary to clear weight of evidence;
2. Erroneous introduction of evidence;
3. Waiver barring claim for damages;
4. Erroneous charge to jury.
Defendant, 66 years of age, was born and lived all his life in Grand Rapids. He had been in the soft drink bottling business for 30 years prior to 1951. In July, 1951, the assets of the bottling business were sold to Edward Nold for $25,000, with a $5,000 down payment and the balance secured by chattel mortgage. Nold, failing to make payments, went into bankruptcy and defendant foreclosed the mortgage. The bankruptcy court ordered all assets covered by the mortgage to be restored to defendant as owner of the mortgage.
Approximately one year after defendant's sale to Nold, namely, June, 1952, plaintiff read appellant's advertisement offering the bottling plant for sale. Plaintiff contacted defendant, and, he testified, defendant told him he wanted to get out of the bottling business because of age and ill health, and when defendant asked him if he were a bottler he told defendant he knew nothing about the bottling business.
*114 Plaintiff testified that during preliminary negotiations defendant told him that his product enjoyed a wonderful acceptance and reputation in the trade; that in April, 1952, he had had all the machinery and equipment completely overhauled and, therefore, it was in good running condition; that he had always made a profit in operating the business; that plaintiff could reasonably expect to net $10,000 a year on the business; that a Mr. Nold had the business and it had run down while he was operating it but that he (defendant) had brought it back to a break-even point after repossessing it. All this testimony was denied not only by defendant but also by defendant's son.
On July 7, 1952, the parties came to terms and plaintiff asked defendant to have his attorney consult with plaintiff's attorney in the preparation of papers. This was done, resulting in the closing of the deal on July 12, 1952. The written agreement provided in substance:
1. That the 1,600 shares to be transferred to plaintiff was all of the authorized and issued and outstanding stock of the corporation;
2. That defendant was absolute owner of said stock, free of liens or claims, and warranted title thereto;
3. That all of the assets of the corporation were free of claims and liens and that the corporation owned said assets and had the right to the various "Folger" names by which it had been known;
4. That the corporation was lawful and existing;
5. That defendant would personally undertake to pay all debts and other obligations due to date of consummation and that there were no contracts with officers or others or continuing liabilities.
Plaintiff took possession and began production on Monday, July 14, 1952. Plaintiff spent the first week at the plant and then put his 28-year-old son in *115 charge. The son had for the previous 3 years been driving a Greyhound bus and had never managed a business. The son brought into the business a friend who was working for a beer distributor and put him in charge of sales. The business continued until plaintiff closed it on the following October 11th or 12th.
On September 22, 1952, plaintiff's attorney sent a letter to defendant, informing him that he had been guilty of misrepresentation, and that plaintiff, therefore, was rescinding and cancelling his purchase of defendant's stock and stood ready to surrender the stock certificates in exchange for a refund of the $10,000 purchase price.
On December 9, 1952, plaintiff, through an auctioneering firm, conducted an auction sale of physical tangible assets, and as a result of such sale plaintiff received $2,381.47 of the gross proceeds of $3,522.50.
Question 1. Should a new trial be granted because the verdict of the jury was contrary to the great weight of evidence or influenced by prejudice?
There was a sharp conflict in evidence presented as to what was said and done in the negotiations that led up to the sale. There were several unusual phases to the testimony. Defendant points to the fact that it is undisputed that he went to the plant to assist plaintiff in any way he could on several occasions between July, when plaintiff took possession, and Labor Day, and that at no time did plaintiff complain to him that defendant had made any of the false representations he relies upon in this trial. Defendant further points out that both he and his son refute plaintiff's testimony, but that plaintiff did not call his wife to the stand to corroborate him and that the wife was present when the fraudulent statements are alleged to have been made.
*116 Defendant calls this Court's attention to the fact that the sale of the stock was made for $10,000 and the appraiser for the bankruptcy court inventoried the physical assets and established a value of $14,766.71. Plaintiff calls attention to testimony showing not only an absence of good will but an existence of hostility toward the bottling company; the fact that the previous purchaser Nold could not successfully operate the plant even though he was experienced with machinery and with the bottling business and was in constant contact with the customers; that Mr. Ernest Proud, a director of Michigan Bottlers Association and president of Southern Michigan Bottlers Association, testified that the business "could not be operated profitably" and that "the franchise value wasn't there to begin with."
The jury and the trial court had an opportunity to weigh the testimony after hearing and observing the witnesses. This Court is limited to the printed words in weighing the testimony.
The record discloses that if the proof were properly admitted, said proof was not only sufficient to submit the issue to a jury, but was of such a nature that this Court cannot set aside the verdict on the ground that it was against the great weight of evidence or that said verdict discloses the existence of prejudice.
Question 2. Did the court err in allowing the introduction of improper evidence?
It is appellant's contention that after plaintiff and defendant executed a written instrument, prepared by their respective attorneys, containing the warranties above referred to, that all testimony as to conversation between the parties preceding the execution of the agreement should have been excluded by the trial court. Appellant relies upon the principles set forth in Bates Tractor Co. v. Gregory, 199 Mich. 8. In that case defendant contended that before *117 he bought the tractor he relied on certain letters and circulars as to how the tractor would perform. The trial court held plaintiff had defrauded defendant and gave judgment for damages. In reversing the judgment, this Court said (pp 13,14):
"We are of opinion that the contention of plaintiff must prevail. * * * We have held that, where the parties to a contract reduce it to writing and agree as to what warranties said written contract shall contain, other warranties growing out of antecedent representations may not be imposed upon the vendor. * * * Representations in the nature of warranties antecedent to the contract cannot be urged as fraud in cases where the contract is in writing, and contains specific warranties. The evidence introduced upon the part of the defendants should have been rejected, and a judgment should have been entered for the plaintiff."
Appellee relies upon the legal principles set forth in Mesh v. Citrin, 299 Mich. 527. In this case plaintiff subleased a filling station from defendants. The sublease provided:
"`Said party of the second part [plaintiff] acknowledges that it has examined and knows the condition of said premises and the buildings, equipment, machinery and appliances situated thereon, and acknowledges that it has received the same in good order and repair, that no representation as to the condition or repair thereof have been made by the party of the first part.'"
In Mesh v. Citrin, supra, plaintiff, before signing the contract, had it examined by his attorney. Plaintiff testified that after going into possession he found that the premises had been grossly misrepresented; that the station did not pump the gasoline defendants stated it would; that he could not make the $50 or $60 per week defendants said he could, *118 and that the equipment was in unworkable condition. This Court answered defendants' contention that as a matter of law the plaintiff was estopped to assert the representations in question in the following language:
"Defendants contend that as a matter of law plaintiff was estopped from claiming any misrepresentation of the condition of the station and equipment because of the above-quoted provisions of the lease and supplemental agreement. Such provisions are not binding on plaintiff if he was induced to sign the lease by defendants' fraudulent representations. Delta Asbestos Co., Inc., v. Sanders, 259 Mich. 317."
Plate v. Detroit Fidelity & Surety Co., 229 Mich. 482, involved a written contract which provided:
"`This subscription is not subject to countermand and no conditions, agreements or representations either written or verbal, other than those printed herein, shall be binding on said company. * * * This subscription contains the entire contract between the subscriber and the company.'"
This Court said (pp 486, 487):
"The seal of silence as to actual fraud is not imposed by any such provisions. It is elementary that fraudulent representations inducing a contract will void it. Plaintiff does not seek to vary the terms of the contract, but claims the contract is void because she was induced to execute it by false and fraudulent representations made by Mr. Scott. It has long been settled that such provisions in a contract do not prevent showing the contract is void by reason of false and fraudulent representations in its procurement. Peck v. Jenison, 99 Mich. 326; J.B. Millet Co. v. Andrews, 175 Mich. 350; J.B. Colt Co. v. Reade, 221 Mich. 92."
If appellant made the representations claimed by appellee, such as the reconditioning of machinery, *119 the good will that had been earned in the past, and the past earnings of the company, he was not making same as a warranty in regard to the future, but as a statement of fact as to what had happened in the past.
Under the decisions above set forth we hold that the trial court did not err in permitting the testimony in regard to defendant's statements to plaintiff during the negotiations which led up to the execution of the contract.
Defendant argues that the trial court committed reversible error in allowing plaintiff to call to the stand for cross-examination the former production manager, Mr. Reidsma. This witness, the son-in-law of defendant, was an employee of the business for 17 years, the last 12 years as production manager. Defendant objected, insisting that this witness did not come within the statute (CL 1948, § 617.66 [Stat Ann § 27.915]) permitting the calling for cross-examination "the opposite party, employee or agent of said opposite party," because the witness was an employee of the corporation and not the defendant. The defendant not only owned the great majority of the stock but was the manger of the company. The court did not err in allowing this cross-examination.
Witness Reidsma owned a few shares of stock in the corporation, which he assigned to appellee on the day the sale was made. He was cross-examined as to whether he had held up the closing of the deal by refusing to assign his stock. This witness denied. He was then asked whether he told plaintiff and his son, after the sale was completed and plaintiff had taken over the operation of the plant, that defendant was planning to close the plant on Labor Day if he did not complete a sale before that date. Witness denied both conversations.
*120 Plaintiff then called to the stand plaintiff's son, who testified that Reidsma had told him that he held up signing his stock certificate because he thought plaintiff was getting a raw deal and that Reidsma had trouble sleeping nights over it. Plaintiff's son also testified that Reidsma said that the plant would have been closed Labor Day if defendant had not secured a buyer. Both of these statements were made outside the presence of the defendant after the sale was consummated and if same had been offered as proof by plaintiff or plaintiff's son before Reidsma was called should have been excluded under the hearsay rule. Plaintiff cannot circumvent this rule by calling Reidsma to the stand, and then under the pretense of impeachment, place plaintiff's son on the stand and have him testify as to what he heard someone say outside the presence of the defendant. We disagree with the trial court's opinion stating: "In any event, the court is of the opinion that no prejudice resulted to the defendant from according the plaintiff the right to cross-examine this witness." We consider the testimony not only improper but highly prejudicial.
Question. 3. Was the defense of waiver available to defendant?
Defendant bases his argument that plaintiff waived his right of action on the fact that within a week or 10 days after taking over the plant the plaintiff was fully advised of the facts such as faulty machinery, absence of good will, et cetera, and that plaintiff decided to gamble on the busy summer season. Defendant also calls attention to the fact that when plaintiff wrote his letter of September 22, 1952, rescinding and cancelling the agreement, that this letter constituted a ratification and affirmance and an intent to waive the fraud and an election to forego damages. Further, that the record discloses without dispute that plaintiff endeavored to *121 sell the plant to his son and Reidsma at the close of the busy summer season and that later, in September, plaintiff admitted he advertised the business for sale and as a result of said advertisement 2 people indicated an interest in it.
An action for fraud after affirming a contract does not require the prompt action required when the action is based on rescission. In Poloms v. Peterson, 249 Mich. 306, 309, this Court said:
"Defendant's contention that by retaining possession the plaintiffs have estopped themselves from recovering in this suit is not well founded. They had the right of affirming the contract and of seeking redress in damages. Laches short of the statute of limitations is not a defense to an action so brought. Barnhardt v. Hamel, 207 Mich. 232, and Haukland v. Muirhead, 233 Mich. 390."
In Haukland v. Muirhead, 233 Mich. 390, 393, the following principle was established:
"Plaintiffs not having sought rescission, but, on the contrary, having affirmed, did not by a delay short of the statute of limitations lose their right to recover their damages in an action for fraud and deceit. Dayton v. Monroe, 47 Mich. 193."
The fact that the plaintiff intended to rescind when he wrote his letter to defendant on September 22, 1952, would not prevent him the following February from changing his mind and proceeding in an action of fraud based on affirmance rather than rescission. The defendant cannot complain because he refused to accept the offer of rescission.
The facts that defendant contends constitute waiver are material on the question as to whether a fraud was perpetrated but would not constitute a waiver of plaintiff's right of action for fraud.
Question 4. Did the trial court err in instructing the jury?
*122 The record shows that the jury was not properly instructed on the question of damages, and further that the jury was confused as to what constituted damages at the time they arrived at a verdict. The court first instructed as follows:
"Further, the amount which Mr. Paquin received from his auction sale for the machinery and equipment some several weeks, I believe it would go into the several months after the deal was closed, the amount of money which he received from that sale cannot be taken as the value of that equipment and furniture at the time that the deal was made back in July."
Subsequently the court instructed:
"And if you find that the fraud and misrepresentations have been established by a preponderance of the evidence, having in mind all of these instructions, then the plaintiff would be entitled to recover, and in this case, the plaintiff makes claim that he is entitled to recover the difference, that which he paid for the property less the amount which he received upon the sale, and those figures which have been given to you, I believe by the attorney for the plaintiff, is $6,830.75, and to that they have added interest at 5% from December 5, 1952, to the date of this trial, which they have computed, to bring the total recovery to $7,199.50."
That the verdict was arrived at without the jury understanding what constituted proof of damages is disclosed by the return of the jury, as follows:
"Foreman of the jury: Your honor, this jury after great deliberation finds that there is cause for action, and Mr. Paquin be reimbursed for the amount that was set by the court.
"The Court: Just a minute. No, you will have to state that amount.
*123 "Foreman of the jury: If you will give me  I took the amount  we didn't mark that down. I think that was $7,199 and some cents.
"The Court: I stated that they claimed the sum of $7,199.50.
"Foreman of the jury: That is exactly what we agreed on."
The error in the court's instructions was also disclosed when the jury was polled and the following occurred:
"Juror Helsel: May I ask a question?
"The Court: No, the only question is, was that, and is this your verdict?
"Juror Helsel: Well, I didn't understand about that $10,000.
"The Court: No.
"Juror Helsel: The jury had nothing to do with the price, did they?
"The Court: $7,199.50.
"Juror Helsel: That is my verdict.
"The Court: That's your verdict?
"Juror Helsel: Yes, sir.
"The Court: All right."
The proper rule of damages in this case is set forth in 24 Am Jur, Fraud and Deceit, § 227, p 55:
"The great weight of authority sustains the general rule that a person acquiring property by virtue of a commercial transaction, who has been defrauded by false representations as to the value, quality, or condition of the property, may recover as damages in a tort action the difference between the actual value of the property at the time of making the contract and the value that it would have possessed if the representations had been true. In other words, the defrauded party is entitled to recover the difference between the real and the represented value."
*124 This Court does not rule that there is sufficient proof of prejudice in this record to, of and by itself, constitute reversible error. In the retrial this Court suggests however that plaintiff not endeavor to introduce hearsay testimony in an attempt to prove the absence of good will, thereby requiring defendant to object before the jury. This Court in Kovich v. Church & Church, Inc., 267 Mich. 640, 646, stated:
"The record discloses throughout a persistence upon the part of counsel for the defense in asking questions that were irrelevant and immaterial to the issue involved, thus compelling plaintiff's counsel to make continual objections. The effect of this action may have been to depreciate the plaintiff's case in the minds of the jury."
Instances such as the following, which occurred on the cross-examination of defendant, must be avoided:
"Q. Mr. VanHoutum, every time you have been in court over the last number of years you have had the same difficulty 
"Defendant's attorney: Oh, come on, just a moment, your Honor. I want the record to show that is highly prejudicial and very, very  well, I have no term for it. Did the court hear what he said, your Honor?
"The Court: Yes, I will sustain the objection.
"Plaintiff's attorney: Well, if the court please, I don't yet see the basis of the objection of the question. I made a general statement.
"The Court: It would be the inferences that would go along with a question such as that.
"Plaintiff's attorney: We are prepared to prove it the fact.
"The Court: Well, all right, I say the inferences would be of a nature that the court cannot approve."
*125 Reversed, with costs to appellant. New trial ordered.
CARR, C.J., and BUTZEL, SMITH, SHARPE, BOYLES, REID, and DETHMERS, JJ., concurred.

=== CASE 2225774 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:55.000518+00 ===

412 Mass. 64 (1992)
587 N.E.2d 231
GAIL A. WATERS
vs.
MIN LTD. & others.[1]
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Essex.
November 5, 1991.
February 27, 1992.
Present: LIACOS, C.J., WILKINS, ABRAMS, NOLAN, & LYNCH, JJ.
James J. McNulty for the defendants.
Nicholas J. Decoulos for the plaintiff.
LYNCH. J.
This case arises from a contract between Gail A. Waters (plaintiff) and "the DeVito defendants"[2] (defendants), whereby the plaintiff was to assign her annuity policy having a cash value of $189,000 to the defendants in exchange *65 change for $50,000. The plaintiff brought suit to rescind the contract on the ground of unconscionability. Defendant Min Ltd. counterclaimed seeking declaratory relief and specific enforcement of the contract. A Superior Court judge, sitting without a jury, found for the plaintiff, ordered that the annuity be returned to the plaintiff on repayment of $18,000 with interest, and dismissed the counterclaim of Min Ltd. The defendants appealed and we took the matter on our own motion. We now affirm the judgment.
We summarize the relevant facts from the judge's findings. The plaintiff was injured in an accident when she was twelve years old. At the age of eighteen, she settled her claim and, with the proceeds, purchased the annuity contract in question from the defendant Commercial Union Insurance Company. When the plaintiff was twenty-one, she became romantically involved with the defendant Thomas Beauchemin, an ex-convict, who introduced her to drugs. Beauchemin suggested that she sell her annuity contract, introduced her to one of the defendants, and represented her in the contract negotiations. She was naive, insecure, vulnerable in contract matters, and unduly influenced by Beauchemin. The defendants drafted the contract documents with the assistance of legal counsel, but the plaintiff had no such representation. At least some portions of the contract were executed in unusual circumstances: i.e., part of the contract was signed on the hood of an automobile in a parking lot, part was signed in a restaurant. The defendants agreed to pay $50,000 for the annuity policy which would return to them as owners of the policy $694,000 over its guaranteed term of twenty-five years, and which had a cash value at the time the contract was executed of $189,000.
Beauchemin acted for himself and as agent of the defendants. For example, the defendants forgave a $100 debt of Beauchemin as deposit for the purchase of the annuity policy. From a subsequent $25,000 payment, the defendants deducted $7,000 that Beauchemin owed them.
Based on the foregoing, the judge found the contract unconscionable.
*66 The defendants contend that the judge erred by (1) finding the contract unconscionable (and by concluding the defendants assumed no risks and therefore finding the contract oppressive); (2) refusing them specific performance; and (3) failing to require the plaintiff to return all the funds received from them.
1. Unconscionability. The defendants argue that the evidence does not support the finding that the contract was unconscionable or that they assumed no risks and therefore that the contract was oppressive. "[W]e may not set aside findings of fact `unless clearly erroneous, and due regard shall be given to the opportunity of the trial court to judge of the credibility of the witnesses.' Mass. R. Civ. P. 52 (a), 365 Mass. 816 (1974)." First Pa. Mortgage Trust v. Dorchester Sav. Bank, 395 Mass. 614, 621 (1985). Also, we may not reverse the judge's findings or conclusions if they are not tainted by an error of law. See Blackwell v. E.M. Helides, Jr., Inc., 368 Mass. 225, 226 (1975).
The doctrine of unconscionability has long been recognized by common law courts in this country and in England. See Banaghan v. Malaney, 200 Mass. 46 (1908); Boynton v. Hubbard, 7 Mass. 112 (1810); Kleinberg v. Ratett, 252 N.Y. 236 (1929); Campbell Soup Co. v. Wentz, 172 F.2d 80 (3d Cir.1948); 14 S. Williston, Contracts § 1632 (3d ed. 1972), and cases cited; Leff, Unconscionability and the Code  The Emperor's New Clause, 115 U. Pa. L. Rev. 485, 531-533 nn. 184-202 (1967). "Historically, a [contract] was considered unconscionable if it was `such as no man in his senses and not under delusion would make on the one hand, and as no honest and fair man would accept on the other.' Hume v. United States, 132 U.S. 406[, 411] (1889), quoting Earl of Chesterfield v. Janssen, 38 Eng. Rep. 82, 100 (Ch. 1750). Later, a contract was determined unenforceable because unconscionable when `the sum total of its provisions drives too hard a bargain for a court of conscience to assist.' Campbell Soup Co. v. Wentz, 172 F.2d 80, 84 (3d Cir.1948)." Covich v. Chambers, 8 Mass. App. Ct. 740, 750 n. 13 (1979).
*67 The doctrine of unconscionability has also been codified in the Uniform Commercial Code (code), G.L.c. 106, § 2-302 (1990 ed.),[3] and, by analogy, it has been applied in situations outside the ambit of the code. See, e.g., Zapatha v. Dairy Mart, Inc., 381 Mass. 284, 291 (1980) (termination clause in franchise agreement not considered unconscionable); Commonwealth v. DeCotis, 366 Mass. 234, 242 (1974) (extraction of resale fees for no rendered services deemed unfair act or practice under G.L.c. 93A, § 2 [a]). See also Meehan v. New England School of Law, 522 F. Supp. 484, 494 (D. Mass. 1981) (applying Zapatha and concluding contract clause waiving tenure rights not unconscionable because plaintiff attorney carefully negotiated clear, easily identifiable language in clause); Scheele v. Mobil Oil Corp., 510 F. Supp. 633, 637 (D. Mass. 1981) (relying on Zapatha to deny defendant's motion to dismiss where motion claimed code related only to sale of goods and not mutual termination agreements). As explained in Bronstein v. Prudential Ins. Co., 390 Mass. 701, 708 (1984), "[in Zapatha] the court applied statutory policy to common law contract issues, which, for centuries have been within the province of this court." Accordingly, although we are not here concerned with a sale of goods or a commercial transaction, Zapatha is instructive on *68 the principles to be applied in testing this transaction for unconscionability.
Unconscionability must be determined on a case-by-case basis, with particular attention to whether the challenged provision could result in oppression and unfair surprise to the disadvantaged party and not to allocation of risk because of "superior bargaining power." Zapatha, supra at 292-293. Courts have identified other elements of the unconscionable contract. For example, gross disparity in the consideration alone "may be sufficient to sustain [a finding that the contract is unconscionable]," since the disparity "itself leads inevitably to the felt conclusion that knowing advantage was taken of [one party]." Jones v. Star Credit Corp., 59 Misc. 2d 189, 192 (N.Y. Sup. Ct. 1969). See, e.g., Matter of Friedman, 64 A.D.2d 70, 85 (N.Y. 1978) (contract unconscionable because art dealer's "consideration" inadequate where widow conveyed more than 300 works of art to dealer and received neither the payment of purchase price nor right to receive a fixed price within a definite time, only dealer's promise of payment if and when sales made); Nelson v. Nelson, 57 Wash.2d 321, 323-324 (1960) (contract found unconscionable where defendant agreed to exchange equity in her property  worth more than $4,750  for equity in the plaintiff's property valued at $2,750). High pressure sales tactics and misrepresentation have been recognized as factors rendering a contract unconscionable. Industralease Automated & Scientific Equip. Corp. v. R.M.E. Enters., Inc., 58 A.D.2d 482, 488-490 (N.Y. 1977). If the sum total of the provisions of a contract drive too hard a bargain, a court of conscience will not assist its enforcement. Campbell Soup Co., supra at 84.
The judge found that Beauchemin introduced the plaintiff to drugs, exhausted her credit card accounts to the sum of $6,000, unduly influenced her, suggested that the plaintiff sell her annuity contract, initiated the contract negotiations, was the agent of the defendants, and benefited from the contract *69 between the plaintiff and the defendants.[4] The defendants were represented by legal counsel; the plaintiff was not. See Zapatha, supra at 294. The cash value of the annuity policy at the time the contract was executed was approximately four times greater than the price to be paid by the defendants. For payment of not more than $50,000 the defendants were to receive an asset that could be immediately exchanged for $189,000, or they could elect to hold it for its guaranteed term and receive $694,000. In these circumstances the judge could correctly conclude the contract was unconscionable.
The defendants assumed no risk and the plaintiff gained no advantage. Gross disparity in the values exchanged is an important factor to be considered in determining whether a contract is unconscionable. "[C]ourts [may] avoid enforcement of a bargain that is shown to be unconscionable by reason of gross inadequacy of consideration accompanied by other relevant factors." 1 A. Corbin, Contracts § 128, at 551 (1963 & Supp. 1991). Moreover, an unconscionable contract is "such as no man in his senses and not under delusion would make on the one hand, and as no honest and fair man would accept on the other." Hume v. United States, 132 U.S. 406, 411 (1889), quoting Earl of Chesterfield v. Janssen, supra. See In re Estate of Vought, 76 Misc. 2d 755 (N.Y. Sur. Ct. 1973) (assignment of interest in spendthrift trust for $66,000 under provisions which guaranteed assignees ultimate return of $1,100,000).
We are satisfied that the disparity of interests in this contract is "so gross that the court cannot resist the inference that it was improperly obtained and is unconscionable." In re Estate of Vought, supra at 760.
*70 2. Amount of repayment order. The defendants also argue that the judge erred in failing to require the plaintiff to return the full amount paid by them for the annuity.[5]
The judge's order was consistent with his findings that Beauchemin was the agent of the defendants, and that the plaintiff only received $18,000 for her interest in the annuity.
Judgment affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  Cube Ltd., Robert A. DeVito, David A. DeVito, and Michael D. Steamer. The defendants Commercial Union Insurance Company and Thomas Beauchemin did not appeal from the judgment.
[2]  The judge referred to the defendants Min Ltd., Cube Ltd., David A. DeVito, Robert A. DeVito, and Michael D. Steamer, collectively as "the DeVito defendants" because their identities and roles were not made clear at trial. The plaintiff originally agreed to assign her rights and interest in a certain annuity policy to Cube Ltd., which later transferred all its interest in the annuity to Min Ltd. David A. DeVito is president of Cube Ltd. Michael D. Steamer is business manager of Min Ltd. Robert A. DeVito conducted negotiations with the plaintiff regarding the annuity policy.
[3]  General Laws c. 106, § 2-302 (1990 ed.), reads as follows:
"§ 2-302. Unconscionable Contract or Clause.
"(1) If the court as a matter of law finds the contract or any clause of the contract to have been unconscionable at the time it was made the court may refuse to enforce the contract, or it may enforce the remainder of the contract without the unconscionable clause, or it may so limit the application of any unconscionable clause as to avoid any unconscionable result.
"(2) When it is claimed or appears to the court that the contract or any clause thereof may be unconscionable the parties shall be afforded a reasonable opportunity to present evidence as to its commercial setting, purpose, and effect to aid the court in making the determination."
The standards of determining a contract unconscionable set forth in G.L.c. 106, § 2-302, are the same standards expressed in Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 208 (1981). "The issue is one of law for the court, and the test is to be made as of the time the contract was made." Zapatha v. Dairy Mart, Inc., 381 Mass. 284, 291 (1980).
[4]  These latter two findings were grounds enough for the judge to rescind the contract. See 1 H.C. Black, Rescission of Contracts § 32 (2d ed. 1929), and cases cited. The plaintiff relied on Beauchemin to represent her in the contract negotiations. Accordingly, he was obligated to act on her behalf and in her interest. Id. Instead, he acted in his own self-interest and caused benefits to inure to himself by having his debts forgiven and requiring he be named beneficiary of the annuity policy.
[5]  The defendants paid $18,000 cash after deducting $7,000 for a debt which was owed to them by Beauchemin. The remaining $25,000 due on the contract was never paid.

=== CASE 9740994 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:47:08.124928+00 ===

SATHRE, Judge.
The certified record on this appeal, is lengthy, but the facts necessary,to a.determination of the issues presented are substantially as follows: On February 7,, 1934 the Board of Railroad Commissioners (now Public Service Commission) of the State of North Dakota issued to the Northern Truck Line of Williston, North Dakota Special Certificate No. 175 authorizing the transportation of property in intra-state commerce in the vicinity of Williston, North Dakota. This certificate was issued under authority of Chapter 164 of the Session Laws of 1933-.. The proceedings in this matter was -assigned Case No: S-240.
On March 18, 1946 the Public Service Commission, after notice and hearing approved a sale and transfer by Northern Truck Line of said-Special Certificate No. 175 to Northern Transportation Company.
This matter was assigned Case No. S-874. Notice of hearing in this matter was sent to representatives of all North Dakota railroads, but none of the railroads appeared at the hearing. The commission made its findings of fact, conclusions and order as follows:
“That special certificate No. 175 authorized the transportation of general commodities in load lots of 5000 lbs. of more, from and within the territory described as follows-:
“Bounded on the east by Williams, Mountrail, Divide, Burke County line;’ on the north by the International Boundary Line; on the west by the North Dakota-Montana State Line; on the south by the county road running east of Fairviéw, Montana, to a junction of U. S. Highway No. 85 and State Highway No. 23, except that the transportation of livestock, heavy setup machinery, agricultural products of all kinds, sand, gravel, brick, tile arid emigrant movables máy be transported' -in¡both -truck loads and in less thap truck loads to and -.from a distance of 25 miles.from Williston, the base of operation; and, further, that • household .goods may be transported to.ancl.from any place within the state in load lots .of 3000 lbs or more.” ,,
*526Thereafter on May 24, 1946 upon request of the' purchaser of said Certificate No. 175, Northern Transportation Company, the Commission issued amended findings of fact, conclusions and order in said case S-874, without further notice of hearing in the matter. This amended order describes special certificate No. 175 as follows:
“That Special Certificate No. 175 authorizes the transportation of general commodities in load lots of 5000 lbs., or more, from and within a territory described as follows:
“ ‘Bounded on the east by the Williams-Mountrail-Divide-Burke County Lines; on the north by the International Boundary Line; on the west by the North Dakota-Montana State Line; on the south' by a county road running east of Fairview, Montana, to a Jet. with U. S. Highway No. 85 'and State Highway No. 23.’
except that livestock, heavy set-up machinery, household goods, ' emigrant movables and petroleum products in bulk may be transported' between points and places within the State of North Dakota.”
In November 1950 the Northern Transportation Company as seller and E. G. Balsam, L. W. Balsam, S. F. De France and V. L. De France, a partnership doing business as Balsam & De France, as buyers, made application, to the Public Service Commission for authority by the Northern Transportation Company to sell and transfer to Balsam & De France said Special Certificate No. 175. Notice of hearing .on this application was given to all of the railroads in the State and they appeared and protested the transfer of said Certificate to Balsam & De France.
Thereafter and on March 14, 1951 the Commission issued findings of fact, and conclusions, and made its order that said, certificate No. 175 be reissued and transferred to Balsam & De France. The’certificate thus reissued was in all respects identical with the certificate issued and transferred to the Northern Transportation Company under the amended order of May 1946,
No appeal was taken from this order by the railroads or by any other carriers.
On' May 4, 1951 Hvidsten Transport, Transport Inc., Dugan Oil and Transport Co., and Indianhead Truck Line filed with the Commission a complaint alleging that the Public ■ Service Commission by its amended order of May 24, 1946 in the matter of the sale of Special Certificate No. 175 by Northern Truck Line to ¡Northern Transportation Company to Balsam & De France, unlawfully enlarged and extended the operating rights of said Northern Transportation Company under said Certificate in vio.lation of Séction 49-1810, 1949 Supp.NDRC 1943;’TfeLif the present assignees of .sard” Special Certificate No,..-175, Balááni & De France were permitted to operate to the extent that the authority of said Certificate hád been unlawfully enlarged, such operation would result in irreparable harm, injury, damage to the applicants and to the general public.
Balsam & De France answered denying generally the allegations of the application.
The railroad respondents were permitted to intervene in this proceeding and joined in the application of the four motor carriers.
On January 29, 1952 the Commission issued its order dismissing the application of the said motor carriers. Thereafter the motor carriers and the railroads appealed from the decision of the' Commission to the district court of Burleigh County. The matter was heard before the Hon. Geo. Thom Jr., District Judge/upon the certified record and transcript of proceedings had before the Public Service Commission.
The district court found as a fact that the original certificate No. 175 authorized freight service only in the vicinity of Wil-liston and made conclusions of law that the authority to transport petroleum and petroleum' products existed only from and to that' territory or zone. ' The court upheld, however, the Commission’s finding that the *527Certificate was not restricted as to commodities. It also concluded that the motor carrier respondents could not complain, of the amended order of the Public Service Commission in case No. S-874 issued May 24, 1946 since the record shows that their certificates of authority were issued subsequent to the issuance and transfer of Certificate No. 175 to Northern Transportation Company. With reference to the railroad respondents however the court found that no notice of hearing was given them before making the amended order in Case S-874 on May 24, 1946, and concluded that the amended order unlawfully enlarged and extended the operating authority of Special Certificate No. 175 to the extent that it provided:
“Except that livestock, heavy set-up machinery, household goods, emigrant movables and petroleum products in bulk may be transported between points and places within the State of North Dakota.”
The court then directed that the proceedings be remanded to the Commission for deletion of that portion of • authority just quoted and ordered the Commission to draw the Certificate issued to Balsam &. .De France so as to limit the authority to and from and within the following .zone:
“Bounded on the east by Williams, Mountrail, Divide, Burke County lines; on the north by the International Boundary Line; on the west by the North Dakota-Montana State Line; and on the south by a county road running east of Fairview, Montana to a junction of U. S. Highway No. 85 and State Highway No. 23”.
From this judgment" both the Public Service. Commission and Balsam & De France appealed" to the Supreme Court.
The specifications of error as set forth by the appellants, the Public Service Commission and Balsam & De France may be summarized in three propositions:
“1. Whether or not special certificate No. 175,, as originally issued in 1934 authorized the transportation of freight between all points and places in the State, or whether it was limited to service to and from the vicinity of Williston.
“2. Whether or not the railroad respondents are now barred from objecting to the amended order of the Public Service Commission, dated May 24, 1946 in tase S-874 on the ground of laches.
“3. Whether or not the amended order issued by the Public Service Commission on May 24, 1946 in case S-874 unlawfully extended the authority of special certificate No. 175 beyond the scope of the notice given to the railroad respondents.”
We shall" first Consider the second proposition urged by the appellant.
It is established by" the undisputed facts, the substance of which has been set out herein, that the railroad respondents were served ■with notice of the hearing upon the application of Northern Transportation Company for authority to sell and assign Certificate No. 175 to Balsam & De France. The hearing was had before the Public Service Commission on February 7, 1951, at Dickinson, North Dakota. The railroads appeared at the hearing by their counsel, participated in the proceedings and objected to the transfer of Special" Certificate No. 175 from Northern Transportation Company to Balsam & De France. They, contended that the amended order of May 24, 1946 was an enlargement of the authority under original certificate No. 175; that no notice of any hearing thereon had been served on the railroads, and that the Commission was without jurisdiction to make said amended order. . . ,
The Public Service Commission issued its findings of fact and order, Ma'rch 14, 19J1, approving the transfer of. Special Certificate No. 175 to Balsam & De France. True an4 , complete copies of, the order were sent .by registered mail to the attorneys .for all the railroad respondents qn March 20, 1951. Under, Section 28-3215 *528NDRC 1943 the railroad respondents had the right of appeal from said order. '
Said Section 28-3215 provides:
“Any party to any proceeding heard by an administrative agency, except in cases where the decision of the administrative .agency is declared final by any other statute, may. appeal from such decision within thirty days after notice thereof has been given. * * *»
The order of the Public Service Commission issued March 14, 1951 was a final order. The Commission had jurisdiction over the subject matter and had power to issue such order under Section 49-1810 NDRC 1943 as amended by Chapter 277 Session Laws of 1945 which provides:
“Special common motor carriers may transport commodities within their authority, in any quantity but only from or , to that territory or zone for which they heretofore lawfully served, proved or hereafter may prove,. public convenience and necessity. A special common motor carrier shall have the authority :
“1. To transport household goods, emigrant movables, livestock, and farm supplies, or other special commodities or., general commodities in truckloads as defined by the commission, from or to points not in such -zone or between points on Class A routes, by the" authority and under the conditions and rules set by the commission;
«2 * * *»
The railroads were parties to the proceedings in which the order was issued. They did not appeal from the order and it became final when the time, for appeal had elapsed.
The present appeal was taken by the Public Service Commission and Balsam & De France-from the judgment of‘the district court which reverséd the order of the Public' Service Commission made January 29, 1952 in- the matter of' the application of the four motor carriers for a “Cease and Desist” order against Balsam & De France. The railroad respondents, as interveners, joined in the application of the motor carriers and collaterally challenged the order of the Commission made March 14, 1951 in the matter of transfer of Certificate No. 175 to Balsam' & De France. No appeal was' taken from that order and it had become final. As a general rule an order or determination of an administrative body having jurisdiction under authority of law is not subject to collateral attack in the absence of fraud or bad faith.
In 73 C.J.S., Public Administrative Bodies and Procedure, § 145, page 478, it is stated:
“As a general rule, the decisions or orders of an administrative body are, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, presumptively correct and valid. Thus there is .a presumption that legal duties and statutory requirements were complied with, that facts justifying a ruling were in existence, and that there was sufficient evidence on which to base the decision of the agency. So also, the action of an administrative board or officer, when done in the course of official duty, is generally presumed to have been done in good faith and imports verity. Unappealed-from orders must be assumed to be fair, just and reasonable, but the presumption in favor of an administrative decision is more potent with respect to a finding of .fact than it is with respect to a question of law.”
In the-same volume, same subject, § 146, Collateral Attack, 'pages 479, 480 the rule is stated as follows:
“The order or determination of an administrative-'body, acting within its. .jurisdiction and under authority of law, is not subject to collateral attack, in the absence of fraud or bad .faith, the only' method of attack available being by appeal as provided by statute. The rule 'is particularly applicable, where' the question in issue is one that requires-'a 'background of ‘Specialized *529experience, so that the admiiiistrative agency is peculiarly qualified to determine it.”
See also Application of M. & S. Transport Co., 153 Neb. 260, 44 N.W.2d 585.
Since the order of March 14, 1951 had become final and no appeal having been taken therefrom, the railroads were not in position to challenge it by collateral attack in the subsequent proceedings brought by the four motor carriers. It follows therefore that the judgment of the district court erroneously held that the order of the Public Service Commission of March 14, 1951 was void.
With reference to the four motor carriers, Hvidsten Transport, Transport Inc., Dugan Oil and Transport Company and Indianhead Truck Line, the record shows that their operating certificates were issued after the amended order of May 24, 1946, and subsequent to the reissuance of Special Certificate No. 175 to .Northern Transportation Company., They were not at that time in the transportation business in North Dakota and were not in position to attack the amended order of May 24, 1946 and the reissuance thereunder of Special Certificate No. 175. The district court held:
"That since the petitioners, now appellants, were not holders of any certificates and were not engaged in the transportation of goods in North Dakota .at the time of the amended findings in case No. S-874 they cannot be heard to complain of the orders of the Public Service Commission therein; that they are not such interested parties as to have any right to complain thereof, and object thereto. * * * ”
The four motor carriers took no cross-¿ppeal from the judgment of the district court and must therefore be deemed to be bound thereby.
In the joint briéf.of the railroads-and the four motor carriers, it is stated: ■
“Respondents' agree with appellant, Balsam & De France, when it states on pages 93 and 94 of its brief, that many issues have been eliminated. The issue of whether or not the motor carrier respondents were entitled to notice in the 1951 transfer hearing is now out of the case.”
In view of our conclusion herein it will not be necessary to consider the other specifications, urged by appellants.
After a careful consideration of the lengthy record we are agreed that the judgment of the district court should be reversed, except as to the dismissal of the complaint of the four motor carrier respondents.
The case is remanded to the district court with directions to .enter judgment reinstating. the findings and order of the Public Service: Commission made March 14, 1951.
It is so ordered.
MORRIS and GRIMSON, JJ., concur.
JOHNSON, J., did not participate.

=== CASE 9740995 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:47:08.129244+00 ===

BURKE, Chief Justice
(dissenting).
The original certificate of public convenience and necessity in this case was issued to Northern Truck Line of Williston on February 7, 1934. Early in 1946 an application for authority to sell the Northern Truck Line to Northern Transportation was filed with the Public Service' Commission. Notice of hearing upon this application wás served upon all railroad carriers in the state. The only issue specified for consideration and determination upon such hearing was whether the sale should be authorizéd. None of the railroad carriers appeared or filed any objections to the transfer and on ■ March 18, 1946, the sale was-authorized by order of the commission. Thereafter on May 24, 1946, without any notice or hearing the commission entered an order which substantially enlarged the territory authorized to be served by virtue of the transferred certificate of public convenience and necessity.
*530Section 28-3208 NDRC 1943 provides in part:
. “Whenever an administrative agency, * *, . * shall hold any hearing or make any independent investigation upon the claim or request ,of any person, no decision shall be made by the agency' until all parties iii interest shall have been furnished with a written specification of the issues which are to be considered and determined * * ⅜ >?
It is clear that the order of the commission enlarging the territory authorized to bé served by the Northern Transportation Company was issued in violation of the provisions of the above statute. .
“A -public utility commission, being unknown to the common law, derives its authority wholly from constitutional or statutory provisions, and it possesses only such powers as are thereby conferred, * *
73 C.J.S., Public Utilities, § 38, p. 1064; Petition of Village Board of Wheatland, 77 N.D. 194, 42 N.W.2d 321; State ex rel. Lemke v. Chicago & N. W. R. Co., 46 N.D. 313, 179 N.W. 378. And "where power is given a commission to do a certain act in a certain manner, the- manner prescribed is the measure of the power given.” 73 C.J.S., Public Utilities, § 39, p. 1076.
In the Wheatland case, supra, 77 N.D. at page 218, 42 N.W,2d at page 335, we quoted with approval from 42 Am.Jur. (Public Administrative Law, Sec. 68) 379 saying;
“The powers- conferred upon the commissioners ‘must be exercised in .accordance with the statute bestowing such powers and they can. act only in the mode ’ prescribed by the statute * * *. They cannot rightfully dispense with any of the-essential forms of proceedings whidh the legislature has prescribed for the prfrpose of in-. vesting them with power to.act.’”
In my opinion the legal principles above stated are correct and for that reason it is' my conclusion, .that-the order of .the commission enlarging the territory to be served by the Northern Transportation Company was wholly void because the commission had no power to issue it. ■
In November 1950, an application was made- to .the Public Service Commission for authority to transfer the certificate, here in question, from Northern Transportation Company to Balsam and De France. A notice of hearing upon the application was served upon all the railroads doing business in the state. In that notice the only issue specified for consideration and determination w;as whether the transfer should be authorized. Upon the hearing upon such transfer the railroads attempted to inject into the cáse the question of whether public convenience and necessity existed for the authority conferred by the certificate. The commission sustained all objections to the reception of evidence concerning this issue and after the close of the hearing ordered the transfer of the certificate to Balsam and De France. No appeal was taken from this order. It is my view" that ’ the evidence concerning " public convenience and necessity was properly excluded. The sole issue before the commission as specified in. the notice of hearing was whether the certificate as amended in 1946 should be transferred. At that hearing the commission had no power to consider or decide any other issue.
It is the opinion of the majority that because the railroads attempted to raise the question of' public convenience and necessity at this hearing and, after the evidence on this question was excluded and an -order made directing' the transfer of the certificate, failed to* áppeal from the order, they waived any right to attack the validity of the certificate. I cannot agree with this conclusion because, as I see it, a reconsideration of the question of public convenience, and necessity or a consideration and determination of the validity of the certificate could only: bé had<'at a hearing at which those issues' had been specified-as the= issues to be considered and determined. ..Neither an attempt to raise an issue which could' not be considered, nor the failure to *531raise another such issue, can constitute a waiver or create an estoppel. The railroads therefore had the right to challenge the validity of the 1946 certificate directly in this proceeding. That certificate is void and the judgment of the district court to that effect should he affirmed.

=== CASE 9740996 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:47:08.133896+00 ===

On Petition for Rehearing
SATHRE, Justice.
The railroad respondents have filed a petition for rehearing. It is stated that review of the Supreme Court’s decision of April 18, 1955 indicates that the decision turned upon the fact that the railroad respondents failed to appeal from the order of the Public Service Commission dated March 14, 1951 in case .No. S-1142 and therefore said respondents cannot, now gol-laterally attack that decision in the absence of fraud or bad faith. It is stated:
“The Court states that the railroad respondents appeared in Case No. S-1142 and failed to appeal from an adverse decision. That is correct. It also indicates however, that the issue presented in the instant case was also presented in that case. That is incorrect.”
Case No. S-1142 is the record made in the matter of the application of Northern Transportation Company to. sell Special Certificate No. 175 to. Balsam & De France. This is the . identical certificate sold by Northern Truck Line to Northern Transportation Company and whjch was amended without notice to the railroads by the order of the Commission issued May 24, 1946. The railroads stipulated, however, that after the entry of the amended order dated May 24, 1946, copies -of it were mailed to representatives of all North Dakota railroads. The notice of hearing upon the application for authority by Northern Transportation Company to sell Certificate No. 175 to Balsam & De France described the area of operating authority in the identical language of the amended certificate as follows:
“Notice of Hearing
“Notice is hereby given that the Application of John P. Neadors, Bert Ell-ingson, and A. J. Bartlett, -dba Northern Transportation Company, Willis-ton, North Dakota to sell and Balsam & De France, Miles City, Montana to buy Special Certificate No. 175 authorizing motor freight service for the transportation of general commodities, to, from and within a territory described as follows:
“ ‘Bounded on the east by the Williams-Mountrail-Divide-Burke County Lines; on the north by the International Boundary Line; on the west by the North Dakota-Montana State Line; and on the south by a county road running east of Fairview, Montana, 'to a Jet.” with US Hwy. No. 85 and St. Hwy. No. 23,’
“Except that livestock, heavy setup machinery, -household goods, emigrant movables and petroleum products in bulk may be transported between points and places within the State of of North Dakota, will be considered and public hearing held thereon by the Public Service Commission of'the State of North Dakota, on the 6th day of February, 1951 at 10:30 A.M., Mountain Standard Time, at the courthouse at Dickinson, North Dakota, at which time and place all interested parties may be hear.d and offer evidence for or against the granting of the application: .• -
“Dated at Bismarck, North Dakota, this 15th day of January, 1951.”
The notice was served upon all the railroads in the State, including the respondents herein.
The railroads appeared generally at the hearing and submitted to the jurisdiction of the Commission. They objected to the transfer of the certificate to Balsam & De France. They sought to introduce evidence of convenience and necessity which in*532volved the state-wide operating authority granted by the certificate. The Commission refused to admit such testimony. Counsel for the railroads then made.offers of proof as follows:
“First, we offer to show the nature and extent of the railways’ service furnished in this area which is aífécted in the whole state of North Dakota, by time tables showing the freight trains and freight movements and facilities supplied by the railway companies for the transportation of the commodities described in Special Certificate No. 175.” -
Objection was made to the offer and sustained.
Counsel for the railroads:
“We now offer to show, and ask the reporter to copy into -the record copies of Special freight operators certificates, No. 554, Crosby Transfer Company; No. 47, Culp Truck Lines; No. 639 Kasper Filkowski; No. 286, Reinhart Grishkowsky; 194 Hart Motor .Express; 666 Hart Motor Express; No. 251, J. H. Maas; 507,
“A1 Redmond; No. 260, Lorenz So-witch';
“And then interstate freight operators as follows: Certificate No. 4 Dakota Transfer & Storage Company; No. 52 Hart Motor Express; 273 Houck Transport Company; 252Hvid-sten Transport; 196 H. F. Johnson, Inc.; 291 John H. King, Sidney, Montana ;
“Alsq Class A.. Certificates as follows: 44 and 329, Culp Truck Lines; 313 Dakota Transfer & Stórage Company; 326 Minot-Portal Transfer Service; 90, Stanley Transfer;
“All of which certificates are certificates issued to operators who furnish transportation services for all or part of the general commodities and other sub-. jects of transportation ’ which are referred to in special certificate No. 175; and they, together with the railroad transportation facilities heretofore referred to, are offered for the purpose of showing that the public is adequately served without the issuance, or approval of the transfer of certificate No. 175.”
Ojection was made to the offer and sustained.
Counsel for the railroads:
“And further we offer to show generally that the transportation facilities of the kind and character described-in Certificate No. 175 are adequate and •that no public convenience or necessity exists for the continuance of this certificate or the transfer thereof; that the .effect of the approval of this would simply be to put another competitor in the transportation field who would attempt to take business away from carriers who are now adequately taking care of the public.”
Objection was made as follows:
. “That is obj ected to on the ground and for the reason that the question of convenience and necessity and adequacy of present facilities is not an issue before the Public Service Commission at this time.” “Objection sustained.”
The railroads contend that the Public Service Commission exceeded its statutory authority in amending special Certificate No. 175 ex parte and thereby enlarging the scope of activity permitted under it’so as to provide
“that livestock, heavy set-up machinery, household goods, emigrant movables and petroleum products in bulk may be transported between points and places within the State of North Dakota.”
The railroads are not now in a position to challenge the authority so granted. ’ Certificate No. 175 was originally issued on February 7, 1934, pursuant to the authority provided in Chapter 164 SLND 1933. *533The realities are that although the original certificate was restrictive in form, certificate holders were permitted to operate on a state-wide basis. From, 1942 to 1946 the Northern Truck Liné transported quantities of petroleum products in bulk under the authority of Certificate No. 175. On March 18, 1946, the Commission after notice and hearing authorized the ¡ sale and transfer of the certificate from the Northern Truck Line to Northern Transportation Company. Thereafter the purchaser- ■ asked that the certificate be amended so ■ as to broaden its authority to include state-wide operations. The railroads had been made parties to the proceedings to transfer the-certificate to the Northern Transportation Company but received no notice of any application to amend it. ■ However, copies of the amended certificate were furnished to the attorneys for the railroads shortly after it was issued on May 24, 1946. The only statute dealing with the amendment of a certificate by the Commission is Section 49-1816 NDRC 1943 which provides:
“The commission, at- any time, for good cause, may suspend -and, upon not less than five days’ notice to the grantee of any certificate, and on opportunity to be heard, may revoke or amend any certificate.”
The Commission is clearly vested with general power to amend a certificate and the only party to whom this statute requires notice to be given is the grantee. In this case the grantee was the .applicant .for the amendment. When original Certificate No. 175 was issued the Commission obtained jurisdiction of the subject matter and of the parties, including the railroads. • The only position of the railroads that is at all tenable is that they being parties who might be affected by the extension of competitive service permitted by the amendment were entitled to be heard and that in the absence of notice the amendment was not binding upon them. This contention can only go to the personal jurisdiction of the Commission over the railroads. It does not involve jurisdiction over the subject matter which fell within the general powers of the Commission. See Application of Hvidsten, 78 N.D. 56, 48 N.W.2d 26.
“A failure to comply with- the requirements as to notice and process may result in a failure to acquire jurisdiction, ' but if • a general appearance is entered, jurisdiction of the person is conferred even though it was not acquired by proper service of notice or process. A general appearance without objection waives all irregularities preceding the hearing.” 42 Am.Jur., Public Administrative Law, Section 121.
Our attention has been called to Petition of Village Board of Wheatland, 77 N.D. 194, 42 N.W.2d 321. In that case objection to the jurisdiction of the Commission was made by special appearance and we held that the objection was not waived by participating in the trial on the, merits after the objection had been overrulécl.
In November 1950 the Northern Transportation Company by application -to the Public Service Commission sought authority- to .sell and transfer the-.certificate to Balsam & De France. (Case No. S-1142) The certificate to be so transferred was not the,-.original restricted certificate but th,e amended and enlarged certificate und.er which the Northern Transportation Company had operated at least part of the time since its issuance in 1946. Noticp of hearing on this application for transfer was given to parties concerned, including 'the railroads. The notice of hearing served upon the railroads set forth the amended and the enlarged certificate verbatim. The railroads did not 'appear specially and object to the transfer of the enlarged' certificate on 'the, grouhd that it was issued without jurisdittion but appeared generally and ffes'isted the- transfer. It is clear from the record that the main reason for resisting the transfer was that the certificate permitted competitive transportation of petroleum and petroleum products on a state-wide basis. The railroads sought to challenge the public convenience and necessity of operations that might be conducted *534under the amended, certificate. This went not to jurisdiction but to merits of the operation permitted by the certificate.
The railroads contend that the Northern Transportation Company made little use of its authority under the certificate from 1946 when it obtained it until 1951 when it sold it to-Balsam & De France. This was undoubtedly the basis for the railroads’ attempt to resist the transfer on the ground .of lack of public convenience and necessity but that contention goes to the merits rather than to the jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission. It is also argued that if the Commission had at the hearing in 1951 righted the wrong it had committed by issuing the e5c parte amended and enlarged certificate no hardship would have ensued, an argument which again pertains to the merits and emphasizes the fact that if the railroads had then raised the question of lack of jurisdiction, as they clearly had the right and opportunity to do, no hardship would have ensued to Balsam & De France, who the record shows relied upon transfer to them of the amended certificate and thereafter engaged in the transportation of-petroleum products in bulk out of Fargo and Grand Forks.' It is clear to us that the railroads', having had the opportunity to raise the' qfiestioh of the authority of the Commission to make thé ex parte amended and extended' order when they appeared before the Commissibn and resisted on the merits the transfer.to Balsam & De France, by their general appear^ anee waived their objections to the jurisdiction of the Commission rising out of the issuance of the ex parte order and cannot now be heard to challenge the validity of that, order on the ground that the Commission had no jurisdiction to make it.
In the case of Grubb v. Public Utilities Commission of Ohio, 281 U.S. 470, 50 S.Ct. 374, 378, 74 L.Ed. 972, the Supreme Court of the United States speaking through Justice Van Devanter said’:
“The thing presented for adjudication in the case in the state, court was the validity of the order, and it was incumbent on the appellant to present in support of his asserted right'of attack every available ground of which he had knowledge. He was not at liberty to prosecute that right by piecemeal, as by presenting a part only of 'the available grounds and reserving others for. ^another suit, if failing in that. Werlein v. City of New Orleans, 177 U.S. 390, 398, et seq., 20 S.Ct. 682, 44 L.Ed. 817; United States v. California and Oregon Land Co., 192 U.S. 355, 358, 24 S.Ct. 266, 48 L.Ed. 476.
“As the ground just described was available but not put forward the hppel-lant must abide by the rule that a judgment upon;the merits.in one suit is res judicata in another where the pátties and subject-matter.are-the same, not only as respects matters actually presented to sustain or defeat the right asserted, but also as respects any-other available matter which .might have, been presented to that end. Baltimore S. S. Co. v. Phillips, 274 U.S. 316, 319, 47 S.Ct. 600, 21 L.Ed 1069; United States v. Moser, 266 U.S. 236, 241, 45 S.Ct. 66, 69 L.Ed. 262; Cromwell v. County of Sac, 94 U.S. 351, 352, 24, L.Ed. 195.”
Rehearing denied.
MORRIS and. GRIMSON, JJ., concur;.
JOHÑSON, J., did not participate

=== CASE 9740997 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:47:08.742763+00 ===

Reid, J.
Upon leave granted, defendants appeal from a temporary injunctive order of the circuit court. Plaintiff filed the bill in chancery seeking to enjoin defendants from tortiously interfering with plaintiffs contracts with wholesalers and retailers, to which contracts the defendants are not parties; from inducing breaches of plaintiffs said contracts and from conspiring and committing acts tending to restrain trade and to create a monopoly in the sale of plaintiffs products bearing plaintiffs trade-mark.
Plaintiff is a manufacturer of cameras, et cetera, and alleges that defendants are retailers who sell plaintiff’s products but who are not parties to any fair-trade agreement, either with plaintiff or with any of plaintiff’s wholesalers or distributors. Plaintiff charges that defendants have tortiously inter*56fered with plaintiff’s contracts and that defendants have induced dealers to breach their contracts. Defendants admit that they have sold plaintiff’s products for less than the price established in the contracts between plaintiff and signers of contracts with plaintiff. Defendants maintain that as nonsigners they are within their legal rights in setting their own prices for such products. Defendants further deny that they have tortiously interfered with any of plaintiff’s contracts or induced any breach thereof.
Plaintiff claims that defendants obtained Argus cameras by inducing other dealers to breach their contracts; that they use the goods thus obtained to cut prices; that the defendants by cutting prices, interfere with the contract Argus has with other-dealers ; that the defendants are fast creating a monopoly. Plaintiff claims further that the defendants profit by an increase in their volume of sales at the-expense of Argus and its dealers who have created the demands for the goods that the defendants sell ;■ that the defendants’ interest therefore must be-weighed against the interest and investment -of plaintiff Argus and the' hundreds of other retailers who wish to profit by the sale of Argus products; plaintiff further claims that the defendants’ selfish interests must be weighed against the desire of consumers to be able to purchasé Argus cameras from their regular camera dealers' instead of from price cutters; plaintiff further claims that the desire of defendants to cut prices must be further weighed against the inherent monopoly in the course that defendants pursue. The temporary injunction granted by the trial court is as follows: -
“It is hereby ordered that a temporary injunction shall be issued, .
*57“And it is further ordered that the. said defendants, and each qf them, their respective officers, directors, agents, employees, servants, affiliates, successors, heirs and assigns, and all persons acting in •concert or participation with them or any of them, are hereby strictly commanded, restrained and enjoined
“(a) From interfering with the operation and effect of and from impairing or otherwise depriving Argus Cameras, Inc., of the benefits of its fair-trade contracts and its lawful right in the State of Michigan to confine the distribution of its trade-marked products solely through wholesale and retail distributors and dealers who are willing to enter into such contracts by mailing or otherwise disseminating in the State of Michigan circulars, catalogs, mailing pieces or any other form of advertising, or in any other manner offering for sale or selling or delivering for sale in the State of Michigan any Argus products, bearing its trade-mark and covered by plaintiff’s said fair-trade contracts, at less than the prices established thereby as the same are in force and effect from time to time and of which the defendants shall have notice;
“(b) From inducing or attempting to induce wholesale and/or retail distributors and dealers of Argus products to violate their contracts with Argus Cameras, Inc., by purchasing Argus products from any retailer at less than the minimum prices established pursuant to an Argus retailer fair-trade contract in effect between such retailer and Argus Cameras, Inc., or by purchasing any Argus product from any wholesaler in violation of the provisions of an Argus wholesaler fair-trade contract in effect with such wholesaler, or by inducing any retailer to enter into an Argus retailer fair-trade contract with Argus Cameras, Inc., for the purpose of supplying any Argus product to defendants or any of them in violation of such contract, from purchasing, directly or indirectly, Argus products from any person, firm or corporation which has entered *58into an Árgus retailer fair-trade contract or an Argus wholesaler fair-trade contract, where defendants, or any of them, have notice or knowledge 'of such contract, and from inducing or attempting to induce wholesale and retail distributors and.dealers of Argus products to violate their contracts with Argus Cameras, Inc., either directly or by means of any subterfuge, sham or other indirection; “until the further order of this court.” '
The act under which the contracts between plaintiff Argus and its wholesalers and distributors were executed, is PA 1937, No 50 (CL 1948, § 445.151 et seq. [Stat Ann 1953 Cum Supp §19.321 et seq.]). .
Defendants rely upon the' decision of this Court in Shakespeare Company v. Lippman’s Tool Shop Sporting Goods Co., 334 Mich 109. In the Shakespeare Case we say (syllabus 1) :
“State statute declaring that advertising, offering for sale or selling of a commodity which bears the trade-mark, brand, or name of the producer or owner and which is in fair and open competition with commodities of the same general class at a price that is less than that set by the producer or vendor is unfair competition and actionable at the suit of any person damaged thereby is unconstitutional as applied to persons who have not signed a so-called fair-trade agreement whereby they agree to abide by the producer’s -minimum prices on the products, since it constitutes a deprivation of property without due process of law (Const 1908, art 2, §16; CL 1948, §445.151 et seq.).”
Defendants claim there is considerable doubt as to-whether they would be guilty of plaintiff’s charges even if the defendants did induce the nonperformance of plaintiff’s fair-trade contracts by their wholesalers and distributors, for the purpose of acquiring merchandise.
*59We quote from 4 Restatement, Torts, §774, as follows:
“One is privileged by proper means to induce the nonperformance of a contract or bargain, the purpose or eff.ect of which is to restrict his business •opportunities in violation of a defined public policy.
“Comment:.
“a. The privilege stated in this section enables a person to protect himself by proper means against restrictions on his business opportunities when the restrictions violate a defined public policy. In some cases such a restriction may be the avowed purpose of the interrupted arrangement; in others this may be the effect, in view of the administration of the arrangement or other circumstances, whether or not it. is the purpose. It is not enough, however, that the contract or bargain involved restricts the actor’s business opportunities. Every contract limits in some degree the opportunities of persons not parties to the contract. Such a restriction is ordinarily deemed desirable both in the public and the private interest. However, some restrictions may work prejudice to both interests. Accordingly, contracts in unreasonable restraint of trade áre generally unenforceable even against the contracting party. The rule stated in this section is not limited, however, to such contracts. Though the contract may be enforceable in some manner between the parties, one whose business opportunities are restricted by it may be able to survive only through a breach of the restriction; and this breach he is privileged to seek by proper means, if the restriction violates public policy.”
. Defendants further elaim that the public policy of Michigan was set forth in the Shakespeare Case, supra. Defendants seem not to dispute that the fair-trade contracts entered into between plaintiff Argus and its wholesalers and distributors are valid as between the parties to such contracts, but defend*60ants claim that as to nonsigners of snch contracts, such nonsigners are guiltless of tort, though they purchase from a signer.
Under the allegations contained in the bill, plaintiff fails to state a ease for equitable relief, in view of the decision of this Court in the Shakespeare Case. We consider that the Shakespeare Case, supra, laid down a principle of law, the fair implication of which is such that under the law of Michigan thus established, defendants, nonsigners (of so-called fair-trade agreements with plaintiff) must not be enjoined from purchasing the products of plaintiff Argus from signers, nor from selling the products at prices less than prices fixed by plaintiff.
The temporary injunctive order is reversed. We remand the case to the trial court for further proceedings, if any. Costs to defendants.
Carr, C. J., and Sharpe and Dethmers, JJ., concurred with Reid, J.

=== CASE 9740998 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:47:08.747812+00 ===

Btjtzel, J.
{dissenting). The sole question before us is the propriety of the trial court’s order granting the preliminary injunction. In Niedzialek v. Journeymen Barbers, Hairdressers & Cosmetologists’ International Union of America, Local 552, AFL, 331 Mich 296, 302, a suit to restrain picketing, we adopted the words of another court in reference to a preliminary injunction (Goldfield Consolidated Mines Co. v. Goldfield Miners’ Union No 220, 159 F 500, 511, 512):
“It is not necessary that the complainant’s rights be clearly established, or that the court find complainant is entitled to prevail on the final hearing; It is sufficient if it appears that there is a real and substantial question between the parties, proper to be investigated in a court of equity, and in order to *61prevent irremediable injury to the complainant, ber fore his claims can be investigated, it is necessary to prohibit any change in the conditions and relations of the property and of the parties during the litigation.”
Is there a real and substantial question involved in this case? At the present time we only consider the cause of action alleging tortious procurement of breach of contract between plaintiff and those with whom it signed contracts to maintain minimum or stipulated resale prices.
In Krause v. Hartford Accident & Indemnity Co., 331 Mich 19, 25, we stated:
“From the early case of Lumley v. Gye, 2 El & B1 216 (118 Eng Rep 749, 22 LJ QB [NS] 463), most of the common-law courts have adopted and enlarged upon the idea that unlawful interference with another’s contract rights constitutes an actionable tort. In general that proposition has been adopted in this jurisdiction. See Morgan v. Andrews, 107 Mich 33; Wilkinson v. Powe, 300 Mich 275. But the interference must be unlawful in character.”
In Wilkinson v. Powe, 300 Mich 275, 282, there referred to, we said:
“A prima facie case is established when plaintiff proves the intentional procurement of a breach of contract, and, upon such proof, it becomes incumbent upon defendant to show justification.”
Quoting from another case, E. L. Husting Co. v. Coca Cola Co., 205 Wis 356, 366 (237 NW 85, 84 ALR 22, 29), we further stated (pp 282, 283):
“The great weight of authority in this country and in England is to the effect that, if A has a legal contract with B, either for the rendition of service or any other purpose, and C, having knowledge of the existence thereof, intentionally and knowingly, *62and without, reasonable justification or excuse, .induces B to break the contract, by reason of which A sustains damage, an action will lie by A against C.to recover the same. * * * The action of C.is-malicious, in that, with the knowledge' of A’s'rights, he intentionally and knowingly and for unworthy or selfish purposes, destroys them by inducing B to break his contract. It is a wrongful act, done Intentionally, without just cause, or excuse, and from this a=malicious motive is to be inferred. This does not necessarily mean actual malice or ill. will, but the intentional doing of a wrongful act without legal or social justification.”
The plaintiff alleges and the defendants admit that they are informed of the plaintiff’s fair-trade contracts and the prices established thereunder. To support their allegation that defendants procured their cameras from, and thus caused breach of contract by, plaintiff’s dealers and distributors, it is alleged in the complaint that:
“The distribution of plaintiff’s products is restricted only to those.wholesalers and retailers who' have voluntarily entered into fair-trade contracts with it.”
In their answer defendants neither admit nor deny this allegation. The affidavit of Dudley J. Scholton, plaintiff’s vice-president in charge of sales, states:
“We have negotiated contracts with all wholesalers handling our product.”
The affidavit of Robert E. Woolson, plaintiff’s field sales manager, states:
“Since 1947, all Argus products have been sold subject to fair-trade contracts in all of the States having fair-trade laws.”
However, in their answer defendants deny the allegation that they induced breach of contract and *63in an affidavit in answer to that of Scholton,'the defendants again '
“deny that they have induced other dealers or wholesalers to breach their fair-trade contract obligation to Argus.” '
i The trial judge, while noting the defendants’ denials; stated: . ” '
“There is no mention in any of the affidavits of how the products were acquired.
' “The plaintiff has shown, by affidavits, that its products were in the hands of the ' défendants. It lias shown that it has religiously refrained from selling any of its products to' anyone other than its contract holders’.' If the plaintiff has given some evi-r dence that the defendants did make such purchases for' their own benefit and that they do ■ have, the plaintiff’s products in their possession, I believe a legitimate inference can be drawn from such circumstances that the products were acquired by the defendants through inducement of contract holders to. breach their contracts.”
The manner-' in which, defendants obtained • the cameras is a matter peculiarly within their own knowledge and their failure to indicate otherwise leaves; no choice but to indulge in that inference. • •■■It-is clear that Michigan recognizes the t.ort alleged and that a cause of,-action is stated by the complaint. While there has been no case in this Court concerned with this precise set of facts as constituting procurement of breach of contract, we note that in a similar case the Federal court considered that such a complaint stated a cause of action. Sunbeam Corp. v. Payless Drug Stores, 113 F Supp 31 (N. D. California 1953). The district court for the eastern district of Michigan has reached the same conclusion in 2 cases. Sunbeam Corp. v. Economy Distributing Co., Inc., civil action No. 13900; Sun*64beam Corp. v. Hall of Distributors, Inc., 131 F Supp 791, civil action No 14000 (preliminary injunctions granted in both, cases).
Defendants contend that assuming arguendo their procurement of breach of contract, they are legally justified in doing so. They raise a question as to the constitutionality of the fair-trade law and consequent illegality of plaintiff’s contracts, as well ¿s our decision in Shakespeare Company v. Lippman’s Tool Shop Sporting Goods Co., 334 Mich 109. I am bound by the majority opinion in that case though I dissented, in part, as to the merits of the issue. However, I cannot agree with my Brother Reid as to the implications and scope of the majority opinion. The only thing there decided was that the nonsigner provision of the act was unconstitutional as to nonsigners of fair-trade agreements. We did not hold that the act was unconstitutional as to signers of such agreements. As we do not here consider the constitutionality of the act as to signers of fair-trade agreements, plaintiff’s contracts must, for purposes of this opinion, be considered valid and enforceable. While the Shakespeare Case solely holds that non-signers are not bound by the contracts, it does not leave nonsigners free to engage in what is otherwise tortious activity. We, therefore, must conclude that there exists a real and substantial controversy between the parties which does afford a basis for preliminary relief.
Other factors are necessarily considered in granting or denying preliminary relief. In Cohen v. Detroit Joint Board Amalgamated Clothing Workers of America, 327 Mich 606, 610, where we reversed a trial court’s refusal to grant a temporary injunction, we said:
“In granting or withholding injunctive relief pendente lite in a case of this character it is highly proper and quite essential for a court to consider *65whether the rights of the respective litigants will best be subserved by granting temporary injunctive relief if sought. If the personal rights or property rights involved will best be preserved by granting temporary injunctive relief in a suit presenting issues of controversial merit, such relief should be granted. Gates v. Detroit & Mackinac Railway Co., 151 Mich 548.”
In Steggles v. National Discount Corp., 326 Mich 44, 50 (15 ALR2d 208), we noted:
“The general rule is that whenever courts have found a mandatory injunction essential to the preservation of the status quo and a serious inconvenience and loss would result to plaintiff and there would be no great loss to defendant, they will grant it.”
We further recognized in that case that the plaintiff’s loss was a continuing one and that the status quo to be preserved was the “last actual, peaceable, noncontested status which preceded the pending controversy.”
It is readily apparent that left unchecked defendants’ conduct would, in a matter of time, result in leaving plaintiff’s good will and distribution system in a substantially irreparable and chaotic condition. As compared with the loss which defendants might suffer by the granting of preliminary relief, plaintiff’s must be more highly regarded and protected.
Plaintiff’s affidavits in support of its claim to temporary injunction are very convincing. They show in no uncertain terms that' plaintiff conducts a very large and well-established business engaged in manufacturing and selling a popular and well known camera and that millions of dollars have been expended in advertising; that defendants are appropriating the good will so established to their own advantage by tortiously inducing others to break their fair-trade agreements. Plaintiff’s business has *66grown to a large extent by protecting the retailer through fair-trade or minimum retail price agreements. Many retailers, and particularly those, conducting smaller camera shops dealing in plaintiff’s products, have thus built up successful businesses which plaintiff alleges now are being destroyed through defendants’ tortious conduct in inducing others to violate their fair-trade agreements with plaintiff. This has had a disastrous effect on the dealers, as well as on plaintiff. As a result many dealers who respected their contracts have been forced out of business, while others threaten to discontinue selling plaintiff’s products. It can readily be seen that a concern that sells a fair-trade article at below the minimum price agreed upon may drive out a legitimate dealer and thus create a monopoly in itself. It can sell at a low price either as a loss leader or as a bait to get customers to buy other products, or through a large volume of sales make a profit. It also affects the manufacturer. The affidavits show that in the first 7 months of 1954, plaintiff’s sales in Michigan declined 37% as against the same period in 1953, while the national sales increased 33%; that during the same period in 1953, 17.4% of plaintiff’s sales were made in Michigan, in 1954 during this period only 8.2% were made in Michigan. The showing in itself is sufficient to fully justify the trial judge to issue a temporary injunction.
It is equally apparent that the “last actual, peaceable, noncontested status which preceded the pending controversy” in this case goes back to the point at which defendants allegedly unlawfully secured the cameras from those under contract with plaintiff. We do not think that the date that plaintiff demanded that defendants cease their practices is determinative of the status quo, but rather we are here *67concerned with status quo consistent with the theory of the cause of action alleged by plaintiff.
Defendants further contend that a sworn answer and counteraffidavits preclude the granting of temporary relief. While possibly this may be a general rule, we have held that it is solely a matter of judicial discretion. Mactavish v. Kent Circuit Judge, 122 Mich 242. We have in the past approved of the granting of an injunction pendente lite “notwithstanding the defendant’s sworn answer refuting the essential allegations of the bill of complaint.” Seifert v. Buhl Optical Co., 276 Mich 692, 695. As the granting of preliminary relief is discretionary with the court of original jurisdiction, the Supreme Court will not interfere except on very clear or strong grounds or where such discretion is palpably abused. Flemming v. Heffner & Flemming, 263 Mich 561; see Seifert v. Buhl Optical Co., supra, at 699, 700, where we affirmed the granting of a temporary injunction saying:
“The trial judge did not abuse his discretion in his attempt to preserve the status quo by providing for plaintiffs’ retention of business which they otherwise might lose through defendant’s unlawful methods of advertising.”
While more doubtful if based upon plaintiff’s other 2 causes of action, the part of the injunction restraining defendants from selling at less than the fair-trade price is necessary to the efficacy of the order prohibiting them from procuring breach of contract. Not to allow it would be to permit defendants to reap the fruits of their alleged tortious conduct.
Since the filing of the briefs and the oral argument our attention has been directed to Sunbeam Corp. v. Masters of Miami, Inc. (CCA), 225 F2d 191, decided July 22, 1955, under Florida law. There the *68court of appeals for the fifth circuit, in a 2 to 1 decision, dismissed a complaint similar to that of Argus in this case, relying upon 4 Restatement, Torts, § 774. The application of the Restatement rule expressly depends upon a determination of the public policy of the jurisdiction in question. The history of the Florida fair-trade laws and the forceful language employed by the Florida court in declaring succeeding nonsigner provisions unconstitutional led the majority of the court of appeals to conclude that the fair-trade contracts in question violated Florida public policy. As of that time Florida had declared the law invalid- as to nonsigners but had never squarely held the remainder of the law unconstitutional. The majority of the court of appeals deemed it unnecessary to decide the validity of the Florida law as to signers of contracts, but nevertheless concluded that the contracts violated public policy. While we agree entirely with the dissenting opinion which questions the majority’s conclusion as to Florida public policy, it is important and decisive to note that neither the judicial nor legislative history of fair trade in Michigan is comparable to that of Florida.. In the Shakespeare Case, supra, we did not attack the theory and economic basis underlying fair-trade laws, as had the Florida court, but rather the majority of our Court limited its decision to the validity of the nonsigner provision depending to a large extent upon a nonfair-trade precedent. Therefore, Michigan has not, as has Florida, expressed repeated and sweeping judicial condemnations of fair trade. On the contrary we have only had the unequivocal expression of the legislature permitting fair-trade contracts such as plaintiff’s. This is the present public policy of Michigan.
Statutes legalizing fair-trade agreements have been enacted in 45 States. The Miller-Tydings amendment to the Sherman Act, 50 Stat 693, amend*69ing 15 USCA, § 1, permits them, and many cases, notably Old Dearborn Distributing Co. v. Seagram-Distillers Corp. (1936), 299 US 183 (57 S Ct 139, 81 L ed 109, 106 ALR 1476), have validated them. "Within the past 6 months the Pennsylvania supreme court has upheld, as against all arguments, the constitutionality of its act as to a nonsigner and thus presumably as to signers as well. Burche Co. v. General Electric Co. (1955), 382 Pa 370 (115 A2d 361). To be sure some 5 States, Michigan included, have held the nonsigner provision invalid. However, we have never held that the law is not valid as to signers. It is not within our province to declare that plaintiff’s contracts violate public policy, and especially not at a preliminary hearing.
We, therefore, should affirm the order appealed from, with costs.
Boyles and Kelly, J J., concurred with Butzel, J.
Smith, J., took no part in the decision of this case.

=== CASE 2225782 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:55.179976+00 ===

72 N.W.2d 603 (1955)
161 Neb. 123
Otto L. PRICE, Administrator of the Estate of Nellie V. Price, Deceased, Appellee,
v.
Harry KING and Orville R. Conn, Appellants.
No. 33787.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
October 21, 1955.
*605 C. E. Cronin, Grand Island, Clark J. Mingus, Ravenna, for appellants.
Cunningham & Cunningham, Grand Island, for appellee.
Heard before SIMMONS, C. J., and CARTER, MESSMORE, YEAGER, CHAPPELL, WENKE, and BOSLAUGH, JJ.
CARTER, Justice.
This is an action brought by Otto L. Price, administrator of the estate of Nellie V. Price, deceased, for the benefit of the next of kin of Nellie V. Price, to recover damages for her wrongful death. The jury returned a verdict for the plaintiff against the defendants in the sum of $20,000, and judgment was entered thereon. The defendants appeal.
The death of Nellie V. Price was the result of a collision between an automobile being driven by the deceased, Nellie V. Price, and a truck being driven by the defendant Harry King, and owned by the defendant Orville Conn. It occurred at the intersection of two graveled county roads about 4 miles west of Alda, Hall County, Nebraska, referred to in the record as the Bonsak corner, on October 13, 1953, at about 7:30 a. m. The weather was clear, visibility was good, and the roads were dry. There were no warning or stop signs on either road at the intersection. No question is raised by the appeal in regard to the amount of the damages as found by the jury. The assignments of error relate to the liability of the parties for negligence and to the correctness of the instructions of the court in submitting the case to the jury, if a jury question is found to exist.
The record shows that Mrs. Price was an employee of an ordnance plant near Grand Island, Nebraska. It was her custom to leave home about 7 a. m. and drive to work in her car. Immediately prior to the collision she was driving north as was her usual custom towards the intersection where the accident occurred. After the collision the automobile of the deceased was in the ditch, headed west, at the northeast corner of the intersection.
The truck being operated by the defendant King approached the intersection from the west. It was hauling a load of shelled corn and according to King was traveling at a speed of approximately 35 miles an hour. After the collision the truck was also in the ditch, headed west, at the northeast corner of the intersection. There is evidence that the truck was on top of the front end of the Price car.
Mrs. Price died approximately 3 hours after the accident without making any statement as to how it happened. A witness, John McDermott, testified that he talked with the defendant King shortly after the accident and that King said "he did not see her until he hit her."
The defendant King testified that he approached the intersection from the west at approximately 35 miles an hour. There was a cornfield to the south which had been picked out and he said that he could see the Price car approaching when he was west of the Bonzak barn, which was about 280 feet west of the north and south highway. He said Mrs. Price was twice as far away from the intersection at that time. He fixed the distance as three light poles south of the intersection. He said he looked again when he was "pretty close to the intersection." At this time, he said, the Price car was a "considerable distance south" and that it "was about twice as far from the front of her car to the intersection as from the front of my truck to the intersection." He said he was from 7 to 11 steps from the west line of the intersection the last time he looked. He continued to drive at the same speed and at no time slowed down as he approached the intersection. His evidence is that he saw he had *606 time to clear the intersection so he kept on going, but that the Price car hit the right front fender and wheel of his truck in the intersection. He states he was driving on his right-hand side of the road and that his truck was hit on the east side of the center of the intersection. He did not know where on the north and south road the Price car was being driven. He states that when the front of the truck was struck it went up in the air and that is the last he remembers as to what happened. He admits that he did not again look to the south after he came by the last row of corn in the field south of him because "I felt I had plenty of time to get across the intersection." He said he had on a heavy load and had to watch the road ahead of him, and for that reason he did not again look to the south. He said he knew that Mrs. Price had the right-of-way over him because she was approaching from his right.
There is evidence by the witness Bonsak that he saw the truck pass his place going east and that the Price car was about twice as far away from the intersection as the truck at that time. The witness Dobesh was standing in a cornfield southeast of the intersection while engaged in picking corn and watched the approach of both vehicles immediately prior to the collision. He said he saw the truck at the Bonsak trees and the car approaching near the point where he had a truck parked in his field. He stated that both the truck and car were traveling too fast when he saw them and that if their speeds were maintained there would be an accident. He testified that the truck was farther from the intersection when he saw it at the Bonsak trees than was the Price automobile.
There is evidence of some tire marks in the intersection. One was described as a brush mark indicating that a wheel had been pushed to the north. The condition of the car and truck is described after the accident. It is asserted by defendants that the damage to the truck shows that it was struck on the right front fender and wheel. This evidence is disputed. The pictures in evidence show that the truck and car were totally wrecked. The evidence is clear that the truck turned over and landed partly on the Price car. The physical facts are disputed and any conclusion reached from them is not at all conclusive.
The evidence may be summarized as follows: Defendant King was the employee of the defendant Conn. He was driving a truck which was in good condition. As he approached the intersection he was driving at 35 miles an hour and at no time did he apply his brakes or attempt to slow down. He saw the Price car coming some distance away. He looked a second time and assumed he had time to go on through. After passing the last row of corn on his right he did not look again, and the collision occurred. The plaintiff was traveling north. Because of her death, shortly after the accident, her version of the accident is not available. She evidently was traveling on her right-hand side of the highway as King stated the collision occurred east of the center of the intersection. The physical facts are inconclusive and any inferences to be drawn from them are clearly for the jury. The condition of the truck and automobile after the collision was such that it points to no conclusive theory as to who was responsible for the accident. Whether the damage relied upon was caused by the original impact in the intersection, or by the subsequent overturning of the loaded truck, is not certain. The evidence in this respect was clearly a question for the jury to consider. The evidence of some of the witnesses relied upon was impeached to some extent by previous statements alleged to have been contrary to their evidence at the trial. This goes to the credibility of such witnesses and the weight to be given their testimony. Such matters are solely for the jury. We conclude from an examination of the whole record that the evidence was sufficient to submit the case to the jury. The conflicts in the evidence were peculiarly for the jury to resolve. Consequently the trial court did not err in overruling the motions of the defendants for a directed verdict and their motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict. *607 This conclusion is supported by our holdings to the following effect: Where different minds may draw different conclusions from the evidence in regard to negligence, the question should be submitted to the jury. It is only where the evidence shows beyond reasonable dispute that plaintiff's negligence is more than slight as compared with the negligence of the defendant that it is proper for the trial court to instruct the jury to return a verdict for defendant or enter a judgment notwithstanding the verdict. Becks v. Schuster, 154 Neb. 360, 48 N.W.2d 67; Young v. Stoetzel, 159 Neb. 624, 68 N.W.2d 186; Granger v. Byrne, 160 Neb. 10, 69 N.W.2d 293.
The defendants contend primarily that the evidence shows Nellie Price was guilty of negligence more than slight as a matter of law when compared with the negligence of the defendants. The only negligence shown on the part of Nellie Price was that she was driving fast. There is no evidence that she was violating any speed limit fixed by statute. Whether she was negligent in failing to keep a proper lookout, or in failing to yield the right-of-way, is dependent upon the facts proved, and consequently is a matter for the jury. The presumption is that she used due care. There is a natural presumption that every one will act with due care. The mere fact that an accident happens does not prove contributory negligence. Negligence must be proved by direct evidence or by facts from which such negligence can be reasonably inferred. In the absence of such proof, negligence cannot be presumed. The evidence of the plaintiff, and the defendants as well, is sufficient from which the jury might find that King was grossly negligent. The jury could find that he failed to keep a proper lookout and failed to slow down or stop his truck where reasonable care under the circumstances required him to do so. The fact that he had a heavy load on the truck, requiring, as he said, that he had to watch the road immediately ahead of him, would not excuse his duty to keep a proper lookout for approaching traffic. It cannot be said that Nellie Price was guilty of negligence which would as a matter of law preclude a recovery. From the record before us, she could well have assumed that her right-of-way was going to be respected by the driver of the truck. The degree of negligence on her part, if any, is for the jury to determine under proper instructions by the court.
The defendants contend that instruction No. 4 given by the trial court was prejudicially erroneous. The complaint is directed at that part of the instruction providing: "You are instructed that the defendants in their answer deny the material allegations of the plaintiff's petition and also in said answer allege negligence on the part of said Nellie V. Price.
"The latter provisions of said answer are affirmative in their nature and before defendants can avail themselves thereof they must have proved the same by a preponderance of the evidence." The defendants assert that this portion of the instruction places too great a burden upon them. In support of their contention they cite Murray v. Pearson Appliance Store, 155 Neb. 860, 54 N.W.2d 250, 258. It was therein said: "The rule in this regard is as follows: `If the defendant pleads that the plaintiff was guilty of contributory negligence the burden is upon him to prove that defense and this burden does not shift during the trial of the case. However, if the evidence adduced by the plaintiff tends to prove that issue the defendant is entitled to receive the benefit thereof and the court must instruct the jury to that effect.' Mundy v. Davis, supra [154 Neb. 423, 48 N.W.2d 394]. See, also, Krepcik v. Interstate Transit Lines, 154 Neb. 671, 48 N.W.2d 839."
While instruction No. 4 is not in compliance with the foregoing rule, we have repeatedly held that the instructions given to a jury must be construed together, and if when construed as a whole they properly state the law it is sufficient. Shiers v. Cowgill, 157 Neb. 265, 59 N.W.2d 407. By instruction No. 5 in the present case the court told the jury: "In determining whether a party has sustained the burden of proof *608 placed upon him by the preceding instructions you are not limited to the evidence introduced by such party. Either party is entitled to the benefit of any evidence tending to establish his contentions, even though such evidence comes from witnesses presented by the opposite party." Instruction No. 4, when properly construed with instruction No. 5, correctly states the law, and is in accord with the rule quoted in the Murray case.
The defendants' assignments of error are without merit. The judgment of the district court is affirmed.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 2225789 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:55.348793+00 ===

587 N.E.2d 1221 (1992)
225 Ill. App. 3d 331
167 Ill. Dec. 606
The PEOPLE of the State of Illinois, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Herbert BoCLAIR, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 1-88-0238.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, Third Division.
February 13, 1992.
*1222 Office of the State Appellate Defender, Chicago (Edward J. Wong, III, of counsel), for defendant-appellant.
Jack O'Malley, State's Atty., Chicago (Renee Goldfarb, Walter P. Hehner, of counsel), for plaintiff-appellee.
Justice CERDA delivered the opinion of the court:
Following a bench trial, defendant, Herbert BoClair, was convicted of aggravated criminal sexual assault, criminal sexual assault, and aggravated criminal sexual abuse (Ill.Rev.Stat.1985, ch. 38, pars. 12-14(a)(2), 12-13(a)(2), 12-16(d)), and was sentenced to a maximum prison term of 30 years. On appeal, he has submitted pro se briefs in addition to the briefs filed by the State Appellate Defender.
In the briefs filed by the State Appellate Defender, defendant contends that the trial court abused its sentencing discretion because it considered complainant's mental retardation as an aggravating factor, it failed to consider defendant's rehabilitative potential and other mitigating factors, and it restricted defendant's right of allocution. He contends further that the convictions for criminal sexual assault and aggravated criminal sexual abuse must be vacated because they were based upon the same physical act as the conviction for aggravated criminal sexual assault. He requests that we reduce the sentence for aggravated criminal sexual assault or remand for resentencing by a different judge. The State agrees that the conviction for criminal sexual assault should be vacated.
In his pro se briefs, defendant asserts a litany of alleged violations of his constitutional rights and contends that he was not proved guilty beyond a reasonable doubt.
On the evening of August 22, 1986, defendant sexually assaulted his mentally retarded deaf-mute 13 year-old grandniece in the basement of his niece's home in the 6700 block of South Damen Avenue in Chicago. There was evidence that complainant's deafness impaired her ability to balance and rendered her incapable of walking downstairs to the basement without assistance.
Three eyewitnesses testified that they saw defendant in the basement with complainant, that his penis was exposed, erect, and wet, that her vaginal area was wet, and that defendant said that complainant's mother would kill him and that he knew that what he had done was wrong. One of the eyewitnesses reached the basement a step or two ahead of the others and actually saw defendant lying on top of complainant. Defendant was standing up when the other two eyewitnesses saw him.
A physician, who examined complainant later that night, discovered a small vaginal tear but no vaginal trauma or laceration. *1223 Laboratory tests apparently proved negative for semen.
Defendant testified that he knew that complainant was deaf, mute, and mentally retarded. He denied that he engaged in sexual intercourse with her and claimed that he had been drinking and was in a "dream stage." He testified that he thought that he had "messed with the kids in some way" and claimed that his niece told him that his brother had fondled complainant. He fled Chicago and was subsequently apprehended in St. Louis, Missouri. He admitted that when he was captured he did not tell the police that his niece said that his brother had fondled complainant.
During the sentencing hearing, the assistant State's Attorney argued in aggravation that defendant had prior convictions in 1957 and 1958 and had served prison sentences for armed robbery, burglary, and robbery. The presentence investigation report (PSI) failed to disclose defendant's criminal history because the relevant records apparently had not arrived in time from St. Louis, Missouri. The assistant State's Attorney requested that the trial court sentence defendant to an extended term.
Defense counsel argued in mitigation that defendant was 55 years old and a widower with five children. (Defendant testified at trial that he had six children.) Defense counsel argued further that defendant had dropped out of school in the tenth grade to join the United States Air Force and that he was honorably discharged four years later. Defense counsel observed that defendant was a self-employed contractor, that he had abused alcohol for over 30 years, and that he was experiencing health problems attributable to his alcohol abuse.
The trial court asked defendant whether he had anything to say. Defendant responded that he felt that he was not properly represented. The trial court disagreed and stated that defendant was well represented. Defendant then stated that the case did not make sense to him because he had always had sexual partners. The PSI discloses that defendant boasted about his promiscuous behavior. The trial court asked defendant why he had bothered a mentally retarded person. Defendant said, "Your Honor," and the trial court interrupted him and stated, "I don't even want to talk to you." The trial court then sentenced defendant to 30 years in prison and told him, "Get out of here."
The first issue on appeal is whether the trial court erred in considering complainant's mental and physical disabilities as an aggravating factor for sentencing purposes. Defendant contends that the trial court should not have considered complainant's disabilities during sentencing because her disabilities were an implicit element of criminal sexual assault, which was based upon her inability to understand the nature of his conduct. (Ill.Rev.Stat.1985, ch. 38, par. 12-13(a)(2).) Criminal sexual assault is a Class 1 felony with a statutory sentencing range of not less than four years and not more than 15 years' imprisonment. (Ill.Rev.Stat.1985, ch. 38, pars. 12-13(b), 1005-8-1(a)(4).) In the case at bar, defendant was not sentenced for criminal sexual assault. Rather, he was sentenced to a maximum 30-year prison term for the Class X felony of aggravated criminal sexual assault. (Ill.Rev.Stat.1985, ch. 38, pars. 12-14(a)(2), 12-14(c), 1005-8-1(a)(3).) Complainant's inability to understand the nature of defendant's conduct was not an element of aggravated criminal sexual assault. The relevant elements of aggravated criminal sexual assault were defendant's use of force, his threat of force, and his infliction of bodily harm. Because complainant's disabilities were not an element of aggravated criminal sexual assault, the trial court did not abuse its discretion in considering those disabilities as aggravating circumstances.
The next issue is whether the trial court erroneously failed to consider defendant's rehabilitative potential and other mitigating factors. The Illinois Constitution provides in part that "[a]ll penalties shall be determined both according to the seriousness of the offense and with the objective of restoring the offender to useful citizenship." (Ill. Const.1970, art. I, § 11.) The trial court is vested with considerable *1224 discretion in imposing a sentence, and a sentence consequently will not be modified on appeal in the absence of an abuse of that discretion. (People v. Perruquet (1977), 68 Ill. 2d 149, 153, 11 Ill. Dec. 274, 368 N.E.2d 882.) A sentence is presumed to be proper. (People v. Jenkins (1984), 128 Ill.App.3d 853, 857, 84 Ill. Dec. 118, 471 N.E.2d 647.) The presumption may be rebutted only by an affirmative showing that the sentence imposed greatly departs from the spirit and purpose of the law or is manifestly contrary to constitutional guidelines. People v. Murphy (1978), 72 Ill. 2d 421, 439, 21 Ill. Dec. 350, 381 N.E.2d 677.
The spirit and purpose of the law are promoted "when a sentence reflects the seriousness of the offense and gives adequate consideration to the rehabilitative potential of the defendant." (People v. Murphy, 72 Ill.2d at 439, 21 Ill. Dec. 350, 381 N.E.2d 677, quoting People v. Heflin (1978), 71 Ill. 2d 525, 545, 17 Ill. Dec. 786, 376 N.E.2d 1367.) The trial court generally is the proper forum for determining a suitable sentence, and its sentencing decisions are entitled to great deference and weight. (People v. James (1987), 118 Ill. 2d 214, 228, 113 Ill. Dec. 86, 514 N.E.2d 998.) A court of review will not substitute its judgment for that of the trial court. (People v. James.) The trial judge is not required "to detail for the record the process by which he concluded that the penalty he imposed was appropriate." (People v. La Pointe (1981), 88 Ill. 2d 482, 493, 59 Ill. Dec. 59, 431 N.E.2d 344.) Similarly, the trial court is not required to articulate its consideration of mitigating factors (see People v. Baker (1983), 114 Ill.App.3d 803, 811, 69 Ill. Dec. 913, 448 N.E.2d 631) or to make an express finding that the defendant lacked rehabilitative potential (People v. Gallardo (1983), 112 Ill.App.3d 764, 776, 68 Ill. Dec. 360, 445 N.E.2d 1213). Nor is the trial court required to accord greater weight to defendant's potential for rehabilitation than to the seriousness of the crime. People v. Shumate (1981), 94 Ill.App.3d 478, 485, 50 Ill. Dec. 169, 419 N.E.2d 36; People v. Hayes (1979), 70 Ill.App.3d 811, 831, 26 Ill. Dec. 817, 388 N.E.2d 818.
The statutory penalty range for aggravated criminal sexual assault, a Class X felony (Ill.Rev.Stat.1985, ch. 38, par. 12-14(c)), is from 6 to 30 years' imprisonment. (Ill.Rev.Stat.1985, ch. 38, par. 1005-8-1(a)(3).) Defendant's 30-year sentence was the maximum penalty. During the sentencing proceedings, the trial court considered the serious circumstances of the case. Defendant sexually assaulted his 13-year-old grandniece in a basement. He admitted that he knew that she was deaf, mute, and mentally retarded. Furthermore, she was unable to walk unassisted to the basement, and the trial court consequently could have concluded that defendant physically moved her to the basement in order to molest her. Not only did defendant fail to express remorse, but the PSI indicates that he boasted of his promiscuity with other women.
Furthermore, the trial court heard the arguments of counsel in aggravation concerning defendant's criminal history and in mitigation concerning his personal background. When defendant testified at trial, he denied that he had committed the crime and attempted to implicate one of his brothers. The trial court noted defendant's denial and was entitled to consider defendant's perceived perjury when sentencing him. See People v. Meeks (1980), 81 Ill. 2d 524, 536, 44 Ill. Dec. 103, 411 N.E.2d 9; People v. Sansorez (1987), 156 Ill.App.3d 986, 988, 109 Ill. Dec. 529, 510 N.E.2d 150.
Defendant relies upon People v. Harris (1989), 187 Ill.App.3d 832, 844-45, 135 Ill. Dec. 291, 543 N.E.2d 859. The defendant there was a 39-year-old financially responsible maintenance worker with no prior felony convictions who committed an act of sexual penetration upon a child by inserting his finger into her vagina. He was sentenced to 25 years in prison by the trial court. On review, the 25-year sentence was found to be excessive.
We find that there was no abuse of discretion by the trial court in this case in sentencing defendant to 30 years' imprisonment.
*1225 The next issue is whether the trial court's restriction of defendant's allocution was reversible error. Section 5-4-1(a)(5) of the Unified Code of Corrections (Ill.Rev. Stat.1985, ch. 38, par. 1005-4-1(a)(5)) provides that the trial court shall afford defendant an opportunity to make a statement at the sentencing hearing. But the trial court's failure to invite allocution is a technical error that can be harmless. (See People v. Lewis (1988), 175 Ill.App.3d 156, 163, 124 Ill. Dec. 771, 529 N.E.2d 752; People v. Spiler (1975), 28 Ill.App.3d 178, 182, 328 N.E.2d 201.) Defense counsel had ample opportunity to present mitigating arguments on defendant's behalf during the sentencing hearing. Given these circumstances, we are satisfied that any error regarding allocution was harmless.
Next, defendant contends that all three convictions were based upon the same physical act and that therefore the convictions for criminal sexual assault and aggravated criminal sexual abuse must be vacated. He contends further that the remaining conviction must be remanded for resentencing by a different judge. The State concedes that the conviction for criminal sexual assault must be vacated, but contends that the conviction for aggravated criminal sexual abuse must be upheld because it was predicated upon defendant's ejaculation on complainant, which was an act separate and distinct from the act of sexual penetration, which was the basis for the aggravated criminal sexual assault conviction. The State contends that defendant should have been sentenced to a maximum seven-year prison term for aggravated criminal sexual abuse, a Class 2 felony. Ill.Rev.Stat.1985, ch. 38, pars. 12-16(e), 1005-8-1(a)(5).
Under People v. King (1977), 66 Ill. 2d 551, 566, 6 Ill. Dec. 891, 363 N.E.2d 838, multiple convictions and concurrent sentences cannot be "carved from the same physical act." Factors to be considered in determining whether defendant's conduct constituted a single physical act or several separate and distinct acts are: (1) prosecutorial intent, as reflected in the language of the indictment; (2) the existence of an intervening act; (3) the time interval between successive parts of defendant's conduct; (4) the victim's identity; (5) the similarity of the acts; and (6) the location of the acts. People v. Ellis (1986), 143 Ill.App.3d 892, 895-96, 97 Ill. Dec. 932, 493 N.E.2d 739.
Application of the above factors to the instant case demonstrates that defendant's conduct constituted a single physical act. All three counts of the indictment charged defendant with offenses based upon contact between defendant's penis and complainant's vagina. Unlike People v. Segara (1988), 126 Ill. 2d 70, 127 Ill. Dec. 720, 533 N.E.2d 802, which was cited by the State and which involved an act of fellatio in addition to an act of vaginal penetration, the case at bar involved solely an act of vaginal penetration. There was no evidence of fellatio. Furthermore, defendant committed the crime upon one victim at a single time and place. There was no evidence of any intervening act. Given these circumstances, we believe that the convictions for aggravated criminal sexual abuse and criminal sexual assault were carved from the same physical act as the conviction for aggravated criminal sexual assault. Therefore, the convictions for criminal sexual assault and aggravated criminal sexual abuse must be vacated. There is, however, no evidence in the record to suggest that those convictions influenced the trial court in imposing the sentence for aggravated criminal sexual assault. To the contrary, the trial court considered the circumstances of the crime, the PSI, and the arguments of counsel. Therefore, we decline to remand the aggravated criminal sexual assault conviction for resentencing.
Finally, defendant's pro se briefs contain a number of assertions. The tenor of the briefs is best exemplified by their disclaimer that they were prepared by a "self-proclaimed Idiot Jailhouse Lawyer." Not only are the briefs replete with sarcastic assertions describing defendant's trial as a "thing performed like a bench trial," a "Star Chamber," and a "burlesque," describing the charges as a "soap opera," and describing defendant's trial attorney as "no more effective than a bottomless boat," but they also are replete with assertions that *1226 are squarely belied by the record. For example, defendant contends that he was deprived of grand jury proceedings, an indictment, and effective assistance of trial counsel. The record clearly negates these assertions. Moreover, defendant contradicts his own claim that he received ineffective assistance of trial counsel by acknowledging in his pro se materials that his trial attorney filed a motion for a new trial to enable the trial court "to clean up its acts of misconduct."
We reject further defendant's assertion that he was not proved guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. Three eyewitnesses discovered him in the basement with complainant. All three testified that his penis was wet and erect, and one testified that she actually saw him lying on top of complainant. There was corroborative medical evidence. Defendant made incriminating remarks, and his flight to St. Louis also was inculpatory. (See People v. Price (1987), 158 Ill.App.3d 921, 927, 110 Ill. Dec. 781, 511 N.E.2d 958; People v. Donald (1971), 132 Ill.App.2d 598, 600, 270 N.E.2d 85.) Defendant attacks complainant's failure to testify, as a violation of the 6th Amendment right to confront witnesses, but the State was not required to have complainant testify. (See People v. Nowak (1970), 45 Ill. 2d 158, 168, 258 N.E.2d 313 (State need not call all of the witnesses to a crime in proving its case).) Given the overwhelming evidence of defendant's guilt, we are satisfied that he was proved guilty beyond a reasonable doubt.
For similar reasons, we reject his contention that he was denied effective assistance of counsel. Given the overwhelming evidence of his guilt, the outcome of the trial could not have been changed.
Finally, nothing in the record supports defendant's assertions that the St. Louis police illegally arrested him, that the trial court was not impartial or that he is being illegally detained.
The conviction for aggravated criminal sexual assault is affirmed and the sentence of 30 years' imprisonment is affirmed. The convictions for criminal sexual assault and aggravated criminal sexual abuse are vacated.
Judgment affirmed as modified and vacated in part.
GREIMAN[*], P.J., and TULLY*, J., concur.
NOTES
[*]  Justice White heard oral arguments prior to his retirement. Justice Freeman heard oral arguments prior to his election to the Illinois Supreme Court. Justice Tully and Justice Greiman concurred with the decision after reviewing the briefs and the record.

=== CASE 2225796 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:55.499969+00 ===

587 N.E.2d 140 (1992)
George RAMBO, Appellant-Plaintiff,
v.
Edward L. COHEN[1] and State of Indiana, Appellees-Defendants.
No. 30A01-9106-CV-195.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, First District.
February 26, 1992.
Rehearing Denied April 7, 1992.
*142 Steven C. Smith, Anderson, for appellant-plaintiff.
*143 Linley E. Pearson, Atty. Gen., Michael A. Schoening, Deputy Atty. Gen., Office of Atty. Gen., Indianapolis, for appellees-defendants.
BAKER, Judge.
Plaintiff-appellant George Rambo, a water treatment technician at the Pendleton Reformatory, initiated this defamation action against then Pendleton Superintendent Edward Cohn and the State of Indiana. The trial court dismissed the action due to Rambo's failure to exhaust administrative remedies under the Administrative Adjudication Act[2] (AAA) and then granted summary judgment to the defendants on the basis of immunity under the Indiana Tort Claims Act (ITCA).[3]
We reverse the dismissal and affirm the summary judgment.[4]
FACTS
Rambo has been an employee of the Indiana Department of Correction at the Pendleton Reformatory for over 30 years. Prior to 1989, he accumulated a large surplus of vacation days. In 1988, the Department of Correction instituted a policy requiring employees to reduce their accumulated vacation time to a maximum of 75 days.
Rambo was, and is, reluctant to take vacation days; he instituted an administrative review challenging the propriety of the vacation policy. Nonetheless, after a great deal of haranguing, Rambo agreed to take a 61 day vacation beginning January 3, 1989. The unusually long vacation required approval not only from Superintendent Cohn, but also from the Commissioner of the Department of Correction and the Director of State Personnel.
Instead of going to Florida as planned, however, Rambo appeared for work on January 3, 1989. He offered his daughter's changed wedding date and the pending status of his administrative challenge as justification. The record reveals Rambo had difficulty understanding the difference between changing his departure date for Florida, a matter solely of Rambo's concern, and changing the commencement date of his time away from work, a matter of demonstrated institutional interest. When Superintendent Cohn learned of Rambo's presence, he summoned Rambo to his office for a meeting. Four people attended the meeting: Pendleton's physical plant director, who is Rambo's immediate supervisor, Pendleton's personnel director, Rambo, and Cohn. The facts most favorable to Rambo reveal Cohn made three statements to which Rambo objects. First, Cohn told Rambo he was a "lazy," "trouble-causing," "stupid," and "arrogant" employee. Record at 93. Second, Cohn told Rambo to stop acting like a "horse's butt." Record at 93. Third, he said Rambo was "anti-Semitic." Record at 93.
The next day, Cohn memorialized the meeting in a letter to Rambo with copies to the other people at the meeting. The letter, however, contains none of the allegedly defamatory remarks made at the meeting. In the end, no disciplinary action was taken against Rambo for his failure to comply with the vacation policy, and he continues in his job as before.
Apparently, however, Rambo has become a depressed and nervous man in the wake of Cohn's remarks and has spent a great deal of time in professional counseling. He now seeks recovery for impotence, shingles, urinary difficulties, bills for medical and psychological assistance, and lost work stemming from emotional distress.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
I. EXHAUSTION
Our initial task is to resolve the inconsistency between the trial court's dismissal of Rambo's complaint for failure to *144 exhaust administrative remedies and the subsequent summary judgment entered for the defendants. Judicial review of agency actions is achieved exclusively through compliance with the procedures of the AAA. IND. CODE 4-21.5-5-1. Generally, the failure to exhaust administrative remedies waives the right to judicial review. IND. CODE 4-21.5-5-4. Indeed, until a party has exhausted available administrative remedies, the courts cannot exercise subject matter jurisdiction over the party's claim, and the action is subject to dismissal. United States Auto Club, Inc. v. Woodward (1984), Ind. App., 460 N.E.2d 1255, 1258, trans. denied; Bowen v. Sonnenburg (1980), Ind. App., 411 N.E.2d 390, 403. Thus, if a party wrongly fails to exhaust administrative remedies, the trial court's sole prerogative is to dismiss the complaint; it cannot enter summary judgment or take any other action. See Harlan Sprague Dawley, Inc. v. Indiana Dep't of Revenue (1991), Ind.Tax, 583 N.E.2d 214. If a State employee has a grievance concerning conditions of employment, IND. CODE 4-15-2-35 requires adherence to established administrative procedures under the State Personnel Administration Act[5] to obtain relief. Spencer v. State (1988), Ind. App., 520 N.E.2d 106, 108, trans. denied. There are exceptions to the general rule, however.
If administrative procedures are incapable of "answering the question presented" by a party's claim, exhaustion is not required. Indiana Dep't of Pub. Welfare v. Chair Lance Service, Inc. (1988), Ind., 523 N.E.2d 1373, 1379. In Shallenberger v. Scoggins-Tomlinson, Inc. (1982), Ind. App., 439 N.E.2d 699, the plaintiff realtor brought a defamation action against another realtor and the members of the local realtors' board. The board had an established grievance procedure, and although the plaintiff's failure to exhaust the administrative remedies afforded by the grievance procedure prevented him from attacking the board's decision making process, the failure to exhaust did not prevent him from proceeding with his defamation suit. The summary judgment in favor of the board members was affirmed, not because the plaintiff failed to exhaust his remedies, but because the board's written statements about the plaintiff were not defamatory. Id. at 705-06.
Similarly, Rambo's complaint in the present case alleges libel and slander; he does not seek relief from an unsatisfactory condition of employment or an involuntary change in his status of employment as contemplated by IND. CODE 4-15-2-35. Quite simply, the administrative review process is incapable of providing a remedy for Rambo's complaint. The State Employees Appeals Commission, the ultimate agency authority for state personnel grievances, is not empowered to award damages for defamation. See IND. CODE 4-15-1.5-6. When the character of the question presented is beyond the pale of the agency's competency, expertise, and authority, failure to exhaust will be excused. See Wilson v. Board of Indiana Employment Sec. Div. (1979), 270 Ind. 302, 385 N.E.2d 438, cert. denied (1979), 444 U.S. 874, 100 S. Ct. 155, 62 L. Ed. 2d 101; Spencer, supra; Indiana Dep't of Welfare v. Stagner (1980), Ind. App., 410 N.E.2d 1348, 1351.
The trial court had subject matter jurisdiction over Rambo's claim and therefore erred in dismissing Rambo's complaint.
II. SUMMARY JUDGMENT
A. Standard of Review
After erroneously dismissing Rambo's complaint, the trial court granted summary judgment to the defendants. Summary judgment is appropriate only when no genuine issues of material fact exist. Moore v. Sitzmark Corp. (1990), Ind. App., 555 N.E.2d 1305. When reviewing the disposition of a summary judgment motion, we stand in the same position as the trial court, and review all evidence in the light most favorable to the non-movant. Forrest v. Gilley (1991), Ind. App., 570 N.E.2d 934, 935, trans. denied. Once the movant has demonstrated no genuine issue of material fact exists, the non-movant may not rest on pleadings, but must set forth *145 specific facts showing a genuine issue does exist and that a trial is therefore warranted. Tucher v. Brothers Auto Salvage Yard, Inc. (1991), Ind. App., 564 N.E.2d 560, 563, trans. denied. When the defendant is the movant, the defendant must either show that the undisputed facts negate at least one element of the plaintiff's cause of action or that the defendant has a factually unchallenged affirmative defense which bars the plaintiff's claim. Moore, supra, at 1307. If no genuine issue of material fact exists, we will affirm a summary judgment on any legal theory supported by the record. Hupp v. Hill (1991), Ind. App., 576 N.E.2d 1320.
B. Defamation
To maintain an action for defamation, a plaintiff must show a communication with defamatory imputation, malice, publication, and damages. Shallenberger, supra, at 704. Defamatory communications are those which tend to harm a person's reputation by lowering the person in the community's estimation or deterring third persons from dealing or associating with the person. Chestnet v. K-Mart Corp. (1988), Ind. App., 529 N.E.2d 131, 135, trans. dismissed. Initially, the determination of whether a communication is defamatory is a question of law for the court; it is to be presented to the jury as a question of fact only if the communication is reasonably susceptible to either defamatory or non-defamatory interpretation. Id. In making the determination, the communication is to be viewed in context and given its plain and natural meaning, "according to the idea they are calculated to convey to whom [it is] addressed." Jacobs v. City of Columbus (1983), Ind. App., 454 N.E.2d 1253, 1264, trans, denied. See also Martin v. Indiana Bell Tel. Co., Inc. (1981), Ind. App., 415 N.E.2d 759. Accord, Rybas v. Wapner (1983), 311 Pa.Super. 50, 54-55, 457 A.2d 108, 110 ("The test is the effect the statement would fairly produce, or the impression it would naturally engender, `in the minds of the average persons among whom it is intended to circulate.'"). Moreover, the allegedly defamatory words are to be construed in light of the circumstances of their utterance. Blickenstaff v. Perrin (1867), 27 Ind. 527.
A communication may be defamatory per se or per quod. In the case of slander,[6] a communication is defamatory per se under well-settled common law rulings if it imputes: 1) criminal conduct; 2) a loathsome disease; 3) misconduct in a person's trade, profession, office, or occupation, or; 4) sexual misconduct. Restatement (Second) of Torts § 570 (1977); 18 I.L.E. Libel and Slander § 21 (1959);[7]Gabe v. McGinnis (1879), 68 Ind. 538.[8]See also State v. Killigrew (1931), 202 Ind. 397, 174 N.E. 808 (criminal conduct); Monks v. Monks (1888), 118 Ind. 238, 20 N.E. 744 (loathsome disease); Young v. Clegg (1884), 93 Ind. 371 (public office); Chestnet, supra, (criminal conduct); Erdman v. White (1980), Ind. App., 411 N.E.2d 653 (profession or trade); Spry v. Corum (1928), 88 Ind. App. 122, 163 N.E. 526 (sexual misconduct). If a communication is defamatory per se, the plaintiff is entitled to presumed damages "as the natural and probable consequence[]" of the per se defamation. Elliott v. Roach (1980), Ind. App., 409 N.E.2d 661, 683. The law presumes the plaintiff's reputation has been damaged, and the jury may award a substantial sum for this presumed harm, even without proof of actual harm. Id. (citing Aafco Heating & Air Conditioning Co. v. Northwest Publications, Inc. (1974), 162 Ind. App. 671, 684, n. 8, 321 N.E.2d 580, 589, n. 8, cert. denied, (1976), 424 U.S. 913, 96 S. Ct. 1112, 47 L. Ed. 2d 318). In addition, *146 the plaintiff, upon proper proof, is entitled to special damages, i.e., damages, generally pecuniary in nature, which are consequential to the defamation. Id. See also Stanley v. Kelley (1981), Ind. App., 422 N.E.2d 663 (discussing presumed and special damages).
All other factual communications, even if they are defamatory in that they tend to harm a person's reputation by lowering the person in the community's estimation or deterring third persons from dealing or associating with the person, Chestnet, supra, are, at most, defamatory per quod. This latter type of defamation is actionable, if at all, only if it causes the plaintiff special damages. See Jacobs, supra, at 1264; W. Prosser and W. Keeton, Prosser and Keeton on Torts, § 112, p. 793 (5th ed. 3rd printing 1989); Restatement (Second) of Torts § 575 (1977). Accord, Ceravolo v. Brown (1978), Ala., 364 So. 2d 1155; Moricoli v. Schwartz (1977), 46 Ill. App. 3d 481, 5 Ill. Dec. 74, 361 N.E.2d 74; Gomez v. Hug (1982), 7 Kan. App. 2d 603, 645 P.2d 916; Bradshaw v. Swagerty (1977), 1 Kan. App. 2d 213, 563 P.2d 511; Sampson v. Rumsey (1977), 1 Kan. App. 2d 191, 563 P.2d 506; Scott v. Harrison (1939), 215 N.C. 427, 2 S.E.2d 1; Meier v. Novak (1983), N.D., 338 N.W.2d 631; Braugh v. Enyart (1983), Tex. App., 658 S.W.2d 221, error refused n.r.e.[9]
In either a per se or a per quod defamation action, however, the plaintiff may recover for emotional or physical harm only upon proof of the predicate case. The gravamen of a defamation action is harm to the plaintiff's reputation in the eyes of others. Marczak v. Drexel (1989), 186 Ill. App. 3d 640, 644, 134 Ill. Dec. 441, 443, 542 N.E.2d 787, 789. Accordingly, a plaintiff in a per se defamation action can recover for emotional distress or bodily harm only upon proof the communication is indeed per se defamatory and therefore, the cause of presumed damages. That is, if the judge or jury decides the communication is not per se defamatory, the plaintiff's claim for emotional and physical damages will fail along with the predicate case. W. Prosser and W. Keeton, Prosser and Keeton on Torts, § 112, p. 794 (5th ed. 3rd printing 1989); Restatement (Second) of Torts § 623 (1977).
Similarly, a plaintiff in a per quod defamation action can recover for emotional and physical harm only upon a showing of special damages, Restatement (Second) of Torts § 623 (1977); W. Prosser and W. Keeton, Prosser and Keeton on Torts, § 112, p. 794 (5th ed. 3rd printing 1989). Emotional and physical harms are not special damages unto themselves, but rather are parasitic damages, viable only when attached to normal (i.e., pecuniary) special damages. Id.; C.J.S. Libel and Slander § 191 (1987); Scott, supra, 215 N.C. at 430-31, 2 S.E.2d at 3. See also Bradshaw, supra, 1 Kan. App.2d at 214-15, 563 P.2d at 513 (in addition to loss of reputation, plaintiff pleaded humiliation and embarrassment; because the alleged slander was not defamatory per se, no reputational harm was recoverable, and the humiliation and embarrassment did not constitute special damages). The parasitic damages ride along with special damages; if special damages are alleged and proved, recovery for parasitic damages is possible; if special damages are not alleged and proved, there can be no recovery for the parasitic damages.[10]
*147 We turn now to the specific allegations of Rambo's action.
1. Remarks alleging incompetence as an employee
As we have already noted, Rambo alleges Cohn, in the presence of Rambo's supervisor and Pendleton's personnel chief, called Rambo a lazy, trouble-causing, stupid, and arrogant employee.[11] Rambo cannot recover for these remarks.
In an opinion authored by Judge Staton, this court recently adopted the majority American rule that no publication occurs when statements about an employee are communicated by a supervisor or employer only to other company personnel with an interest in the statement. Bals v. Verduzco (1990), Ind. App., 564 N.E.2d 307. Here, regardless of the nature of Cohn's remarks about Rambo's performance, the only third parties who heard them were Rambo's supervisor and the head of the personnel department. Because both of these people had an interest in Superintendent Cohn's remarks about Rambo's performance, there was no publication, and hence, no liability.[12]
Even if the remarks were untrue, defamatory, and published, however, there would nonetheless be no liability. Under ITCA, Superintendent Cohn was immune from liability for actions, undertaken in the scope of his employment, to enforce rules and regulations. IND. CODE 34-4-16.5-3(7); Indiana Dep't of Correction v. Stagg (1990), Ind. App., 556 N.E.2d 1338, trans. denied. The vacation policy Cohn was trying to enforce during the meeting with Rambo was an official Department of Correction policy, and Cohn is therefore absolutely immune to Rambo's suit for the remarks about Rambo's performance as an employee.
The trial court properly granted the defense motion for summary judgment for Cohn's remarks about Rambo's performance as an employee. Cohn's other remarks, calling Rambo a "horse's butt" and "anti-Semitic," likewise lead to no liability, but for different reasons.[13]
2. Horse's Butt and Anti-Semitic
It is well-settled throughout this country that obnoxious remarks, even remarks much more obnoxious than those Cohn is alleged to have made here, are not defamatory per se, and will not lead to liability without proof of special damages. See, e.g., Raible v. Newsweek, Inc. (W.D.Pa. 1972), 341 F. Supp. 804, 807 ("to call a person a bigot or other appropriate name descriptive of his political, racial, religious, economic or sociological philosophies gives no rise to an action for libel"); Ceravolo, supra ("dead beat" and "crook"); *148 Moriarty v. Lippe (1972), 162 Conn. 371, 294 A.2d 326 (defendant called plaintiff police officer a "clown," "big fat ape," "smart aleck," "big fat oaf," and a "stupid son of a bitch"); McGuire v. Jankiewicz (1972), 8 Ill. App. 3d 319, 290 N.E.2d 675 (defendant insurance agent told plaintiff attorney's client that plaintiff was an asshole); Gomez, supra ("fucking Mexican greaser" and "fucking spic"); Bradshaw, supra ("nigger" and "bastard"); Sampson, supra ("son of a bitch"); Ferilito v. Cecola (1982), La. App., 419 So. 2d 102, 105, writ denied, 422 So. 2d 157 ("[p]rofane language, although disgusting and uncouth, is not defamatory per se."); Harris v. Levy (1977), La. App., 353 So. 2d 1065 ("son of a bitch"); Hansen v. Dethridge (1946), N.Y. City Ct., 67 N.Y.S.2d 168;[14]Ledsinger v. Burmeister (1982), 114 Mich. App. 12, 318 N.W.2d 558 ("nigger"); Milner Hotels v. Dougherty (1943), 195 Miss. 718, 15 So. 2d 358 ("God damn son of a bitch" and "damn liar"); Meier, supra ("asshole"); Yeager v. Local Union 20 (1983), 6 Ohio St. 3d 369, 453 N.E.2d 666 ("Little Hitler"); Rybas, supra (tenant's attorney wrote letter to landlord's attorney, calling landlord anti-Semitic). In light of these cases, we hold Cohn's use of the relatively mild phrase "horse's butt" was merely obnoxious language which the law tolerates as an expression of free speech in a free society. The phrase "anti-Semitic," however, requires some further analysis.
As we stated earlier, the determination of whether a statement is defamatory or not is to be made in light of all the circumstances surrounding its utterance. Blickenstaff, supra. The Rybas decision, in which the Pennsylvania court held the phrase "anti-Semitic" not to be defamatory per se, makes clear the circumstances surrounding an utterance include the nature and extent of the audience receiving the publication and the nature of the times in which the utterance is made. In Beamer v. Nishiki (1983), 66 Haw. 572, 670 P.2d 1264, the court stated the determination "depends, among other factors, upon the temper of the times, the current of contemporary public opinion, with the result that words, harmless in one age, in one community, may be highly damaging to reputation at another time or in a different place." Id. at 580, 670 P.2d at 1271 (quoting Schermerhorn v. Rosenberg (1980), 73 A.D.2d 276, 284, 426 N.Y.S.2d 274, 282).
Here, the audience was comprised of only two people, both of whom were intimately involved in Rambo's continuing administrative struggle over the vacations policy. We fail to see how Cohn's angry remarks could deter these two people from associating with Rambo. Chestnet, supra; see also Rybas, supra, 311 Pa.Super. at 56, 457 A.2d at 111. Moreover, we are concerned here solely with the analysis of whether Cohn's remarks could be defamatory per se. We do not question that a charge of being anti-Semitic could be defamatory per quod given proof of special damages,[15] but Rambo has not attempted to make a per quod case.
In addition, the cases finding allegations of anti-Semitism and the related allegations *149 of being a "Naziphile" or a "Quisling"[16] to be defamatory per se all arose in the 1940s, when an allegation of anti-Semitism was tantamount to an allegation of sympathy with Nazi Germany. In those days, when almost every American family had some involvement with the war against Nazi Germany and its allies, an allegation of sympathy with the enemy could easily destroy a person. See Sweeney v. Schenectady Union Publishing Co. (2nd Cir.1941), 122 F.2d 288, 290-91, aff'd without opinion by an equally divided Court with Justice Jackson not participating, 316 U.S. 642, 62 S. Ct. 1031, 86 L. Ed. 1727 (mentioning the perils of being associated with Hitler and his persecution of Jews);[17]Sanctuary v. Thackrey (1947), 189 Misc. 724, 72 N.Y.S.2d 104, aff'd, 273 A.D. 883, 78 N.Y.S.2d 361 (libelous per se to call plaintiff a Quisling, though defendants proved truth of allegation); O'Donnell v. Philadelphia Record Co. (1947), 356 Pa. 307, 312-13, 51 A.2d 775, 777 (defendants committed libel per se when they accused a news reporter to be a Naziphile in sympathy with Hitler's liquidation of Jews).[18]
Today, passions have had almost half a century to cool, and although an allegation of anti-Semitism is as morally reprehensible now as it was then, the consequences of such an allegation today bear little resemblance to the harm a defamed person would have suffered in the 1940s.[19]
In light of the preceding discussion, we hold the phrase "anti-Semitic," like the other ethnically related slurs in the cases cited above, is not defamatory per se.
Because Cohn's remarks about Rambo acting like a "horse's butt" and being "anti-Semitic" were not defamatory per se, Rambo was limited to an action for defamation per quod. He failed to allege or show the existence of a genuine issue of material fact concerning the pecuniary special damages that are the essence of a per quod defamation action. His attempt to recover damages only for physical and emotional injuries therefore fails, and the trial court properly entered summary judgment in favor of the defense.
CONCLUSION
The trial court erred in dismissing Rambo's complaint. Rambo was not required to exhaust his administrative remedies. The entry of summary judgment, however, *150 was proper. Cohn's remarks about Rambo's performance as an employee were not published, and Cohn was also immune for those remarks. The other remarks were not defamatory per se, and Rambo failed to make out an action for defamation per quod.
The dismissal of Rambo's complaint is reversed. The summary judgment in favor of Cohn and the State is affirmed.
RATLIFF, C.J., and ROBERTSON, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Although the parties have spelled the defendant's name "Cohen," the record reveals "Cohn" is the proper spelling.
[2]  IND. CODE 4-21.5-1-1 et seq.
[3]  IND. CODE 34-4-16.5-1 et seq.
[4]  Rambo's complaint also states a cause of action under 42 U.S.C. § 1983. Rambo made no argument to the trial court or this court, however, concerning his claims under § 1983, and he has therefore waived any such claims. Ind.Trial Rule 56(H); Ind.Appellate Rule 8.3(A)(7).
[5]  IND. CODE 4-15-1-1 et seq.
[6]  Rambo has not pursued his libel claim beyond the use of the word "libel" in his complaint. Any libel claim is therefore waived. See note 3, supra.
[7]  Without citation, this section also mentions the imputation of actions that would cause a person to be disinherited as defamatory per se.
[8]  The ancient rule concerning sexual misconduct referred only to women. See W. Prosser and W. Keeton, Prosser and Keeton on Torts, § 112, p. 793 (5th ed. 3rd printing 1989). In Indiana, however, the per se defamatory nature of such charges applies equally to men and women. IND. CODE 34-1-62-1.
[9]  Thus, it is defamatory per se to accuse a physician of killing his or her patients, Depew v. Robinson (1883), 95 Ind. 109, but it is not defamatory per se to allege a physician wrote and posted a threatening note in public view, Divens v. Meredith (1897), 147 Ind. 693, 47 N.E. 143, because the latter allegation does not attack the physician as a physician.
[10]  Our supreme court's recent decisions in Shuamber v. Henderson (1991), Ind., 579 N.E.2d 452 and Cullison v. Medley (1991), Ind., 570 N.E.2d 27 reflect the same idea. In Cullison, the court abolished the "impact rule" for cases of tortious trespass and provided the possibility of recovery for emotional distress in such cases without a showing of physical injury. In Shuamber, after remarking that the Cullison decision included intentional torts other than trespass, the court held that plaintiffs who sustain a direct impact as a result of another's negligence can recover for emotional distress, "without regard to whether the emotional trauma arises out of or accompanies any physical injury to the plaintiff." Id. at 456.
Thus, although the impact rule no longer exists for intentional torts, Indiana still requires a predicate tort, such as defamation, before a plaintiff can recover for emotional distress, and if a defamation plaintiff cannot prove the elements of either per se or per quod defamation, there can be no recovery for emotional distress.
[11]  At first blush, these remarks present the question of whether Cohn was stating facts or opinion. Although whether a communication is a statement of fact or opinion is a question of law, Near East Side Community Organization v. Hair (1990), Ind. App., 555 N.E.2d 1324, 1328 (citing Jamerson v. Anderson Newspapers, Inc. (1984), Ind. App., 469 N.E.2d 1243), we need not reach the issue here because Rambo, as will be discussed, cannot recover for any defamatory remarks made against him in his capacity as an employee in the present context.
The Colorado Supreme Court's decision in Bucher v. Roberts (1979), 198 Colo. 1, 595 P.2d 239, provides a thoughtful discussion of an employer's First Amendment protection in commenting on an employee's performance, and of society's tolerance for verbally abusive angry outbursts, as reflected in Comment e of Restatement (Second) of Torts, § 566 (1977).
[12]  Judge Hoffman impliedly stated the same result in his opinion for the court in Kolczynski v. Maxton Motors, Inc. (1989), Ind. App., 538 N.E.2d 275, trans. denied.
[13]  We are aware of no Department of Correction policy, or of any executive, legislative, or judicial policy in this state which would authorize state supervisory employees, in the course of their employment as defined ITCA, to hurl personal and ethnic insults at their subordinates.
Moreover, the phrases "horse's butt" and "anti-Semitic," although uttered in a heated conversation stemming from a work-related dispute, are themselves unrelated to Rambo's performance as an employee. Thus, these phrases do not fall within the rule adopted in Bals, supra, and were therefore published to Rambo's supervisor and the Pendleton personnel chief.
[14]  In Hansen, the City Court of New York eloquently stated that:
[e]pithets of the character which form the basis of this complaint for libel and slander, while malodorous and unesthetic, are colloquialisms largely indulged in by the general citizenry in the heat of discussion or controversy. It would be an infringement of the right of free speech to restrict the average citizen to the use of esthetic language and limit the right of pungent description of distasteful personalities or opinions. While the line of demarcation between slander and permissive descriptive adjectives may be thin, the Court is of the opinion that the words complained of in the instant case come within the latter category. No special damages are averred in the complaint nor does it allege any special innuendos recognized by those who heard the language employed. The Court, moreover, will not set itself up as a censor of the linguistic mores of the community. The reason for such reluctance will readily be apparent to any one who frequents our places of recreation such as ball parks and boxing exhibitions. Wounded sensibilities are not actionable per se, and while the sensibilities of the plaintiff have undoubtedly been outraged, the Court is without power to give redress.
Id. at 168-69.
[15]  For example, if Rambo were a meat supplier with Kosher customers, a charge of anti-Semitism leading to loss of Kosher business could easily support a per quod defamation action.
[16]  Vidkun Quisling was a Norwegian politician who collaborated with the Nazi invaders and served as head of the Norwegian puppet regime, the State Council of Norway, from 1940-45. See The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language 1072 (4th printing, 1970). Quisling is a synonym for "[a] traitor who serves as the puppet of the enemy occupying his country." Id.
[17]  The plaintiff in Sweeney was a Congressman from Ohio who was alleged in the media to have opposed the appointment of the United States Attorney for the Northern District of Ohio to the federal bench because the nominee was a naturalized Jew born in Hungary. Sweeney filed several suits, and the decision cited above, in which Judge Learned Hand concurred, was the only one, even in those trying times, to find the accusation against Sweeney to be libelous per se. The decision in Life Printing & Publishing Co., Inc. v. Field (1944), 324 Ill. App. 254, 260, 58 N.E.2d 307, 310 contains a list of the other reported decisions in Sweeney's suits.
[18]  The decision in Sanctuary, supra, for example, makes clear the validity of the idea that the defamatory nature of an utterance is to be construed in light of the times. The defendants in that case successfully raised the defense of truth, and the decision is not only a stirring defense of the United States' conduct in World War II, but is also a palpable expression of the judge's contempt for the plaintiff's beliefs.
[19]  The decision in Schermerhorn v. Rosenberg (1980), 73 A.D.2d 276, 426 N.Y.S.2d 274, does not imply a contrary conclusion. In that case, the media defendants deliberately fabricated lies about the plaintiff New York state senator, falsely attributing to him various anti-Semitic, anti-Black, and anti-Hispanic statements. They then published those lies in a general circulation newspaper in the plaintiff's senatorial district, which had a large Black population.
As a result of the fabrications, the plaintiff's daughter was assaulted, he suffered vilification by his Senate colleagues, received death threats, and required police protection. The court held this evidence was sufficient to let the question of the libellous nature of the publication go to the jury.
The nature and extent of the publication and the audience, and the circumstances surrounding the remarks, were critical to the determination of the remarks' potentially defamatory nature, and the difference between the situation in Schermerhorn and the present case requires no further elaboration.

=== CASE 9740999 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:47:15.574729+00 ===

Boyles, J.
(dissenting). Plaintiff, consisting of certain residents and taxpayers of the city of Ludington in Mason county, filed the bill of complaint in this case to enjoin the defendants from proceeding with the proposed construction of a county infirmary in the city of Scottville in said county. These taxpayers adopted the designation Mason County Civic Research Council. The defendants are the county of Mason and the' city of Scottville. The trial court, after a hearing on stipulated facts, filed a comprehensive written opinion and entered an order dismissing the bill of complaint. Plaintiff appeals.
Two principal questions are here for decision: (1) Does the board of supervisors of Mason county have authority to erect a county convalescent .home and infirmary building at. the proposed location in Scottville; and (2) does the city of Scottville have authority to deed to the county the parcel óf land *317on which the building is to be located. Appellant adds a third incidental question, involving the right of ■ the board of supervisors to use' county sinking funds to erect an infirmary.' • ■ ■
■ The facts have been stipulated. In 1942 the county acquired and has since maintained a place in Ludington as an infirmary, under the name of Mason County Convalescent Home, and under the manage^ ment and control of the county social welfare board.1 In 1949, by a vote of the electors in said county, a county sinking fund was created and taxes voted for the purpose of constructing a new county jail and a new county convalescent home.2 No action has been taken by the county sinking fund commission3 to allocate or use the fund. In 1952 the board of supervisors authorized its building committee to procure plans for a new jail and a new convalescent home or infirmary, which was done. Also, in 1952, the electors of the county voted favorably for a bond issue of $165,000 for the purpose of constructing and equipping “a new county convalescent home (infirmary).” In 1953 the city of Scottville offered to deed to the county approximately 3 acres of land out of an 18-acre park known as McPhail Field, as the site for the proposed new “county convalescent hospital (infirmary).” The board of supervisors voted to accept the offer, subject to providing a merchantable title.4 In June, 1953, the county prosecuting attorney gave the board of supervisors a written opinion approving the title to the Scottville site, and the board of supervisors adopted a resolution “accepting the proposed Scottville site and approving the construction of the infirmary in aceord*318anee with the plans and specifications prepared by the architect upon the site in the' city of Scottville.”
In July, 1953, the plaintiff Mason County Civic Research Council filed the instant bill of complaint seeking temporary and permanent injunctions to restrain the city of Scottville from conveying the proposed site to the county, and to restrain the county from further proceeding with the plan for the construction of the proposed county infirmary in Scottville. Plaintiff appeals from the dismissal, by the trial court, of its bill of complaint.
1. Does the county board of supervisors have authority to erect a county infirmary at Scottville, under the facts in the case?
The applicable constitutional and statutory provisions are as follows:
“Each county may also maintain an infirmary for the care and support of its indigent poor and unfortunate, and all county poor houses shall hereafter be designated and maintained as county infirmaries.” Const (1908), art 8, § 11.
“The board of supervisors of any county in this State in which a county infirmary is not already erected, may, at any annual or special meeting thereof, determine to erect such a house for the reception of the poor of their county.” CL 1948, § 402.6 (Stat Ann 1950 Rev § 16.147).
“The said several boards of supervisors shall have power and they are hereby authorized at any meeting thereof lawfully held:
“First, To purchase for the use of the county any real estate necessary for the erection of buildings for the support of the poor of such county, and for a farm to be used in connection therewith;
“Second, To purchase any real estate necessary for the site of any court house, jail, clerk’s office, or any other county building in such county;
■ “Third, To fix upon and determine the site of any ¡such building, if not previously located; * * - *
*319“Fifth, To remove or designate a new site for any county buildings required to be at the county seats, when such removal shall not exceed the limits of the village or city at which the county seat is situated, as previously located;
“Sixth, To cause to be erected the necessary buildings for poorhouses, jails, clerk’s offices, and other county buildings, and to prescribe the time and manner of erecting the same.” CL 1948, § 46.11 (Stat Ann 1953 Cum Supp § 5.331).
Plaintiff mainly relies on the language in the first sentence of CL 1948, § 402.6 (Stat Ann 1950 Rev '§ 16.147), supra, authorizing the board of supervisors to erect a county infirmary in any county “in which a county infirmary is not already erected.” Plaintiff claims that a county infirmary has already been erected in Ludington, hence, the county has no authority to' change the location and “erect” an infirmary in Scottville. The legislative intent may readily be gathered from the ensuing provisions in the same act, as well as in the other acts above referred to. Obviously, there was no legislative intent that once a county infirmary had been “erected” in a certain place, the county must be limited in perpetuity to that one location for an infirmary. In fact, the record here shows that the Mason county infirmary was originally located in Amber township, which farm site was disposed of when the infirmary was relocated (apparently in conjunction with a “county convalescent home”) in a large former residence building in Ludington. Under plaintiff’s theory, the farm site would be the only lawful place for a county infirmary. There is no merit in appellant’s claim that the board of supervisors may not acquire a different site for the infirmary.
. .“The board of supervisors of the county have exclusive authority over the subject of the erection of! houses for the reception of the poor of their county, ¡ *320and in the exercise , of this authority they may employ such agents as they choose to execute what they have determined upon to do.” Plummer v. Kennedy, 72 Mich 295, 300.*
2. Does the city of Scottville have the right to convey to the county a part of the so-called McPhail park in Scottville ?
This 18-acre tract was acquired hy the city in 1925 by gift from Curtis W. McPhail, the conveyance stating:
“This deed is made and executed by said first parties with the agreement and understanding that the land above conveyed is to be used for a public park and for no other purpose; except that such a portion as is necessary for an athletic field may be enclosed for such purpose.”
The city, anticipating in an excess of caution a possible claim that this entire 18-acre tract would have to be held by the city in perpetuity as a public park, cleared the title from the possibility by other claimants of an interest in the title. It should be noted that the conveyance from McPhail to the city did not contain a reverter clause, and was not expressly made subject to reversionary interests. When McPhail died testate in 1939 he devised the residue of his estate (which would include any possible interest in the park) to 2 churches, both of which have executed deeds to the city releasing any restrictions or right to the park property. Also, all of McPhail’s heirs have joined in a similar deed to the city, reciting that it was given for the same purpose. The city council of Scottville took formal action vacating the park as to the 3-acre parcel and authorizing the conveyance to the county for an *321infirmary site. In effect, plaintiff would insist that once a parcel of land had been conveyed to a municipality for a park, without a reverter or reversionary clause, it must be held forever by the city as a park. In Briggs v. City of Grand Rapids, 261 Mich 11, we held (syllabus):
“Where there was no reverter clause, statement in deed to city for valuable consideration that land was purchased for park purposes is merely declaration of purpose of conveyance, without effect to limit grant, and therefore city was under no obligation to maintain park in perpetuity.”
“It seems to be the weight of authority that, where there is no reverter clause, a statement of use is merely a declaration of the purpose of conveyance, without effect to limit the grant.” Quinn v. Pere Marquette Railway Co., 256 Mich 143, 151.
Furthermore, the city council took formal action vacating for park purposes the 3-aere parcel to be conveyed to the county. It had statutory authority to do so. CL 1948, § 100.3 (Stat Ann 1949 Rev § 5.1787). The city of Scottville had authority to convey the 3-acre site to the county.
Finally, appellant asks whether the board of supervisors has the right to “ignore” the county board of sinking fund commissioners and order the construction of a county infirmary partly out of sinking funds. Nothing here in the record indicates that the board of supervisors will fail to recognize any statutory authority of the board of sinking fund commissioners. It consists of the county treasurer, county clerk, register of deeds, chairman of the board of supervisors, and chairman of the finance committee of that board.* By statute, the sinking fund is under the control of said board of county sinking fund commissioners, “subject to the supervision and direction *322of the board of supervisors.”* We are in accord with the thorough opinion of the trial court, which is in the record, indicating that the board of supervisors, if it desires to use sinking fund moneys, should have no difficulty in “directing” the sinking fund commissioners.
This opinion is based upon an analysis of the statutory powers conferred upon boards. of supervisors by the legislature. The Michigan Constitution (1908)† provides:
“The legislature may by general law confer upon the boards of supervisors of the several counties such powers of a local, legislative and administrative character, not inconsistent' with the provisions ■ of this Constitution, as it may deem proper.” (Italics supplied.)
It has been argued that boards of supervisors are administrative agencies, lacking authority to change the site of a county infirmary. A board of supervisors is the legislative agency of the county, and if it lacks that authority, obviously it must follow, if existing law is as now argued by appellant, that the location of a county infirmary must remain, perhaps in perpetuity, as originally located, unless further authorized by the legislature.
In some instances the Constitution itself has plainly defined the location of certain county agencies. Article 8, § 13, forbids a change in the location of the county seat of government, once it has been established, until the change in location has been approved by a majority vote of the electors. Article 8, § 4, requires that the sheriff, county clerk, county treasurer, judge of probate and register of deeds “shall hold their offices at the county seat.” Sig*323nificaritly, a change in location of the county infirmary has been left to other Constitutional provisions, and to the legislature.
There is neither a constitutional nor statutory requirement that a change in the loeation of the county infirmary shall require a majority vote of the electors. Unless the board of supervisors has that authority* none exists.
Decree should be affirmed. . No costs, a public question being involved.
Butzel and Smith, JJ., concurred with Boyles, J.
See CLS 1954, § 400.55(e) (Stat Ann 1953 Cum Supp § 16.455. [ft]).
See CL 1948, § 141.51 (Stat Ann § 5.671).
See CL 1948, § 141.31 et seq. (Stat Ann § 5.651 et seq.). i
Reference will be' made later to a claim of defect in the titlftj which the city might convey to. the county, ;
This must now be qualified by a later requirement in CL 1948, § 402.6 (Stat Ann 1950 Rev § 16.147), that before a county infirmary 'is erected, the plans must be approved by the State department of welfare, which has been done in this case.
CL 1948, § 141.32 (Stat Ann § 5.652).
CL 1948, §141.55 (Stat Ann §5.675).
Art 8, § 8.

=== CASE 9741000 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:47:15.58137+00 ===

Carr, C. J.
The facts in this case- appear from a stipulation into which the parties have entered, exhibits that have been returned to this Court, and admitted or uncontroverted averments in the pleadings. In 1942 defendant county purchased, for use as a county infirmary, a parcel of land in the city of Ludington on which was located a residence referred to as the Cray home. The building was remodeled to adapt it for use and has since been devoted to the purposes for which it was acquired. At the same time that the Mason county • site for the infirmary was purchased, land comprising the present poor farm was obtained and is now being used for that purpose. •
Under date of September 20, 1952, the board of supervisors of Mason county adopted a . resolution for submission to the electors of-the question as to whether the sum of $165,000 should be raised by a bond issue to construct and equip a new infirmary. Said resolution referred to the' building then in use as inadequate, but contained no suggestion that the site was open to objection. The resolution was silent insofar as a change in location of the infirmary was concerned. It appears from the record in the case that the electors authorized the issuance of the bonds *324for the purpose indicated. Thereafter the defendant city of Scottville offered to convey to the county as a site for the infirmary a parcel of land in that municipality. Said parcel was a portion of a larger tract previously conveyed to Scottville for use as a public park and for athletic purposes. The board of supervisors of the county voted to accept the offer. Thereupon the plaintiff, a voluntary association composed of electors and taxpayers, brought suit to enjoin the removal of the infirmary from Ludington to the proposed new site. A hearing before the trial court resulted in a decree adverse to the claims of plaintiff, and it has appealed to this Court.
The principal question in the case has reference to the power of the board of supervisors to take the contemplated action in view of the facts involved as disclosed by the record before us. Counsel for defendants in their brief state the question as follows:
“Does the Mason county board of supervisors have the authority to determine to erect a county infirmary at a new location under the facts of this case, the county already maintaining an infirmary in the former Cray home?”
The question presented is one of statutory construction. As an administrative body the board of supervisors has no inherent powers. The present State Constitution (1908), art 8, § 7, in providing for the establishing of said board, declares that it -shall have “such powers as shall be prescribed by law.” A like provision was contained in- the Constitution of 1850, art 10, § 6.
*325The general law providing for the support of poor persons* declares in chapter 2, § 6 (CL 1948, § 402.6 [Stat Ann 1950 Rev § 16.147]) that:
“The board of supervisors of any county in this State in which a county infirmary is not already erected, may, at any annual or special meeting thereof, determine to erect such a house for the reception of the poor of their county; and upon filing such determination with the clerk of the county, they may direct the superintendents of the poor of such county to purchase 1 or more tracts of land, not exceeding'320 acres, and to erect thereon 1 or more suitable .buildings for the purpose aforesaid.”
It will be noted that the authority conferred on the board of supervisors by the above provision is limited to counties “in which a county infirmary is not already erected.” It is clearly implied that the legislature had in mind that it was granting administrative authority rather than powers of local legislative character. It is consistent with the provisions of CL .1948, § 46.11 (Stat Ann 1953 Cum Supp § 5.331) which, insofar as material here, reads as follows:
“The said several boards of supervisors shall have power and they are hereby authorized at any meeting thereof lawfully held:
■ “First, To purchase for the use of the county any real estate necessary for the erection of buildings for the support of the poor of such county, and for a farm to be used in connection therewith;
“Second, To purchase any real estate necessary for the site of any court house, jail, clerk’s office, or any other county building in such county;
“Third, To fix upon and determine the site of any such building, if not previously located.”
*326It may be noted that this section was amended by PA 1955, No 108, which was given immediate effect and approved June 3, 1955, by adding thereto an eighteenth subdivision. Said amendment is not pertinent to any issue in this case.
It is urged that the limitation expressed in the third subdivision, above quoted, should be construed as applicable only to the buildings mentioned in the second subdivision to the exclusion of those referred to in the first. However, if the legislature had so intended we think express reference would have been made to indicate such intent, or the second and third subdivisions would have been combined. Applying general principles of statutory construction, it is a fair conclusion that the legislature had in mind the buildings previously mentioned in the section, and, hence, to grant power to the board of supervisors to fix the. site of the county infirmary and of the-other buildings named if not previously located. Such interpretation is. consistent with the statutory provision first above quoted (CL 1948, § 402.6 [Stat Ann 1950 Rev § 16.147]). The specific provision in the general law relating to the care of poor persons clearly indicates the legislative intent, and the statute defining the powers of the board of supervisors indicates a like purpose to restrict the administrative authority granted, as a matter of public policy, with reference not only to infirmaries but other public buildings as well.
• The principle has been repeatedly recognized that an express grant of power to administrative officers, boards or commissions, is subject to a strict interpretation. Mechem, Public Offices and Officers, § 511. In accord with such principle, it is said in 67 CJS, Officers, §107, p 378, that: •
' “The power and authority to be exercised by boards or commissions must be conferred by clear and un*327mistakable language, since a doubtful power does not exist.” ' ,
Of like import is the decision of this Court in Township of Lake v. Millar, 257 Mich. 135, in which it .was held that the defendant drain commissioner had undertaken to act without jurisdiction. In reaching such conclusion, it was said (p 142):
“The extent of the authority of the people’s public agents is measured by the statute from which they derive their authority, not by their own acts and assumption of authority.” ¡
On behalf of defendants attention is directed to the fact that the provision of the law relative to the care of indigent persons above quoted (CL 1948, § 402.6 [Stat Ann 1950 Rev § 16.147]) limits the authority of the board of supervisors to instances “in which a county infirmary is not already erected.” Emphasis is placed on the use of the word “erected,” it being urged in effect that the term necessarily imports the construction of a building for use as a county infirmary. The argument carries with it the assumption that a remodeling of an existing structure may not be regarded as within the scope of 'the provision. In other words, it is claimed that remodeling is not the equivalent of erecting, building, or constructing. While the contrary view is not unsupported by authority, we think it unnecessary to discuss this angle of the situation. ;
The question before us relates to the intent of the legislature in the enactment of the' statutes here involved. The word “erected” may in a proper context be construed to mean built or constructed. Having in mind the purpose of the legislature in the enactment of the statutes above quoted, we think its obvious that such restricted meaning was not intended. A fairer construction is that the legislature deemed it proper to withhold from the board of su*328pervisors the power to change the site of a county infirmary in an instance where such infirmary has been previously established. In the case at bar there is no question but that the county of Mason, pursuant to action of its board of supervisors, did in 1942 establish the convalescent home or infirmary at a definite location in the city of Ludington. It purchased a site and remodeled the building thereon to adapt it for the contemplated use. That use has continued to the present time. On the same date a farm was acquired to be used in connection with the infirmary, the precise location of said farm not appearing in this record or in the exhibits returned here.
If “erected” means “established” the situation presented here is subject to the restrictive clause of the statute. In determining the legislative intent it must be borne in mind that the mere erection or construction of a building is not sufficient to furnish a county with an infirmary. Such structure must be properly equipped for the purposes for which it is designed. Facilities must be supplied ■ to the end that inmates in such institutions may receive proper care. In 1942 the defendant county did more than .to provide a building for the infirmary. It equipped that building and established it as the type of institution authorized by statute.
That the word “erected” may be construed as “established” is recognized by leading lexicographers. Anderson’s Dictionary of Law; Webster’s New International Dictionary; New Century Dictionary. In Port Huron & Northwestern Railway Company v. Richards, 90 Mich 577, suit was brought on a written instrument executed by defendant whereby he undertook to pay plaintiff the sum of $500 when plaintiff completed the construction of its railway to the village of Port Austin and “have erected” a station for passengers and freight. It appears that the *329plaintiff company had constructed a building at the place designated for the station, and it claimed that it had thereby complied with its agreement. However, the said building had not been established as a station, and the trial court directed a verdict in favor of the defendant. In approving such action, this Court said (p 579):
“The agreement contemplated that facilities should be furnished, not only for the accommodation of passengers, but for the reception and shipment of freight. This involved more than a mere place of shelter. ‘And have erected a regular station’ means more than the erection of a station-house. The word ‘erect’ may mean ‘to build,’ or it may mean ‘to set up’ or ‘found’ or ‘establish’ or ‘institute,’ according to the context. In the connection here used, it means ‘to set up,’ ‘to establish.’ ”
While the case involved the interpretation of a contract, we think like principles are applicable in construing a statute. In either situation the ultimate question is' one of intent, to be determined in the light of what is said and the real purpose to be accomplished. The language, above quoted, from the opinion of the Court in the case cited is applicable in the instant suit. Í
The earlier decision in Kiefer v. German American Seminary of the City of Detroit, 46 Mich 636, is also in point. In 1861 the legislature of the State granted to defendant seminary 25,000 acres of so-called State swamp lands to aid defendant in “erecting” buildings for its use. The act  contained a proviso that in the event the seminary “shall fail to erect •buildings, in pursuance of the terms of the lease or grant made by the city of Detroit of land to said seminary, and within the time therein mentioned,” the grant should be forfeited. The legislature later. *330required that the trustees of the seminary execute a bond to the people of the State in the sum of $25,000, conditioned that the proceeds of the sales of the lands should be applied to the purposes contemplated. The plaintiffs in the case were the sureties on said bonds. The lands granted, or some of them at least, were sold but instead of erecting buildings the defendant seminary, as a result of consolidating with another educational institution, received a building worth several thousand dollars, to which building a substantial addition was later made. The plaintiffs brought suit in equity for an accounting and to enjoin the defendant from making any use of the moneys received from the sale of swamp lands other than in the erection of buildings. The trial court entered a decree in favor of the plaintiffs. This Court, in an opinion written by Justice Cooley, concluded that the' purpose of the State grant had been substantially complied with and that, in consequence, defendant had not acted improperly.
In deciding the case cited, it was recognized that a technical construction of the grant would require the moneys realized from the sale of the lands to be applied to the erection of buildings. The Court, however, did not feel impelled to give such construction. While the defendant had not used the funds derived by it from the sale of the lands granted to construct its buildings, it had accomplished an equivalent result. The decision is authority for the proposition that the word “erecting” does not necessarily require the building of structures in order to accomplish the end in view. Whether the result contemplated has been accomplished is the question at issue. Applying the line of reasoning of the decision to the facts in the case at bar we think the conclusion cannot be avoided that while the county of Mason did not construct a new building in Ludington to be used for-the purposes of.an infirmary* nonetheless *331■it actually established such institution in the manner above indicated.' See, also, Tom v. Board of County Com’rs of Lincoln County, 43 NM 292 (92 P2d 167); State, ex rel. Davis, v. Barber, 139 Fla 706 (190 So 809).
Counsel for defendants cite Plummer v. Kennedy, 72 Mich 295, as bearing on the question of the authority of a board of supervisors with reference to the rebuilding of á county infirmary. In that case the building was located on the “county farm.” It does not appear that any change in site was involved. The precise question at issue was the- authority of the board to employ agents to handle details of the work. The decision is not in point in the instant controversy. .
We think the legislative intent is clearly expressed in the statutory provisions above quoted. In accordance therewith the administrative power-to change the site of a. county infirmary, previously established, is withheld from-the board of supervisors. .No other conclusion, can be reached without ignoring the express provision limiting the authority of said board. With the wisdom or policy thereof courts are not concerned! Rather, the statutes must be construed as enacted, in the light of the purpose to be accomplished and giving due and proper meaning to all provisions.'. As said in MacQueen v. City Commission of City of Port Huron, 194 Mich 328, 342:
“It is a cardinal rule that the legislature must be held to intend the meaning which it has plainly expressed, and in such cases there is no room for construction, or attempted interpretation to vary such meaning.” •
The above language was quoted with approval in the recent decision in Nordman v. Calhoun, 332 Mich 460, 465.
*332In City of Grand Rapids v. Crocker, 219 Mich 178, 182, 183, this Court stated the general rule of statutory construction as follows:
“There seems to he no lack of harmony in the rules governing the interpretation of statutes. All are agreed that the primary one is to ascertain and give effect to the intention of the legislature. All others serve but as guides to assist the courts in determining such intent with a greater degree of certainty. If the language employed in the statute is plain, certain and unambiguous, a bare reading suffices and no interpretation is necessary. The rule is no less elementary that effect must be given, if possible, to every word, sentence and section. To that end, the entire act must be read, and the interpretation to be given to a particular word in one section arrived at after due consideration of every other section so as to produce, if possible, a harmonious and consistent enactment as a whole.”
Among decisions of like import are: Gardner-White Co. v. State Board of Tax Administration, 296 Mich 225; Staiger v. Liquor Control Commission, 336 Mich 630. In the last case cited it was said (p 633):
“It is not the province of this Court to alter or change the clear, distinct and unequivocal wording of a legislative enactment.”
In the case at bar there is no claim that the present site of the county infirmary is not a proper one. As above noted, the resolution of the board of supervisors submitting the question of issuing bonds to raise money for the construction of an infirmary did not aver any lack of suitability as to the existing site, nor did it set forth any intent to procure a site in another municipality. It appears also from the stipulation of facts that the State department of welfare was asked for an opinion as to the com*333parative suitability of the Ludington and Scottville sites, and replied that it found no objection to either. Presumably the expression of opinion had reference to the physical aspects of the sites rather than to any legal questions involved.' It is fairly apparent from the record, considered in its entirety, that the proposed removal of the infirmary from Ludington to Scottville is not sought because the present site is for any reason an improper-one. It has been used since acquired in 1942.
No question is here involved as to the legality of the establishment of the infirmary at its present location. The plaintiff recognizes the validity thereof and for obvious reasons the defendants are not in position to raise any question in that regard. Apparently said action when taken was acquiesced' in by all parties concerned. It is not subject to challenge in this case. The situation presented is that members of the board of supervisors wish to remove the infirmary to Scottville and locate it on the land donated by that city. The question is, as stated at the outset, whether the board of supervisors is by statute granted such authority. For the reasons above set forth we think that the board, under the present statutes pertaining to the matter, does not have the power claimed by it. If it is deemed desirable that the-right to change such site after it has been previously established should be vested in the board, the matter of granting such power rests with the legislature and not with the courts. As the statutes now stand they are clearly inconsistent with such authority.
The determination of the primary question involved renders it unnecessary to consider other issues raised by the parties to the case. The decrée from which the appeal has been taken is reversed, and a decree will enter in this Court, in accordance *334herewith. Inasmuch as questions of statutory construction are involved, no costs are allowed.
Sharpe, Reid, Dethmers and Kelly, JJ., concurred with Carr, C. J.
PA 1925, No 146, as amended (CL 1948, § 401.1 et seq., as amended [Stat Ann 1950 Rev and Stat Ann 1953 Cum Supp § 16.121 et seq.).

=== CASE 2225798 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:55.541781+00 ===

587 N.E.2d 96 (1992)
CITY OF VALPARAISO, Appellant,
v.
James B. EDGECOMB, Appellee.
No. 64S03-9202-CV-127.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
February 25, 1992.
Steven P. Polick, Knight, Hoppe, Fanning & Knight, Schererville, for appellant.
James B. Edgecomb, pro se.
ON CIVIL PETITION TO TRANSFER
KRAHULIK, Justice.
James B. Edgecomb (Plaintiff-Appellee below) seeks transfer after the Court of Appeals instructed the trial court to enter summary judgment against him and in favor of the City of Valparaiso (Defendant-Appellant below). City of Valparaiso v. Edgecomb (1991), Ind. App., 569 N.E.2d 746. The dispositive issue is whether the Indiana Tort Claims Act confers immunity when a city police officer is engaged in leading a funeral procession. We conclude that Ind. Code § 34-4-16.5-3(7) (West Supp. 1991) does not provide immunity.
The facts relative to this appeal follow. On the afternoon of April 20, 1988, Edgecomb was in the process of making a righthand turn onto Roosevelt Road in Valparaiso when his car was struck by a police vehicle driven by a City of Valparaiso police officer, Nicholas J. Starcevic. At the time of the collision, the officer, in compliance with an instruction from his lieutenant, was proceeding to the front of a funeral procession on Roosevelt Road. Edgecomb filed a complaint seeking recovery for his injuries and damages. In response, the City filed a motion for summary judgment, in part on the grounds that Officer Starcevic was engaged in the enforcement of a law at the time of the incident and was, therefore, immune under Section 3(7). The trial court denied the City's motion for summary judgment, but granted its request for an interlocutory appeal. In an opinion decided before our recent reinterpretation of Section 3(7) in Tittle v. Mahan (1991), Ind., 582 N.E.2d 796, the Court of Appeals reversed *97 the trial court and remanded the matter with instructions for the trial court to enter summary judgment in favor of the City. The court concluded that when a police officer is engaged in leading a funeral procession, such officer's activity would constitute the performance of his duty and, as such, he would be engaged in enforcing the law. Edgecomb, 569 N.E.2d at 747. Thus, the court reasoned, the City was immune from liability pursuant to Section 3(7).
In view of Tittle v. Mahan, we now grant transfer. In Tittle, we specifically rejected the notion that the immunity provided by Section 3(7) was co-extensive with the statutory obligations placed on law enforcement officials. We held that activity included within the term "enforcement of a law" was limited to activity "attendant to effecting the arrest of those who may have broken the law." 582 N.E.2d at 801. Thus, we held that there is no immunity under Section 3(7) unless the plaintiff seeks recovery for injuries arising out of police activities attendant to effecting an arrest. Applying this holding in Tittle, we concluded that law enforcement officials and their employers were not immune from liability for treatment of pretrial detainees placed in county jails. Similarly, in City of Wakarusa v. Holdeman (1991), Ind., 582 N.E.2d 802, we held that immunity was not provided under Section 3(7) when a deputy marshall collided with a vehicle while looking for recreational vehicles without the required license plate and registration.
Here, the parties do not dispute that Officer Starcevic was not involved in effecting an arrest and, therefore, pursuant to our holding in Tittle, the City is not immune under Section 3(7). As we stated in City of Wakarusa, "absent immunity, the controlling question becomes whether defendants owed plaintiff a private duty for the breach of which the law permits a recovery. It is undisputed that a person operating a motor vehicle on a public roadway has a duty to operate such vehicle with reasonable care." 582 N.E.2d at 804. A question of fact exists as to whether Officer Stacevic exercised such care under the circumstances. Summary judgment, therefore, was not appropriate and the trial court correctly denied the City's motion.
Accordingly, we now grant transfer, vacate the opinion of the Court of Appeals, and remand this matter to the trial court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
DeBRULER and DICKSON, JJ., concur.
SHEPARD, C.J., concurs in result, without separate opinion.
GIVAN, J., dissents, without separate opinion.

=== CASE 2225805 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:55.686354+00 ===

72 N.W.2d 880 (1955)
MINNKOTA POWER CO-OPERATIVE, Inc., Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
Anne H. BACON, Defendant and Respondent.
No. 7513.
Supreme Court of North Dakota.
October 21, 1955.
*881 Johnson & Hoghaug, Lakota, for appellant.
Philip R. Bangs, Grand Forks, for respondent.
WM. H. HUTCHINSON, District Judge.
This is an action in eminent domain. It is brought by the plaintiff to acquire a right of way across defendant's lands for a high-voltage electric transmission line which was heretofore constructed and maintained under a lease which provided for an annual rental. The action was tried to the court without a jury and a judgment was entered granting the plaintiff the right of way sought and assessing defendant's damages in the sum of $2712.50 as follows:
East half of Section 25, .878
acres, ........................ $  62.50
East half of Section 25, 6 poles at
$10.00 each, ...................     60.00
Section 32, 1.61 acres at $250.00
per acre, ....................    400.00
Section 32, 19 poles at $10.00 per
pole, ........................    190.00
For all detriment to lands of defendant
not occupied by plaintiff's
structures of easements
caused by construction of transmission
lines on said lands ....         2000.00
________
Total, .........................     $2712.50
The plaintiff, feeling that the damages awarded the defendant are excessive, has appealed to this court and asked a trial de novo.
The defendant concedes the plaintiff's right to acquire a right of way across defendant's land. The only issue, therefore, is the amount of damages defendant should receive for the easement plaintiff seeks to acquire, and the damages which will accrue by reason of its severance to that portion of defendant's land not sought to be condemned.
These are the pertinent facts: The defendant is the owner of the East Half of Section 25, Township 152, Range 51, and Section 32, Township 152, Range 50, all in Grand Forks County, except such portions of Section 32 as have heretofore been conveyed and as hereafter set forth. No part of this land lies within the city limits of Grand Forks, and no part has ever been subdivided into lots. Section 32 is located to the northwest and near the corporate *882 limits of the City of Grand Forks. Section 25 is about two miles further to the northwest. Section 32 is bounded on the south by U. S. and State Highway No. 2; U. S. and State Highway No. 81 running in a northwesterly direction out of Grand Forks crosses the northeast corner of Section 32. The Northern Pacific Railway right of way bisects this section entering about 200 feet north of the southeast corner and running in a northwesterly direction to a point about 2,100 feet north of the southwest corner of the section. The Great Northern Railway right of way bounds Section 32 on the west side. A creek known as English Coulee enters Section 32 about 1,800 feet east of the southwest corner of the section and runs in a northeasterly direction about 3000 feet, where it crosses the plaintiff's proposed right of way, then follows east along the north side of the proposed right of way about 800 feet, then flows north and northeast until leaving the section a short distance south of the northeast corner. The farm buildings are located in the northeast corner of Section 32. Since 1940 the defendant has sold all of the land in Section 32 lying south of the Northern Pacific Railway right of way in blocks for industrial and commercial purposes for an average of about $600 per acre. The defendant has also sold about 16 acres directly north of the Northern Pacific Railway right of way for commercial purposes, described by metes and bounds as follows: Beginning at a point on the east line of Section 32 about 1,100 feet north of the southeast corner of the section, thence west about 1,200 feet, thence south about 400 feet, thence southeasterly along the Northern Pacific Railway right of way to the east line of said section, thence north to the point of beginning. This block of about 16 acres was sold for about $1,000 per acre. The unsold portion of Section 32 and the East Half of Section 25 are being used as a dairy farm. This has been the use for more than twenty years of the immediate past. The East Half of Section 25 and all that portion of Section 32 lying east and north of plaintiff's proposed right of way is in pasture. The plaintiff's high line as now constructed is known as a single-pole line. It enters Section 32 on the east side at a point about 1,600 feet north of the southeast corner of the section. The line runs due west 1,155 feet, thence due north 3,689 feet to the north boundary line of the section. The high line enters Section 25 on the east side and at the southeast corner of the northeast quarter, thence running west one half mile on the quarter line. There are twenty-five poles in the installation together with necessary guy wires.
As in most condemnation cases, the evidence as to values is not in agreement. The testimony given fixes the value of the land in Section 32 owned by the defendant and used for agricultural purposes at from $125 to $250 per acre. It places the value on the lands in Section 32 that might be used for commercial or industrial purposes at from $800 to $1,500 per acre. It is conceded by the parties that the lands in Section 25 are of the value of about $62.50 an acre.
In a recent case this court had occasion to consider the law of eminent domain and the principles governing its application. We discussed in detail the provisions of the law and cited and analyzed the cases in our jurisdiction and others which should guide in determining compensation. We refer to the case of Wishek Investment Co. v. McIntosh County, 77 N.D. 685, 45 N.W.2d 417. It is unnecessary therefore to again review the statutes or to again cite the cases there collected.
As above stated, there are two matters for determination: (a) the value of the property sought to be condemned; (b) the amount of the severance damage. It is the contention of the plaintiff that the defendant's lands are farm lands and that their value as farm lands should be the basis in determining the amount which defendant should receive. It is conceded by the defendant that the land in Section 25 is farm land and should be valued accordingly, but the defendant contends that *883 the land in Section 32, because of its proximity to the City of Grand Forks and because of its transportation advantages by reason of railroads and main highways, should be valued as commercial and industrial property and not as agricultural land. The defendant points to the fact that several tracts have already been sold for commercial purposes for an average of some $600 per acre.
It is true that the land in Section 32 lying south of the Northern Pacific Railway right of way, and one tract immediately north of this right of way, has been sold for commercial purpose. However, to say that all the other land in Section 32 has a value other than for agricultural purposes would be contrary to the evidence and not a reasonable conclusion to be drawn therefrom.
There is one tract of land in Section 32 which lies north of the tract already sold to the Northern Construction Company and directly south of the transmission line and consisting of about 13 acres which has a value for commercial purposes of about $650 per acre. The surface generally fits it for such purpose as well as its location with reference to other tracts already sold, the City of Grand Forks and the availability of the railroads and highways. The land traversed by the east and west segment of the transmission line and the land north thereof, since it is in or adjacent to English Coulee, does not appear to be suitable for industrial use. The actual acres taken by the plaintiff for its right of way must be valued as agricultural land, and this value in Section 32 would be $200.00 per acre. It is conceded that the value in Section 25 is $62.50 per acre. The transmission line bounds agricultural land except that portion of the line running east and west in Section 32 which bounds on the north the 13 acre tract that is entitled to be valued as commercial property. There is no certain rule for determining severance damages. In each case the court must consider all the evidence and apply its best judgment to the established facts. Wishek Investment Co. v. McIntosh County, 77 N.D. 685, 45 N.W.2d 417. The severance damage to the agricultural land would not be large. There are some hazards by reason of storms and often weeds must be mowed. A reasonable severance damage for the land in Section 25 would be $50.00. A reasonable severance damage for the agricultural land in Section 32 would be $200.00. The severance damage to the 13 acre tract valued as commercial property would be more substantial. Although we cannot tell to what commercial use the tract may be eventually put, the severance damage can be valued at $800.00.
The trial court found that the plaintiff required an easement with a width of 14.6 feet. The trial court's finding is approved by this court.
The amount the defendant is entitled to recover can be stated as follows:
For property taken in Section 25.. $      55.00
For severance damage to land in
Section 25 ..................        50.00
For property taken in Section 32..       325.00
For severance damage to agricultural
land in Section 32 ......           200.00
For severance damage to commercial
property in Section 32 ....         800.00
_______
Total   $1430.00
The plaintiff has pointed out that the trial court not only gave the defendant the full value of the land taken but also gave judgment for a further sum of $10.00 for each pole used in the transmission line. All poles are located upon the land taken. There is no legal basis for such an award.
The District Court is directed to vacate the judgment heretofore entered and to enter a judgment in harmony with this decision
BURKE, C. J., and MORRIS, GRIMSON and SATHRE, JJ., concur.
JOHNSON, J., disqualified.

=== CASE 2225806 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:55.687382+00 ===

486 N.E.2d 548 (1985)
GIBRALTAR MUTUAL INSURANCE COMPANY, Appellant (Plaintiff below),
v.
HOOSIER INSURANCE COMPANY AND JOHN V. LOUDERMILK, Appellees (Defendants below).
No. 2-484-A-115.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, Second District.
December 11, 1985.
*550 Charles S. Gleason, Gleason, Hay & Gleason, Indianapolis, for appellant.
Stephen M. Gentry, Frank J. Otte, Indianapolis, for appellees.
SULLIVAN, Judge.
Gibraltar Mutual Insurance Company ("Gibraltar") filed its complaint on August 13, 1982, alleging that Hoosier Insurance Company, through John V. Loudermilk ("Hoosier" and "Loudermilk", respectively), knowingly and maliciously disseminated false and derogatory information about Gibraltar. Hoosier and Loudermilk asserted affirmative defenses of truth and privilege to the charge of libel. After argument by the parties, the trial court granted summary judgment in favor of Hoosier and Loudermilk, without an accompanying statement of reasons.[1]
Gibraltar appeals and presents the following issues for review.
(1) Whether the trial court's grant of judgment to Hoosier and Loudermilk is contrary to law.[2]
(2) Whether the trial judge was required to disqualify himself because of his pre-existing bias and prejudice against Gibraltar.
Our standard of review on appeal from summary judgment is well established. We ascertain
"whether the pleadings, affidavits, answers to interrogatories, responses to requests for admission, and depositions, when read in the light most favorable to the non-moving party, reveal any genuine issues of material fact, Henderlong Lumber Co., Inc. v. Zinn (4th Dist. 1980) Ind. App., 406 N.E.2d 310, and if not, whether the trial court correctly applied the law. State ex rel. Van Buskirk v. Wayne Township (4th Dist. 1981) Ind. App., 418 N.E.2d 234."
Shallenberger v. Scoggins-Tomlinson, Inc. (1982) 2d Dist.Ind. App., 439 N.E.2d 699, 703. A material fact is one which facilitates resolution of any of the issues involved. Brandon v. State (1976) 264 Ind. 177, 180, 340 N.E.2d 756, 758. "On the other hand, despite conflicting facts and inferences on some elements of a claim, summary judgment may be proper where *551 there is no dispute or conflict regarding a fact that is dispositive of the litigation." Letson v. Lowmaster (1976) 3d Dist., 168 Ind. App. 159, 161, 341 N.E.2d 785, 787. Accord, Norman v. Turkey Run Community School Corp. (1980) 274 Ind. 310, 312, 411 N.E.2d 614, 615; Hayes v. Second National Bank of Richmond (1978) 1st Dist., 176 Ind. App. 299, 375 N.E.2d 647.
The operative facts are not in dispute: Hoosier, through Loudermilk, directed a letter to the Indiana Guaranty Association[3] with copies to Charles E. Evans, Gibraltar's president, and to W. Rudolph Steckler, Evans' counsel in a separate law suit.[4] With the letter, Loudermilk enclosed Gibraltar's financial statement which reflected a surplus of $55,034. The record reflects that the financial statement is a matter of public record and Gibraltar does not dispute the accuracy of the surplus amount. In the letter, Loudermilk also alleged that Gibraltar was not in compliance with Ind. Code 27-1-6-15 (Burns Code Ed.Supp. 1985), which requires a surplus of $250,000, and exhorted the Guaranty Association to take corrective action to require Gibraltar either to augment its surplus to the statutory level or be precluded from writing insurance in Indiana. Finally, the letter stated that the Guaranty Association, of which both Gibraltar and Hoosier are members, had recently made substantial payments on behalf of insolvent member insurers. The letter formed the basis of Gibraltar's complaint against Hoosier and Loudermilk.
It is appropriate at this juncture to briefly describe the function of the Guaranty Association. The Guaranty Association was created for the purpose of protecting the policyholders of impaired or insolvent insurers. See generally I.C. 27-8-8-5 and Foremost Life Insurance Co. v. Department of Insurance (1980) 274 Ind. 181, 409 N.E.2d 1092. An insurer seeking to transact insurance in Indiana must become a member of the Guaranty Association. I.C. 27-8-8-3. Upon determination by the Commissioner of Insurance that an insurer is impaired or insolvent,[5] the Guaranty Association may, inter alia, (a) guarantee or reinsure covered policies of the impaired or insolvent insurer, (b) assume that insurer's contractual obligations, or (c) lend money to the insurer. I.C. 27-8-8-5. The cost of administering this protection is assessed against member insurers in proportionate shares. I.C. 27-8-8-6. Upon a majority vote of its board of directors, the Guaranty Association must notify the commissioner of potential impairments or insolvencies, and may request that the commissioner conduct an investigation of the insurer believed to be impaired or insolvent. I.C. 27-8-8-9(e), (f) and (g). The Guaranty Association has broad powers to implement its statutory duties and obligations, subject to the immediate supervision of the Commissioner of Insurance. We recognize that remedial authority with respect to inadequate surplus accounts is vested in the Department of Insurance. See I.C. XX-X-X-XX (Burns Code Ed.Supp. 1985), which provides:
"Whenever it shall appear to the department ... (2) That the capital or the surplus fund of any such insurance company is impaired or has been reduced below the amount required by law ... the department is hereby authorized ... to require [the insurer] to restore any impairment of its capital or surplus fund[.]"
However, in light of the preceding discussion, we disagree with Gibraltar's assertion that only the Commissioner of Insurance *552 may act in matters concerning Indiana insurers.
The questions before the trial court, and us, are whether Hoosier's letter was libelous and, if so, whether the publication of the letter exceeded the scope of any privilege.[6]
Gibraltar advances alternative arguments in support of its contention that summary judgment was unwarranted. Gibraltar first argues that it is not subject to I.C. XX-X-X-XX, supra, and that Loudermilk's letter was a false and malicious attempt to coerce settlement of the separate litigation hereinbefore mentioned. Gibraltar also argues that even if the contents of the letter are true, dissemination of information concerning an insurer's financial condition is malum prohibitum[7] and contrary to expressed principles of public policy.
Indiana Code 27-1-6-15, supra, establishes certain financial requirements for mutual insurance companies, such as Gibraltar. That portion of the statute which is in dispute was amended in 1977 to increase the surplus requirement:
"(a) Except as provided in subsection (b) a domestic mutual company that organized before July 1, 1977, must maintain a surplus of not less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars [$250,000]. This subsection does not apply to a company that is organized under I.C. 27-5."[8]
Gibraltar contends this section is unconstitutional, citing IND. CONST. art. I, § 24, "No ex post facto law, or law impairing the obligation of contracts, shall ever be passed." In support of its contention, Gibraltar merely asserts that application of I.C. XX-X-X-XX would impair Gibraltar's charter and "cause a demise of the operation of the business." Appellant's Brief at 17. Gibraltar has failed to support these bare assertions by any semblance of argument or relevant authority, and thus has failed to convince us of any merit in the assertion. See Ogle v. St. John's Hickey Memorial Hospital (1985) 2d Dist. Ind. App., 473 N.E.2d 1055, 1057, n. 2; Ind. Rules of Procedure, Appellate Rule 8.3(A)(7).
In any event, Gibraltar's argument is spurious. It seeks, through convoluted reasoning, to have this court declare I.C. XX-X-X-XX unconstitutional and thereby provide a basis for Gibraltar's cause of action. Gibraltar's argument is but an improper collateral attack upon a part of the General Assembly's regulatory scheme concerning the insurance business, a subject which Gibraltar itself concedes is properly within the exercise of a state's police power. Vernon Fire & Casualty Insurance Co. v. Sharp (1976) 264 Ind. 599, 349 N.E.2d 173. Department of Insurance v. Schoonover (1947) 225 Ind. 187, 72 N.E.2d 747. Such attack on the constitutionality of I.C. XX-X-X-XX is ancillary to Gibraltar's libel action and is also untimely because the issue before us does not involve a particular statute as specifically applied to Gibraltar. See Ruge v. Kovach (1984) Ind., 467 N.E.2d 673, 675.
The statute, on its face, requires Gibraltar, a domestic mutual company organized before 1977, to maintain a surplus of $250,000. It is not disputed that Gibraltar's surplus, as of December 31, 1981, was $55,034. Hoosier's letter to the Guaranty Association, written August 10, 1982, concerned Gibraltar's 1981 year-end surplus. It follows, therefore, that Hoosier's letter *553 was not false when it alleged that Gibraltar was not in compliance with the statutory surplus requirement. Truth is a defense to an action for defamation. Seenig v. Wood (1976) 2d Dist., 169 Ind. App. 413, 440, 349 N.E.2d 235, 251.
Gibraltar argues, however, that I.C. 27-4-1-1 et seq. (Burns Code Ed.Supp. 1985), Indiana's unfair competition act regulating the insurance business, and its underlying public policy have by implication eliminated truth as a defense to libel. There are two aspects to Gibraltar's argument. Gibraltar first asserts that the statute prohibits dissemination of any statement impugning the financial condition of an insurer, and its prohibition applies regardless of the truth or falsity of the statement. Further, Gibraltar asserts that a statement or practice which violates the provisions of the statute gives rise to an independent action for libel, to which the defense of truth is inapplicable.
Gibraltar cites to no specific provision, and we have found none, which expressly eliminates truth as a defense to a charge of libel. Furthermore, Gibraltar's assertion that the statute effects an implied rejection of the common law of libel is unavailing. Statutory pronouncements in derogation of the common law are strictly construed and will not be held to abrogate the common law unless that intention is necessarily implied. Evansville & Ohio Valley Ry. Co. v. Southern Indiana Rural Electric Corp. (1953) 231 Ind. 648, 653, 109 N.E.2d 901, 903; City of Indianapolis v. Indianapolis Water Co. (1916) 185 Ind. 277, 113 N.E. 369; Hosts, Inc. v. Wells (1982) 3d Dist.Ind. App., 443 N.E.2d 319. But cf., Brooks v. Robinson (1972) 259 Ind. 16, 22, 284 N.E.2d 794, 797 (abolishing the common law doctrine of interspousal immunity). Accord, Stream Pollution Control Board of Indiana v. United States Steel, Inc. (N.D.Ind. 1974) 62 F.R.D. 31, aff'd (7th Cir.1975) 512 F.2d 1036; State ex rel. Murray v. Estate of Riggens (1975) 3d Dist., 164 Ind. App. 314, 328 N.E.2d 248.
The statute in question provides, in part:
"(1) Making, issuing, circulating, or causing to be made, issued or circulated, any estimate, illustration, circular, or statement:
* * * * * *
(C) Making any misleading representation or any misrepresentation as to the financial condition of any insurer, or as to the legal reserve system upon which any life insurer operates;
* * * * * *
(3) Making, publishing, disseminating, or circulating, directly or indirectly, or aiding, abetting or encouraging the making, publishing, disseminating or circulating of any oral or written statement or any pamphlet, circular, article or literature which is false, or maliciously critical of or derogatory to the financial condition of an insurer, and which is calculated to injure any person engaged in the business of insurance." I.C. 27-4-1-4.
The statute is a regulatory enactment designed to eliminate unfair competition acts and practices. The statute does not purport to change, or in any way affect, the nature of the common law relief afforded a party who has been libeled, whether by an act which constitutes unfair competition or otherwise. Because the statute is clear and unambiguous on its face, no interpretation is necessary. Daugherty v. State (1984) 1st Dist.Ind. App., 466 N.E.2d 46, 53.
Whether Hoosier's letter could be fairly construed as an "unfair method of competition" is not a question before us. The General Assembly has vested the Commissioner of Insurance with adequate and sufficient authority to investigate and remedy unfair or deceptive practices. See e.g. I.C. 27-4-1-5.
The question before us is whether the statute has effectively eliminated the affirmative defense of truth to an action for defamation. It does not do so.
Gibraltar also argues that the defense of truth has been impliedly eliminated by virtue of the provisions of I.C. 27-9-2-3 *554 and I.C. XX-X-X-XX (Burns Code Ed. Supp. 1985). Indiana Code 27-9-2-3 guards the confidentiality of all documents, files and papers which concern or are part of the record of delinquency proceedings.[9] Indiana Code 27-1-3-11 prohibits the disclosure of information concerning the affairs of an insurance company under examination by the Department of Insurance. These sections, Gibraltar alleges, emphasize the legislature's intent to preserve the confidentiality of the financial concerns of insurers, without regard to the nature of the communication itself.
Gibraltar's argument is ingenious but unavailing. Neither I.C. XX-X-X-XX nor I.C. 27-9-2-3 provides support for Gibraltar's libel action. Both sections are applicable only in instances when an insurer is subjected to an "examination" or delinquency proceeding.
Indiana Code 27-1-3-9 requires the Department of Insurance to conduct an examination of every domestic insurance company at least once every three years. It is the information so obtained that I.C. XX-X-X-XX is designed to protect. In fact, once this information is embodied in the examiner's report, and the Department's recommendations, the prohibition against disclosure is no longer applicable. See I.C. XX-X-X-XX(a).
Neither provision bears any relation to a private cause of action between insurers. We fail to see how a statement concerning an insurer's lack of statutory compliance is transformed, by these provisions, into libel per se.[10] We therefore conclude that the trial court properly granted summary judgment to Hoosier and Loudermilk.
Gibraltar's other allegation of error concerns the trial judge's qualifications to preside over the libel suit. Gibraltar contends for the first time on appeal that the trial judge had been legal advisor to the Governor of Indiana at the time I.C. XX-X-X-XX was enacted. As legal advisor, Gibraltar asserts, he was responsible for the expression of an opinion on the constitutionality of I.C. XX-X-X-XX and, therefore, must have been predisposed to find that I.C. XX-X-X-XX was constitutional.
Gibraltar has failed to preserve this issue for review. Gibraltar's allegations are unsupported by any references to the record, or citations of authority. See Appellate Rule 8.3(7). Gibraltar also does not state when the trial judge was advisor to the Governor or whether he in fact expressed an opinion on the constitutionality of I.C. XX-X-X-XX. It is to be noted, however, that the Attorney General of Indiana is the Governor's lawyer and is required to advise concerning the constitutionality of any existing or proposed legislation. I.C. 4-6-2-5 (Burns Code Ed.Repl. 1982).
Gibraltar has thus failed to show that the trial judge was biased or prejudiced. Bentley v. State (1981) 275 Ind. 67, 69, 414 N.E.2d 573, 575, citing Pulliam v. State (1976) 264 Ind. 381, 391, 345 N.E.2d 229, 238. In addition, Gibraltar did not assert error in this respect until after it received an adverse judgment at the trial court level and has waived any error which may have occurred. See Nelson v. State (1982) 4th Dist.Ind. App., 436 N.E.2d 1153; Singleton v. State (1977) 3d Dist., 173 Ind. App. 606, 364 N.E.2d 1041. In any event, the argument appears contrived and artificial. It does no credit to counsel.
The summary judgment in favor of Hoosier and Loudermilk and against Gibraltar is affirmed.
MILLER (participating in place of BUCHANAN, C.J.), and SHIELDS, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  The "judgment" consists of a record entry to the effect that "Motion of defendants' [sic] for summary judgment is sustained. Judgment for defendants against plaintiff." Record at 229. For future reference, we note that although Ind. Rules of Procedure, Trial Rule 56 does not require that the trial court specifically state the legal basis underlying the summary judgment, "it would be an aid to appellate review if such procedure were followed[.]" Shallenberger v. Scoggins-Tomlinson, Inc., supra at 703. Further, "if review is frustrated by the lack of a statement of reasons because the legal basis for summary judgment is not apparent from the record, we may remand to the trial court for such a statement." Id., citing Ahnert v. Wildman (1978) 2d Dist., 176 Ind. App. 630, 376 N.E.2d 1182.
[2]  Gibraltar also asserts that it was entitled to judgment as a matter of law upon its Motion for Summary Judgment. Gibraltar's argument in this regard is merely an incorporation by reference of its argument against the judgment entered for Hoosier and Loudermilk. A party's entitlement to summary judgment is not determined by the lack of success of the adverse party in seeking the same relief. The existence of a genuine issue as to a material fact is the controlling factor. Trial Rule 56(C). Accordingly, the ruling upon Gibraltar's Motion for Summary Judgment is not before us.
[3]  Indiana Life and Health Insurance Guaranty Association, created under I.C. 27-8-8-3 (Burns Code Ed.Supp. 1985).
[4]  Steckler represents Evans, Keith Bruner, and Argus Marketing in an unresolved breach of contract action against Hoosier and Loudermilk.
[5]  I.C. 27-8-8-2 defines "impaired" and "insolvent" as follows:
"`Impaired insurer' means a member insurer deemed by the commissioner to be potentially unable to fulfill its contractual obligations. `Insolvent insurer' means a member insurer who becomes insolvent and is placed under a final order of liquidation, rehabilitation or conservation by a court."
[6]  Because we conclude that the contents of Hoosier's letter were true and not otherwise prohibited, we do not reach the question of whether the communication was privileged. See generally Indianapolis Horse Patrol, Inc. v. Ward (1966) 247 Ind. 519, 217 N.E.2d 626; Shallenberger v. Scoggins-Tomlinson, Inc., supra, 439 N.E.2d 699; Elliott v. Roach (1980) 4th Dist.Ind. App., 409 N.E.2d 661, on the question of privilege as an affirmative defense.
[7]  Malum prohibitum is commonly defined as "an act which is not inherently immoral, but becomes so because its commission is expressly forbidden by positive law." BLACK'S LAW DICTIONARY 865 (5th ed. 1979).
[8]  Indiana Code 27-5 authorizes and deals with creation of an operation of farmers' mutual insurance companies. Gibraltar does not fall within its provisions.
[9]  Delinquency proceedings may be brought pursuant to I.C. 27-9-2-1 whenever the Commissioner of Insurance believes the condition of the insurer requires intervention to protect the insurer's policyholders, creditors or the public. See I.C. 27-9-3-1 and I.C. 27-9-3-6.
[10]  See Norton v. Cooley (1970) 146 Ind. App. 514, 257 N.E.2d 323, for a concise description of the requirements necessary to establish libel per se.

=== CASE 9741001 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:47:20.318143+00 ===

Nolan, J.
The defendant was convicted in the Framingham Division of the District Court of operating a motor vehicle on a public way while under the influence of intoxicating liquor, in violation of G. L. c. 90, § 24 (1) (a) (1) (1984 ed.). He was sentenced to six months in a house of correction, two years suspended, and fourteen days in an alcohol treatment program. He was also fined. The defendant exercised his right to a “de nova” jury trial which ended in a mistrial. Prior to the second jury trial, the defendant filed a motion to exclude the results of a breathalyzer test based upon the fact that the test was administered between two and one-half and four hours after the defendant’s operation of the vehicle. He also filed a motion to dismiss the complaint, contending that the police failed to advise him in a timely fashion of his right to have an independent physical examination by a physician of his choice pursuant to G. L. c. 263, § 5A (1984 ed.). Both motions were denied. The jury returned a guilty verdict. The judge sentenced the defendant to six months, two months to be served, and the balance suspended for two years under the condition that the *435defendant spend fourteen days in an alcohol treatment program. In addition, the judge directed the defendant to surrender his license and reimposed the fine.
The defendant asserts several grounds for reversal. His principal allegation is that the trial judge erred in failing to instruct the jury according to our recently decided case of Commonwealth v. Connolly, 394 Mass. 169,173 (1985), or in language similar to the instructions we recommended in Connolly. Id. The defendant contends that Connolly should be applied retrospectively.
We conclude that a reversal is warranted because of the judge’s failure to instruct the jury properly on the element of operating under the influence of intoxicating liquor, according to G. L. c. 90, § 24 (1984 ed.). We reach our conclusion for reasons other than those offered by the defendant. Because we reverse the conviction and remand for a new trial, we shall address only those issues that may recur at the new trial. We summarize the testimony.
On December 22, 1983, the defendant attended a Boston Bruins hockey game with four other persons. On the way to the game, the defendant stopped at a package store and one friend bought two six-packs of beer. The defendant had nothing to drink until he arrived at the Boston Garden. There he consumed one beer in the parking lot at or around 7 p.m. The defendant drank two more beers during the game at approximately 8:15 and 9:30 p.m. He and the others left the game at 10:30 p.m. and went to a bar where they remained until “close to” midnight playing pool. The defendant had another beer, and then had nothing further to drink after leaving the bar. The defendant drove one friend home. He experienced engine trouble and the group stayed at this friend’s house for about one hour. The defendant then drove two other persons home at about 1:30 a.m.
Sergeant Robert Horrigan of the Holliston police department was dispatched to an accident scene at approximately 4:30 a.m. on Prospect Street in Holliston.1 He observed an au*436tomobile against a telephone pole and the defendant standing outside the vehicle near the passenger door. A passenger inside was semi-conscious and bleeding from the neck. An ambulance soon arrived and transported the passenger to the hospital. The officer then asked for the defendant’s license and registration. He noticed that the defendant’s eyes were glassy and bloodshot and that his breath smelled of intoxicating liquor. He asked the defendant to perform a field sobriety test, which he failed twice. The officer noticed cuts on the defendant’s face, and he decided to take the defendant to the hospital. On the way to the hospital, they stopped at the police station for about five minutes because the sergeant wanted to “make sure the town was covered since there were only two police officers at the time” on duty.
At the hospital, the defendant was treated by a physician for approximately twenty minutes. Shortly thereafter, Sergeant Horrigan entered the treatment room and gave Miranda warnings to the defendant.2 As the defendant and the officer were leaving to return to the police station, the defendant complained of an injury to his hand. After an x-ray was taken, the defendant was informed that his hand was not injured. Upon arrival at the police station at or about 6:45 a.m., the defendant was formally booked for the offense of driving while under the influence of intoxicating liquor. He was given a breathalyzer test at 7:05 a.m. , which yielded a reading of. 15 per cent blood alcohol content. At this time, the defendant was informed of his right under G. L. c. 263, § 5A (1984 ed.), to have an independent physical examination by a physician of his choice.
1. Jury instructions on the element of operating under the influence. In Commonwealth v. Connolly, 394 Mass. 169, 173 (1985), we interpreted the phrase “while under the influence” as used in G. L. c. 90, § 24 (1) (a). In that case, we concluded that “in a prosecution for operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor, the Commonwealth must *437prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant’s consumption of alcohol diminished the defendant’s ability to operate a motor vehicle safely. The Commonwealth need not prove that the defendant actually drove in an unsafe or erratic manner, but it must prove a diminished capacity to operate safely” (emphasis in original). Id. Connolly did not announce any new legal principles but merely clarified the meaning of “operating under the influence” under G. L. c. 90, § 24. Under these circumstances, it is not necessary to engage in an analysis of the retroactivity of Connolly. See Commonwealth v. Breese, 389 Mass. 540, 541-542 (1983). Cf. Solem v. Stumes, 465 U.S. 638 (1984) (analysis of retroactivity necessary where Court announces a new constitutional principle); Commonwealth v. Paszko, 391 Mass. 164, 180 (1984) (retroactivity analysis triggered by question whether to apply “humane practice” rule to admissions as well as to confessions); Commonwealth v. Breese, supra at 541 (discussion of retroactivity of rule that judge must instruct jury that they are permitted to consider defendant’s intoxication on element of extreme atrocity or cruelty for first degree murder cases); Commonwealth v. Day, 387 Mass. 915, 921 n.10 (1983) (rule that reasonable doubt standard applies to knowing and voluntary Miranda waivers applied prospectively only).
In the present case, the judge’s charge on the element of “operating under the influence” was erroneous. In particular, he stated, “Being under the influence means that the Defendant at the time was influenced in some perceptible, some noticeable, degree by the intoxicating liquor that he had taken, and that’s about all it does mean. It doesn’t mean that he could not drive his car and drive it safely.” The judge went on to state that “[sjuch a violation does not require proof that liquor adversely influenced or affected the operation of the vehicle. If you find that the Defendant operated the vehicle at a time when he was perceptibly affected by intoxicating liquor, regardless of the effects of such liquor on his operation, then you should find him guilty of the offenses charged in the complaint.” As we held in Connolly, this type of charge fails to convey the true meaning of “operating under the influence” as *438compelled by G. L. c. 90, § 24. The judge should have instructed the jury to inquire whether the defendant’s consumption of alcohol diminished his capacity to operate a motor vehicle safely. We rule that it was reversible error not to have done so.
2. Evidence of the breathalyzer test results. The defendant testified that he had not consumed any alcohol after approximately 11:15 p.m. The breathalyzer test was administered at 7:05 a.m. The defendant contends that due to this time lapse the test did not render an accurate account of his blood alcohol content at the time he allegedly was operating the vehicle. Thus, the jury were left to surmise what the actual blood alcohol content was at that time.
Generally, a delay in time works to the defendant’s advantage.3 See State v. Gallant, 108 N.H. 72, 74 (1967). Moreover, delays between an accident or time of arrest and the testing for blood alcohol content generally goes to the weight of the evidence and not to its admissibility. Commonwealth v. Arizini, 277 Pa. Super. 27 (1980). Here, the time delay was reasonable and warranted in the circumstances. The police were dispatched to the accident scene at approximately 4:30 a.m.4 The officer noticed cuts on the defendant’s face and transported him to *439the hospital for treatment. The officer stopped at the police station along the way for five to ten minutes to make sure that his responsibilities were covered. After a doctor initially treated the lacerations on the defendant’s face, the defendant then complained that his hand was injured. A second examination and X-ray was required which took more time. The officer then brought the defendant back to the station at approximately 6:30 a.m. After the initial booking procedures, the defendant was given a breathalyzer test at 7:05 a.m. We think that the delay was not unreasonable. Further, if the time lapse had any effect on the test results, it most likely would have worked in the defendant’s favor.
3. Jury instructions on the delay of time between the time of event and the breathalyzer test. The judge did not commit error in denying the defendant’s request for an instruction that the time delay may be considered with respect to its effect on the chemical test results.5 The defendant offered no scientific evidence to support his contention. The defendant is therefore not entitled to an instruction without some evidence that the time delay could have adversely effected the breathalyzer test results. See Commonwealth v. Neal, 392 Mass. 1 (1984). We held in Neal, supra at 20 n.20, that the defendant does not have the burden of proving that the test results are inadmissible. Further, where he presents evidence to rebut the commonly accepted opinion that the scientific instrument is reliable, then the burden is on the Commonwealth to establish its admissibility. Moreover, defense counsel was allowed to cross-examine the officer who administered the test6 on the issue of the delay of time, and he argued the point extensively to the jury. *440Finally, the judge did include in his charge an instruction with respect to the scientific accuracy of the breathalyzer machine7 that adequately met any objections raised by the defendant.
4. The defendant’s motion to dismiss for failure to comply with G. L. c. 263, § 5A. The defendant argues that the police should have advised him of his right “to be examined immediately by a physician selected by him” at the hospital pursuant to G. L. c. 263, § 5A.8 Section 5A is not a model of clarity in describing a person’s rights. After providing that a person who is held “in custody at a police station or other place of detention” and who is charged with operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor“ has the right, ”at his request and at his expense" to be examined by a physician of his choice, it then requires the police officer in charge of such station or place of detention or his designee to inform the arrested person of this right “immediately upon being booked’ (emphasis added). Finally, § 5A provides that a copy of that section shall be given the arrested person (unless a copy is prominently displayed in the police station or other place of detention) “immediately upon being booked’ (emphasis *441added). The defendant concedes that he was informed of his rights under § 5A upon being booked. It may be argued that to this defendant the hospital was a “place of detention” because the police officer admittedly considered him under arrest at the time of the hospital visit. However, he had not been booked at this time and § 5A requires the police to inform him of his right to be examined at the time of booking. Parsing the statute in this way renders the conduct of the police in this case conformable to the statute. Cf. Commonwealth v. Andrade, 389 Mass. 874, 882 (1983).9
5. Testimony of assistant district attorney. The defendant testified in his first jury trial.10 Consequently, any admissions that he made in the first trial were admissible in the second trial. An assistant district attorney who was present at the first trial heard the defendant admit to driving into the pole. It was not error to allow this witness to testify to such matters. It was open to the defendant to attack the credibility of the assistant district attorney on the issue of bias. The record reflects that he did so. We also reject the defendant’s contention that it was error to have allowed the defendant’s earlier testimony prior to the defendant’s taking the stand. Because of the inherent reliability of admissions, they are generally considered to fall outside the strictures of the hearsay rule. See generally P.J. Liacos, Massachusetts Evidence 276 (5th ed. 1981). The evidence was relevant to the Commonwealth’s case on the element of operation. It was, therefore, admissible.
6. Motion for required finding of not guilty. We affirm the denial of the motion for a required finding of not guilty. “The standard which we apply in reviewing the propriety of the denial of a motion for a required finding of not guilty is ‘whether the evidence, read in a light most favorable to the Commonwealth, was sufficient to satisfy a rational trier of fact of each element of the crime beyond a reasonable doubt.’ ” Common*442wealth v. Amado, 387 Mass. 179, 186 (1982), quoting Commonwealth v. Basch, 386 Mass. 620, 622 (1982).
We consider the evidence at the close of the Commonwealth’s case and at the close of all the evidence to determine whether the motion should have been granted. See Commonwealth v. Sheline, 391 Mass. 279, 283 (1984). There was evidence that a police officer was dispatched to an accident scene. “[WJhile not strongly probative, this fact [an accident] is corroborative of the other evidence of driving while intoxicated; it is not as if the police simply stopped [defendant] while he was driving along safely and came to their conclusion based on an odor of alcohol.” Commonwealth v. Funk, 254 Pa. Super. 233, 238 (1978). Further, the officer noticed11 that the defendant had glassy and bloodshot eyes, and that his breath smelled of alcohol. Finally, the defendant failed the field sobriety tests, and the breathalyzer test resulted in a score of blood alcohol content of. 15 per cent. See Commonwealth v. Moreira, 385 Mass. 792, 795 (1982) (“a verdict of not guilty cannot be directed against the Commonwealth if the only evidence introduced is a positive breathalyzer test”). Evidence of the element of “operation” was introduced by the prosecutor and the parties stipulated that the road was a public way. This evidence combined was sufficient to warrant a denial of the motion for a required finding of not guilty. Moreover, the defendant’s testimony in his case-in-chief did not cause the Commonwealth’s case “to deteriorate” in any way. See Commonwealth v. Sheline, supra at 283.
We reverse the judgment, set aside the verdict, and remand the case to the jury-of-six-session for a new trial, consistent with this opinion.
So ordered.
The defendant testified that the road was icy that morning. The sergeant stated that the road had been recently sanded.
Sergeant Horrigan testified that he had first formed an opinion that the defendant was under the influence of alcohol at this time. The defendant asked the officer if he were under arrest and the officer answered in the affirmative. The time was approximately 5:30 a.m.
In recent years there has been some discussion that a blood alcohol level may increase for a period of time after the last point of ingestion of alcohol due to the length of time it may take the alcohol to enter the bloodstream. See Fitzgerald & Hume, The Single Chemical Test for Intoxication: A Challenge to Admissibility, 66 Mass. L. Rev. 23 (1981). Murphy, Constitutional Bases for a Right of Access to Counsel at the Pre-trial Stages of Drunk Driving Prosecutions: A Study in Conflicting Rights, 4 N. Ill. U. L. Rev. 203, 244 n. 143 (1984). However, the record reflects that the defendant failed to offer at trial or at the hearing on the motion to suppress any scientific evidence to substantiate his position. Cf. Commonwealth v. Neal, 392 Mass. 1, 14-21 (1984). The defendant asks us to determine that a test administered as long as seven hours after the last drink was ingested would produce a higher reading for blood alcohol content than if the test had been given two and one-half to four hours earlier. In the absence of any scientific evidence to substantiate this contention we decline to consider it.
The defendant testified that the accident occurred around 3:15 a.m. The record reflects that the defendant could not account for all of his time spent between 2 a.m. and 4:30 a.m.
The defendant submitted the following request to the judge. “If you entertain a reasonable doubt as to the accuracy of the chemical test results, either because it was administered four hours after the accident or was not properly or competently administered, or because it was not scientifically accurate; or because you believe the inference suggested by the test results is outweighed by other competent evidence, then you should disregard the test and find the defendant innocent or guilty based on other evidence presented in this case,” citing Commonwealth v. Moreira, 385 Mass. 792 (1982).
We note that the defendant does not challenge the actual testing methods used by the officer who administered the breathalyzer test. Nor does the *440defendant claim that he failed to give his consent to the test or that his constitutional rights were violated while he was in custody. See generally Murphy, supra at 203, 269.
“If you are convinced beyond a reasonable doubt that the test administered to the Defendant is scientifically accurate and was properly and competently administered, then you may consider the test result in determining the Defendant’s guilt or innocence. If you believe the test is inaccurate, either because it is scientifically invalid and was not properly or competently administered, then you should disregard the test and find the Defendant innocent or guilty based on the other evidence presented in this case.”
General Laws c. 263, § 5A (1984 ed.), states: “A person held in custody at a police station or other place of detention, charged with operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor, shall have the right, at his request and at his expense, to be examined immediately by a physician selected by him. The police official in charge of such station or place of detention, or his designee, shall inform him of such right immediately upon being booked, and shall afford him a reasonable opportunity to exercise it. Such person shall, immediately upon being booked, be given a copy of this section unless such a copy is posted in the police station or other place of detention in a conspicuous place to which such person has access.”
In all, it would have been better practice to inform the defendant of this right at the hospital, but no prejudice resulted to the defendant.
The first jury trial ended in a mistrial because the jury failed to reach a unanimous verdict.
The defendant emphasizes the fact that Sergeant Horrigan had not formed an opinion as to the defendant’s sobriety until he gave the defendant Miranda warnings at the hospital, and argues therefore that the sergeant entertained a reasonable doubt with respect to the defendant’s condition at the time of operation. An arrest need not be based on an officer’s convictions beyond a reasonable doubt. The standard is probable cause to believe a person has operated a motor vehicle while under the influence. G. L. c. 90, § 21 (1984 ed.). We think it was met here.

=== CASE 9741002 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:47:20.324496+00 ===

*443Liacos, J.
(concurring). I agree with the court’s conclusion that the conviction must be reversed, the verdict set aside, and the case remanded for a new trial due to the failure of the trial judge properly to instruct the jury. I write this separate opinion to comment on the defendant’s claim that his statutory rights under G.L. c. 263, § 5A, (1984 ed.), were violated. I cannot agree with the court’s analysis, nor with its conclusion that there was no violation of the defendant’s rights under that statute. Consequently, I cannot join in section 4 of the court’s opinion.
The court parses the statute so as to render the conduct of the police conformable to the statute. I believe parsing the statute in this fashion subverts the statutory purpose and renders meaningless the right granted by the Legislature. The defendant has an absolute right to be examined by a physician. Commonwealth v. Neal, 392 Mass. 1, 8 n.7 (1984). The obvious reason for examination by a physician of the defendant’s choice is to provide an opportunity for the defendant to obtain his own evidence on the question of his intoxication.1 The court’s decision in Commonwealth v. Andrade, 389 Mass. 874, 881 (1983), recognized that G.L. c. 263, § 5A, “creates a right to obtain evidence that is available for only a short period of time and also seeks to protect this right by requiring that the defendant be informed of its existence.” It is the transient nature of the evidence that makes necessary the requirement that the defendant’s right is “to be examined immediately” (emphasis added). G.L. c. 263, § 5A. The Legislature could not have intended the absurd result that the defendant be informed of his right after its exercise would be futile.2
*444The court places great reliance on the language of the statute providing for notice of his rights to the defendant when he is “booked.” To resolve the ambiguity between the defendant’s right to be examined by his own physician “immediately” and the obligation of the police official to inform him of the right “immediately upon being booked,” the court simply uncouples the two sentences. An understanding of the legislative intent requires an appreciation of the objective of the Legislature. Duggan v. Bay State St. Ry., 230 Mass. 370, 374 (1918).3 As Commonwealth v. Andrade, supra, makes clear, time is crucial in gathering evidence of intoxication.4 Surely, delays, intentional or not, in informing arrested suspects of their statutory rights to have their own physicians gather transient evidence defeat the opportunity of a defendant to gather evidence which might rebut the evidence of the police.
The circumstances involved in the arrest and custody of a person charged with driving under the influence of intoxicating liquor should be considered.in applying the statute. I recognize that the court has stated that the police officers need not “assist” a suspect in obtaining an examination. See Commonwealth v. Alano, 388 Mass. 871, 879 (1983). Once a suspect has been detained, however, the police officers must afford him a reasonable opportunity to exercise his right. The circumstances of each arrest will determine what is reasonable. See Alano, supra at 879-880 (“reasonable opportunity” varies according to circumstances, suggesting that unusual factors may require different actions by police); Commonwealth v. Atencio, 12 Mass. *445App. Ct. 747, 750 (1981) (court considered entire circumstances to determine reasonableness of police conduct).
Application of a standard of “reasonableness” would eliminate cases with the ludicrous result we find here. This defendant was held in custody by a police officer for nearly two hours in the hospital, but was not informed of his right to have an examination by a physician of his choice until he had been removed to the police station. Clearly, a hospital is the kind of place where the defendant’s right to have such an examination could be exercised effectively. The police officer, by not there advising the defendant of his right under § 5A, made a mockery of the expressed legislative intent. In this circumstance, both the “reasonable opportunity” and the legislatively-mandated timely notification were defeated. The court should not close its eyes to the realities of this situation. In my view, the right of the defendant to an immediate medical examination effectively was defeated.
The defendant’s right under G.L. c. 263, § 5A, was violated. The court has not yet determined the appropriate remedy for such a violation. See Andrade, supra at 876-877 & 881 n.2 (dismissal of complaint appropriate absent overwhelming evidence of guilt; question whether suppression of prosecution breathalyzer evidence would be appropriate remedy not decided). Dismissal of the complaint is the appropriate remedy absent overwhelming evidence of guilt. The court has determined on other grounds that this case must be remanded for a new trial. In my view, the other evidence of guilt was sufficiently strong so as not to require dismissal of the complaint. In my view, however, the trial judge should consider a motion to suppress the medical evidence obtained by the police officers, including the breathalyzer evidence, as Commonwealth v. Andrade, supra at 881-882, suggests.
The defendant does not raise due process objections to his inability to challenge the Commonwealth’s evidence. Cf. Commonwealth v. Neal, supra at 8 (due process requirement of an opportunity to challenge the accuracy of breathalyzer result discharged by statutory right to obtain independent test).
The court’s treatment of the statute also violates the axiom of statutory interpretation that “a statute must be read as a whole and consistently with the legislative intent.” Commonwealth v. Adams, 389 Mass. 265, 273 (1983).
“It is a principle of general scope that a statute must be interpreted according to the intent of the makers, to be acertained from its several parts and all its words construed by the ordinary and approved usage of the language, unless they have acquired a peculiar meaning in the law, considered in connection with the cause of its enactment, the subject matter to which it applies, the pre-existing state of the common and statutory law, the mischief or imperfection to be remedied, and the main object to be accomplished, to the end that it be given an effect in harmony with common sense and sound reason.” Id.
See 1960 Ann. Survey Mass. Law § 11.5, at 115-117, for a discussion of the inherent problems involved in linking the obligation of providing notice of the defendant’s right to the time of his booking.

=== CASE 9741003 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:47:21.51669+00 ===

STATON, Presiding Judge.
United Farm Bureau Mutual Insurance Company (Farm Bureau) brings this interlocutory appeal from the denial of Farm Bureau's motion for summary judgment in an action for negligence and abuse of process filed by Thomas J. Groen. The single issue1 with which we are faced on review is whether the trial court erred in holding that Farm Bureau is liable to Groen for the torts of Farm Bureau's attorney which resulted in an improper default judgment being rendered against Groen.
We affirm.
Farm Bureau retained attorney Frank J. Pekofski to pursue subrogation claims which Farm Bureau referred to Pekofski from time to time. Those cases were handled by Pekofski on a contingent fee basis. Pursuant to this arrangement Pekofski filed suit in the name of Farm Bureau's insured, James Elkins, against Thomas Groen to collect on a claim arising from an automobile accident. A default judgment was rendered in that suit though Groen was <apparently never served. Pekofski forwarded a copy of the default judgment to the Bureau of Motor Vehicles and Groen's driver's license was suspended. Later, Groen was arrested for driving while suspended.
Groen challenged the default judgment and it was set aside and declared void due to lack of jurisdiction over Groen. The criminal charges were subsequently dismissed as well.
Groen filed suit against Elkins and Pe-kofski and by amended complaint added Farm Bureau in a claim for damages for gross negligence and abuse of process. Farm Bureau moved for summary judgment on the ground that it could not be vicariously liable for the actions of Pekof-ski who was an independent contractor. The trial court denied Farm Bureau's motion, holding that there was a substantial issue of material fact, and explaining in an accompanying memorandum that Pekofski was an agent of Farm Bureau and any acts or omissions of Pekofski were those of Farm Bureau.
When this Court reviews the denial of a motion for summary judgment we must determine if there exists any genuine issue of material fact and any doubt about the existence of a genuine issue of material fact must be resolved against the moving party. Ogilvie v. Steele (1983), Ind.App., 452 N.E.2d 167, 169. We will affirm if the prevailing party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Integrity Insurance Co. v. Lindsey (1983), Ind.App., 444 N.E.2d 345, 347. In the proceedings at bar the only question is whether the trial court properly applied the law in determining that a client could be liable to a third party *573for the tortious acts of the client's attorney.
The parties rely upon two distinct lines of authority in support of their positions. Farm Bureau cites personal injury cases in which a contractee sought to avoid liability for injuries caused by the negligence of an independent contractor. Representative of this line of authority is Burkett v. Crulo Trucking Co., Inc. (1976), 171 Ind.App. 166, 355 N.E.2d 253, a wrongful death action in which a trucking company was found not liable for a death caused by a truck driver who worked as an independent contractor for the company.
Our First District wrote:
"Where a non-servant agent (independent contractor) has caused harm by his negligent physical activities, the doctrine of respondeat superior is not applicable to make the principal liable to a third person.
* * a a * *
Burkett's case against Crulo was founded on the incorrect premise that a showing of agency alone, without an additional showing of a master-servant relationship, would bring the doctrine of respon-deat superior into play."
355 N.E.2d at 261 and 262.
Groen, on the other hand, depends upon a line of cases which hold that an attorney is the agent of his client with regard to specific litigation and the client will be bound by the acts or omissions of the attorney. See Mid-States Aircroft Engines, Inc. v. Mize Co., Inc. (1984), Ind.App., 467 N.E.2d 1242 (attorney's statement during a dismissal hearing constituted an admission of the client); City of Evansville v. Nelson (1964), 245 Ind. 430, 199 N.E.2d 703 (a client who waived reading of charges waived alleged deficiencies therein and is bound by the acts or non-acts of his attorney and cannot accept the benefits thereof and reject the undesirable acts or non-acts).
Neither line of authority precisely addresses the unique situation in which the client is sought to be held liable to a third person for the actions of his attorney. The parties agree that an attorney is generally considered the agent of his client. Mid-States Aircraft Engines, Inc., supra; Solar Sources, Inc. v. Air Pollution Control Bd. (1980), Ind.App. 409 N.E.2d 1136. There the agreement ends, however, with Farm Bureau insisting that the absence of a master-servant relationship precludes Farm Bureau's liability and Groen claiming that Indiana has rejected the independent contractor distinction in the attorney-client setting.
An attorney representing a client is not a party to the litigation, he acts on behalf of and in the name of the client. The attorney is the agent of the party employing him, and in court stands in his stead. Ferrara v. Genduso (1938), 214 Ind. 99, 14 N.E.2d 580, 581 (citing Sharp v. Moffitt (1884), 94 Ind. 240, 242). The attorney has by virtue of the retainer or employment alone, the general implied authority to do on behalf of the client all acts in or out of court necessary or incidental to the prosecution or management of the suit or defense or the accomplishment of the purpose for which he was retained. 74 CJS Attorney & Client § 191. Indiana courts have held that in the absence of fraud by the attorney the client is bound by the action of his attorney even though the attorney is guilty of gross negligence. State v. Dubois Circuit Court (1968), 250 Ind. 38, 233 N.E.2d 177, 178. The negligence of an attorney is the negligence of his client. International Vacuum, Inc. v. Owens (1982), Ind.App., 439 N.E.2d 188, 190.
A case not cited by Groen addresses an issue similar to the issue involved in this case. In Brutus v. Wright (1975), 168 Ind.App. 366, 324 N.E.2d 165 a taxpayer brought suit against a local school board. On appeal the taxpayer challenged the propriety of an award to the school board for expenses occasioned by delay which necessitated a continuance. The taxpayer contended that any sanctions should be against his attorney who caused the delay, This Court rejected that argument, holding that the act of the attorney is the act of the client and thus, such *574expenses may properly be taxed to a litigant for the acts of his counsel. 324 N.E.2d at 172. We find this situation more closely analogous to the case at bar than the personal injury cases cited by Farm Bureau which hold that general contractors or owners are generally not liable for injuries caused by the negligence of independent contractors hired by the general contractor or owner. See eg., Johns v. New York Blower Co. (1982), Ind.App., 442 N.E.2d 382; Perry v. Northern Ind. Pub. Serv. Co. (1982), Ind.App., 433 N.E.2d 44; Allison v. Huber, Hunt & Nichols, Inc. (1977), 173 Ind.App., 41, 362 N.E.2d 193. Because of the close identity of an attorney with the client he represents, we hold that neither the absence of a master-servant relationship nor the characterization of the attorney as an independent contractor is a bar to liability of the client for the torts of the attorney acting within the scope of his authority. See Hewes v. Wolfe (1985), 74 N.C.App. 610, 330 S.E.2d 16 (where attorney tortiously institutes or contineus civil proceedings or is guilty of oppressive or wrongful conduct during course of proceeding in order to enforce claim of client, client is liable for attorney's wrongful acts); Racoosin v. LeSchack & Grodensky (1980), N.Y.Sup., 103 Misc.2d 629, 426 N.Y.S.2d 707 (utility liable for damages for willful interference with property where judgment against customer for unpaid utility bills was later declared void for lack of jurisdiction over customer); Flight Kitchen, Inc. v. Chicago Seven-Up Bottling Co. (1974), 22 Ill.App.3d 558, 317 N.E.2d 663 (corporate defendant liable for acts of attorney who wrongfully ordered levy against plaintiff's property to enforce judgment rendered on behalf of defendant).
The trial court's denial of Farm Bureau's motion for summary judgment is affirmed.
GARRARD, J., concurs with opinion;
HOFFMAN, J., concurs and concurs in concurring opinion of GARRARD, J.
. In its reply brief Farm Bureau urges us to disregard Groen's Appellee's Brief for being untimely filed. Ind.Rules of Procedure, Appellate Rule 8.1(C) does not mandate such a result, nor does precedential authority. See Brown v. Montgomery (1955), 125 Ind.App. 395, 125 N.E.2d 37. We decline Farm Bureau's invitation.

=== CASE 9741004 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:47:21.521118+00 ===

GARRARD, Judge,
concurring.
I concur in the majority's conclusion in this case but find the "non-servant agent (independent contractor)" analysis set forth in Burkett v. Crulo Trucking Co. (1976), 171 Ind.App. 166, 355 N.E.2d 253, 261 confusing and unhelpful.
Professor Seavey's analysis1 classifies "any one who acts for, or contracts with, the principal other than as a servant [as] an independent contractor."
However, he then makes an additional distinction between independent contractors who are agents and those who are not:
"In other words, there are two kinds of independent contractors-those who are agents and those who are not. Included in the group of independent contractors who are agents are attorneys, auctioneers, brokers, factors and other similar persons who conduct transactions for the principal." Seavey, p. 8.
The question is not so much whether the definition is right or wrong. Is it helpful? In the context here, the question is whether the attorney was an agent for purposes of respondeat superior. He was. It seems to me that whether he might be deemed a species of independent contractor in some broader form of analysis is superfluous.
. Seavey, Law of Agency (1964), Section 6, relied upon in Burkett.

=== CASE 2225829 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:56.152792+00 ===

343 Mich. 304 (1955)
72 N.W.2d 250
PEOPLE
v.
FINKS.
Docket No. 63, Calendar No. 46,478.
Supreme Court of Michigan.
Decided October 3, 1955.
Rehearing denied December 1, 1955.
Thomas M. Kavanagh, Attorney General, Edmund E. Shepherd, Solicitor General, Gerald K. O'Brien, Prosecuting Attorney, Samuel Brezner and Angelo A. Pentolino, Assistant Prosecuting Attorneys, for the people.
Harry J. Lippman (Benedict Segesta, of counsel), for defendant.
KELLY, J.
A complaint was issued out of the recorder's court of the city of Detroit charging the defendant, Arthur W. Finks, with being the father of a child born out of wedlock to complaining witness Louise Gardner, on September 8, 1949. A jury returned a verdict of guilty.
For the purpose of this opinion appellant's numerous reasons for reversal will be consolidated into the following 5 questions.
Question 1: Did the court err in overruling defendant's motion to strike all questions and answers introduced into the record by the people as to the child Arita?
Louise Gardner gave birth to Arita in July, 1947, over 2 years before the birth of the child whose paternity is at issue in this case. At that time an action similar to the one now before this Court was instituted by Louise Gardner against defendant. On cross-examination defendant testified that when he was brought before the court he first denied he was *307 the father of Arita, but later admitted it, because he didn't want any trouble. On direct examination defendant admitted he was contributing to the support of Arita.
The court allowed the introduction of the court file in the case involving Arita, which disclosed an order for defendant's probation because of his failure to pay the $8 per week for Arita as ordered by the court. We do not believe this constituted reversible error, particularly in view of the following instruction of the court:
"I have been requested to charge you, members of the jury, and I do so charge you, that all reference to the child, Arita, as made in this case, either as received of record over objections of counsel for the defendant, in the form of verbal testimony, or in the form of documentary evidence, may be taken by you merely as to the question of the acquaintanceship and the friendship, or other term you may see fit to apply, as to the relation of these parties, but the mere fact that there was a former lawsuit wherein in the defendant in this case was adjudged to be the parent of another child born to the plaintiff, complaining witness, in this case does not, and must not, be taken by you as evidence, or even discussed by you, of his guilt in this particular case. In other words, every case stands on its own merits and on the proof that has been presented. The testimony that has been received with respect to the child Arita was brought in mainly on the ground of credibility of witnesses."
Question 2: Did the court err in permitting testimony as to defendant's arrests and convictions?
The criminal record was not offered in evidence until defendant had failed on cross-examination to remember the nature, dates, places and number of convictions. The record the court allowed to be introduced disclosed convictions for gambling, engaging in an illegal occupation, disorderly person, *308 loitering in a gambling house, and possession of mutuel betting slips.
The right to show these convictions for the purpose of determining credibility is established by CL 1948, § 617.63 (Stat Ann § 27.912).[*]
In determining the weight to be given the defendant's testimony the jury had a right to know what manner of man he had been in the past. See VanGoosen v. Barlum, 214 Mich 595; People v. Cummins, 47 Mich 334.
In Lunde v. Detroit United Railway, 177 Mich 374, 378, this Court held:
"The extent of cross-examination for the purpose of showing the true character of the witness, so as to enable the jury to properly judge the weight to give the testimony, should be and is left to the discretion of the trial judge, and will not be reviewed unless this discretion is clearly abused."
There was no effort made to enlarge upon the details of the convictions and the record was offered with credibility of the witness as the sole issue. This was permissible because of the defendant's evasive and forgetful memory.
Question 3: Did the court commit error in allowing testimony in regard to defendant's promises to marry Louise Gardner?
It was proper to allow this proof to show the relationship between the parties. Defendant denied ever discussing marriage, and the question was one that was properly submitted to the jury.
Question 4: Did the court err in instructing the jury?
The court did not err in instructing the jury, and no purpose would be served here in setting forth the numerous reasons complained of by the appellant.
*309 One reason advanced, however, is of first impression in this State and will be considered in this opinion. The question involves the court's right in its charge to the jury to refer to the State's interest in a bastardy case because of the fact that the child "born out of lawful wedlock * * * is likely to become a public charge."
Defendant requested the court to charge as a matter of law, as follows:
"I charge you as a matter of law that you are in no manner here concerned with whether or not this child, Penny, will be the public charge or subject to welfare assistance in the event you do not find this defendant, Arthur Finks, to be her blood father. The problems of our society are not here involved in this case, and it would of course be manifestly wrong to find this defendant guilty in this case solely and alone because of any thought or effort on the part of any of you to avoid public responsibility that may attach in the event of your verdict here being not guilty."
The request was denied.
Appellant calls this Court's attention to the fact that in 3 different instances the trial court in its charge referred to the likelihood of the child becoming a public charge:
"Because you realize, first of all, the people must establish to your satisfaction by a preponderance of the evidence that the complaining witness and the defendant in this case did have intercourse on the date set forth in the complaint and as a result thereof a child was born, and it was born to her in the county of Wayne, and that child is living and likely to become a public charge. * * *
"It is for you to determine whether at the time and place in question, as set forth by the proofs in this case  and that is the only thing you have to go by  this defendant did have intercourse with the *310 complaining witness at the time and place alleged and as a result of such intercourse she became pregnant and gave birth to a child, which under the law is a child designated as born out of lawful wedlock and likely to become a public charge. That is the sole question of fact for your consideration and determination. * * *
"All we are concerned with is just to determine that question as a question of fact and whether or not that child so born under the circumstances is likely to become a public charge."
In Cunningham v. State, ex rel. Zartman, 65 Ind 377, and in State, ex rel. Freeman, v. Morris, 156 Ohio St 333 (102 NE2d 450), the Indiana and Ohio supreme courts condemned the practice of a trial court instructing the jury in reference to the likelihood of a child in a bastardy case becoming a public charge and the possibility of the State being required to care for said child. In Menn v. State, 132 Wis 61 (112 NW 38), the court criticized a charge where the jury were told that the interest of the State and county to be relieved from expense by reason of the illegitimate child was at stake, and, therefore, the case was equally important to both sides.
The Oklahoma supreme court, in Lawhead v. State, 99 Okla 197 (226 P 376), passed upon an instruction of the lower court which informed the jury that the purpose in proceedings in bastardy cases was to indemnify the public against the burden of supporting the child, with the following statement (pp 199, 200):
"The purpose of the proceeding is a true statement, under the law we cannot see where the defendant's rights are prejudiced thereby as we cannot believe a juror would be disposed to find against an innocent man to save the taxpayers from supporting the outcast child."
*311 In State, ex rel. Feagins, v. Conn, 160 Kan 370, 374 (162 P2d 76); the Kansas supreme court approved the following instruction of the lower court:
"`The ultimate purpose of a bastardy proceeding, such as this, is to establish the paternity of the bastard in question, and to require the father of such child to contribute to its support and maintenance so that the child will not be wholly dependent upon the mother for support, or upon public or private charity for its maintenance and education.'"
In People v. Hamilton, 95 Mich 210, the question arose as to whether the pendency of bastardy proceedings in the circuit court was a bar to a second complaint and examination for the same offense. The following quotation from that opinion deals with the nature and purpose of bastardy cases:
"The remedy in bastardy cases is purely statutory. It has for its object the protection of the public from the support of bastards by requiring the putative father to contribute, and to furnish indemnity to the authorities and assistance to the mother."
The trial court in the present case correctly called to the jury's attention the unusual features of a bastardy proceeding by stating:
"This litigation has to do with the birth of children born out of lawful wedlock. As I say, it is a matter pertaining to the paternity of the child. The sole question involved in this litigation and in this class of lawsuit is the parentage of the child. It is neither a civil case nor is it a criminal case; it is what is termed in law as a quasi criminal case  possibly, you might say just in between those 2 great classifications of our law, civil and criminal."
This case was presented to the jury entitled "People of the State of Michigan v. Arthur W. Finks," and a social worker for the department of public welfare testified that she signed and sent to *312 the prosecutor's office the form on which the complaint charging defendant with being the father of the child was then issued. No error is or could be assigned because this testimony was offered to the jury.
It is difficult to understand how a case so entitled and brought in the name of the people could be presented to a jury without some reference to the State's interest because of the possibility or likelihood of the child becoming a public charge.
Care and caution must be exerted in instructing a jury in a bastardy proceeding, and we are reaffirming the principle set forth in People v. Martin, 256 Mich 33, 35, 36, wherein this Court said:
"The sole question in a bastardy proceeding is whether the defendant is guilty or not. * * *
"Frequently in a proceeding of this nature the jury may be somewhat swayed by their emotions and sympathies so as to overlook the important testimony bearing upon the main issue of the case."
In the present case we adopt the statement of the Oklahoma supreme court  we cannot believe that the jury found against an innocent man to save the taxpayers from supporting the child, because when we read the entire instruction to the jury we come to but 1 conclusion, namely: That the trial court emphatically instructed the jury that they must not find the defendant to be the father of the child unless they were satisfied by a preponderance of the evidence that he was the father.
Question 5: Was the verdict of the jury contrary to the great weight of evidence?
There was sharp conflict between the testimony offered by the people and the defendant, but the record shows an issue of fact which was properly submitted to the jury. This review is by certiorari, and under the decision of People v. Swanson, 217 *313 Mich 103, this Court may only inquire if there was some evidence to support the verdict. There was sufficient evidence to support the verdict in the instant case.
Judgment affirmed.
CARR, C.J., and BUTZEL, SMITH, SHARPE, BOYLES, REID, and DETHMERS, JJ., concurred.
NOTES
[*]  PA 1915, No 314, ch 17, § 63.

=== CASE 9741005 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:47:25.987348+00 ===

JUSTICE WELCH delivered the opinion of the court: James Sill and Heartland Enterprises, Inc., defendants, appeal from a judgment entered by the circuit court of St. Clair County on a jury verdict of $225,400 in favor of plaintiff Marilyn Parvin. The operative facts arise out of an automobile accident. There is no cross-appeal. We reverse and remand for a new trial. Parvin testified at trial as follows: She was driving to work on the morning of January 31, 1980, in her 1973 Ford Pinto. Because the road was icy in patches, she drove at 10 to 15 miles per hour. As she approached an icy spot, she very gently touched her brake pedal. The Pinto slid right and turned so that it stopped entirely in its proper lane of travel but facing the opposite direction. The vehicle behind her stopped about 2 to 4 feet from Parvin’s car. Between 10 and 15 seconds later, as Parvin was about to turn the Pinto, a third car (Sill’s struck the second, pushing it against Parvin’s and resulting in the injuries complained of. Harry Cook, the driver of the second car, testified at trial as follows: The road was “very icy.” He and Parvin were driving at about 20 miles per hour. He saw the Pinto “fishtailing just a little bit” shortly before it turned around. After Cook stopped and prepared to exit his car to help Parvin, he saw Sill’s car come over the crest of a hill about 200 feet behind him. Sill was driving 30 to 35 miles per hour, too fast for the conditions in Cook’s opinion. Sill’s car began sliding to the right after it came over the hill; it skidded about half the distance between the crest of the hill and the point of impact, then “came back to the side of the road” and “was still coming pretty fast” when it struck Cook’s car. Sill testified at trial: He was traveling about 30 miles per hour and following Cook’s car by three to four car lengths, not 200 feet. He saw Parvin’s car fishtailing prior to the collision. Plaintiff was traveling about 20 miles per hour, a safe speed under the circumstances.  The trial court directed a verdict for Parvin on the issue of her contributory negligence. Sill and his employer, Heartland, contend that this was error. We agree. When the evidence and the reasonable inferences from it are considered in their aspect most favorable to the defendants, and it appears therefrom that there is no evidence from which the plaintiff’s contributory negligence could be inferred, it is the trial court’s duty to direct a verdict for the plaintiff on the issue of contributory negligence. Moreover, a court of review passing on the ruling of the trial court should consider that the trial court saw and heard the witnesses. However, if a question remains whether the plaintiff has performed his legal duty, or has observed the degree of care required of him by law, the question must be submitted as one of fact. (Smith v. Bishop (1965), 32 Ill. 2d 380, 383-84, 205 N.E.2d 461, 463.) Here the evidence regarding Parvin’s exercise of due care or failure thereof was at least capable of supporting different inferences. That Parvin was aware of the hazard posed by the condition of the pavement was shown by her admission to that effect as well as the speed at which she was traveling. Cook and Sill were in agreement that Parvin had lost control of the vehicle prior to the maneuver which led to the Pinto turning around. There was no indication in the testimony of Cook or Sill that Parvin slowed down after “fishtailing,” and Parvin, who did not admit the “fishtailing,” obviously could not testify that after fishtailing she slowed down. Thus a substantial question of fact exists as to whether Parvin was guilty of negligence in her operation of the Pinto, which negligence was a proximate cause of the spin which left her in a vulnerable position at the bottom of a hill in an icy lane of traffic. On this record we are compelled to conclude that the issue of Parvin’s contributory negligence was a question of fact for the jury. Accordingly, the judgment must be reversed and the cause remanded for a new trial.  Parenthetically, the foregoing discussion suggests that the crux of Parvin’s position at trial regarding her contributory negligence was that she was not negligent. However, Parvin’s position at trial was that her negligence, if any, was not the proximate cause of the occurrence, and the proximate cause issue was the basis of the trial court’s directing a verdict for Parvin as to her contributory negligence. Our supreme court has repeatedly stated that the question of proximate cause is ordinarily a question for the jury: “We emphasize, however, that each case must turn on its own facts. Defendant remains liable for its negligence if the intervening event was foreseeable. Moreover, to escape liability, defendant must demonstrate that the intervening event was unforeseeable as a matter of law. This we cannot conclude. Proximate cause is ordinarily a question for the jury to decide.” (Davis v. Marathon Oil Co. (1976), 64 Ill. 2d 380, 395, 356 N.E.2d 93, 100.) A foreseeable intervening cause does not break the chain of legal causation. It is not necessary that the precise nature of the intervening cause be foreseen. (Felty v. New Berlin Transit, Inc. (1978), 71 Ill. 2d 126, 131, 374 N.E.2d 203, 205.) There may be more than one proximate cause of an injury. (Bentley v. Saunemin Township (1980), 83 Ill. 2d 10, 17, 413 N.E.2d 1242, 1246.) The intervention of a new, independent intervening cause does not necessarily relieve one of responsibility for a negligent act when the intervening cause of an injury is of such a nature as could reasonably have been anticipated. (Lemings v. Collinsville School District No. 10 (1983), 118 Ill. App. 3d 363, 367, 454 N.E.2d 1139, 1141.) We cannot conclude as a matter of law that the likelihood that a following driver would not exercise sufficient care to avoid a collision involving Parvin was so slight that it was unforeseeable as a matter of law. Accordingly, the issue of whether Sill’s negligence was the sole proximate cause of Parvin’s injuries to the exclusion of her own negligence if any is for the jury to consider on remand. Anderson v. Jones (1966), 66 Ill. App. 2d 407, 213 N.E.2d 627, cited by Parvin, is useful for comparison but does not require a contrary result. There, after an accident had blocked both westbound lanes of a highway, the plaintiff’s car was stopped behind a line of cars which could not get through when it was struck by another car whose driver was obviously negligent in having failed to observe the stopped traffic. The issue on appeal was whether the plaintiff was entitled to recover against the driver whose negligence caused the initial blockage of the highway. The appellate court concluded that the latter driver’s negligence was not the proximate cause of the plaintiff’s injury. However, the difference in time frame between that case and the case at bar is critical. In Anderson v. Jones it was apparent that the driver whose car struck the plaintiff’s could have stopped had he observed the stopped traffic before him. Such a conclusion is not obvious on the instant record. Here, the jury could have believed Sill’s testimony that he was following Cook by no more than four car lengths, and that this was so short a distance that Sill could not have prevented the collision once Parvin lost control of her car.  While our conclusion that this cause must be remanded obviates the need to decide certain other issues raised by Sill and Heartland, observations on some issues which may arise on retrial are in order. The issues raised regarding the “last minute” filing of a count alleging Heartland’s wilful and wanton entrustment of an automobile to Sill should not arise on remand. The same is true of issues regarding proof of Sill’s prior speeding tickets, of the trial court’s denial of defendants’ motion for continuance, and of the trial court’s excusal of two jurors for cause.  Sill and Heartland argue that it was error to instruct the jury that an aggravation of a preexisting ailment or condition is a separate element of compensable damages. (See Illinois Pattern Jury Instruction (IPI), Civil, No. 30.03 (2d ed. 1971).) It is well settled, however, that a tortfeasor is liable for injuries he causes, even when those injuries consist of the aggravation of a preexisting condition. (Balestri v. Terminal Freight Cooperative Association (1979), 76 Ill. 2d 451, 455, 394 N.E.2d 391, 393, cert. denied (1980), 444 U.S. 1018, 62 L. Ed. 2d 648, 100 S. Ct. 671.) Powers v. Illinois Central Gulf R.R. Co. (1982), 91 Ill. 2d 375, 438 N.E.2d 152, cited by Sill and Heartland, does not stand for a contrary proposition, as the propriety of the IPI instruction concerning aggravation of a preexisting condition was not at issue there. Defendants also contend that the court erroneously gave an instruction that the nature, extent and duration of Parvin’s injuries were to be considered as a separate element of damages. We perceive this to be a strained construction of the instructions given; the jury was instructed only to consider those factors in determining damages generally. “We do not hold that a jury may never be instructed to consider the nature, extent and duration of the plaintiff’s injury but simply that a jury should not be instructed to consider it as a separate and compensable element of damage ***.” Powers v. Illinois Central Gulf R.R. Co. (1982), 91 Ill. 2d 375, 384, 438 N.E.2d 152, 156.  The remaining issues raised by Sill and Heartland do not require extended discussion. We cannot say that the court abused its discretion in not allowing defendants to question Parvin’s medical expert about a report prepared by the expert’s medical partner, as limitation of cross-examination of a medical expert rests within the sound discretion of the trial court. (Sears v. Rutishauser (1984), 102 Ill. 2d 402, 407-08, 466 N.E.2d 210, 213.) That Parvin’s expert was a radiologist did not render his testimony regarding Parvin’s need for, and the cost of, back surgery inadmissible, particularly as the witness worked as a consultant to back specialists. (See Skaug v. Johnson (1975), 29 Ill. App. 2d 238, 242, 330 N.E.2d 265, 268 (allowing specialist in internal medicine to testify regarding hearing loss was not improper).) Parvin’s testimony that she was having epigastric complaints due to her back medicine was not rendered upon “a scientific question that must be determined by professional men, skilled in the practice of medicine ***.” (American Smelting & Refining Co. v. Industrial Com. (1933), 353 Ill. 324, 329, 187 N.E. 495, 497.) Testimony by Cook as to whether Sill’s speed was too fast should not have been given (Delany v. Badame (1971), 49 Ill. 2d 168, 178, 274 N.E.2d 353, 358), and we trust that that testimony will not be elicited on retrial. For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the circuit court of St. Clair County is reversed, and the cause remanded for a new trial at which the issue of Parvin’s contributory negligence shall be submitted to the jury. Reversed and remanded. EARNS, J., concurring.

=== CASE 9741006 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:47:25.991786+00 ===

JUSTICE HARRISON, dissenting: I cannot agree that the court erred in directing a verdict for plaintiff on the issue of her contributory negligence. Our supreme court has recognized that, where the evidence and the reasonable inferences from it are considered in their aspect most favorable to defendants, and it appears therefrom that there is no evidence from which a plaintiff’s contributory negligence could be inferred, it is the trial court’s duty to direct a verdict for the plaintiff on the contributory negligence issue. Moreover, a court of review passing on the trial judge’s ruling should take into consideration the fact that the trial judge saw and heard the witnesses. (Smith v. Bishop (1965), 32 Ill. 2d 380, 383-84, 205 N.E.2d 461.) Analysis of the record here reveals that the trial court did not, under the unique facts presented, err in directing a verdict on the contributory negligence issue. While plaintiff’s car turned around on the icy road, the record is devoid of any evidence tending to establish that this event was caused by negligence on'the part of plaintiff. Contrary to the majority’s statement that there is no evidence that Parvin slowed down after “fishtailing,” there is absolutely nothing of record which contradicts plaintiff’s testimony to the effect that the road was icy, that she in fact touched her brake lightly in an effort to slow down a bit more, and that the turning of her vehicle was sudden and unforeseeable. Moreover, defendant Sill testified that plaintiff was driving at a safe speed under the circumstances. Additional uncon-tradicted evidence establishes that plaintiff’s car did not hit anything when it turned around, that it stopped in its own lane of traffic, and that Cook, who was closer to plaintiff’s vehicle than was Sill, was able to stop his vehicle without hitting plaintiff’s. The question of a plaintiff’s contributory negligence may, under appropriate circumstances, be decided as a matter of law (Pearson v. Ford Motor Co. (1975), 32 Ill. App. 3d 188, 192, 336 N.E.2d 528), and the trial court’s action in directing a verdict on that issue here is fully supported by the record. Since my review of the record persuades me that defendants’ remaining contentions are also without merit, I would affirm the judgment in its entirety.

=== CASE 2225835 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:56.248959+00 ===

343 Mich. 300 (1955)
72 N.W.2d 31
McCLARREN
v.
BUCK.
LYNCH
v.
SAME.
Docket Nos. 26-29, Calendar Nos. 46,211-46,214.
Supreme Court of Michigan.
Decided October 3, 1955.
Alexander, Cholette, Buchanan, Perkins & Conklin, for plaintiffs.
Moll, Desenberg, Purdy & Glover, for defendant Buck.
Davidson, Kaess, Gotshall & Kelly, for defendant Sanderson.
SHARPE, J.
This is an appeal by plaintiffs from judgments of no cause of action. The basis of the appeal is the following instructions given to the jury:
"I charge you that merely because an accident happens and an injury results does not in and of itself give rise to the fact that it is necessary to bring a verdict in favor of the plaintiffs in these cases. I charged you before along that line that the mere happening of an accident doesn't in and of itself warrant a verdict in favor of the plaintiffs.
*302 "In that connection, I charge you that should you find from the facts and circumstances that this was an unavoidable accident, then it would be your duty to return a verdict of no cause of action. In that regard, you are to check and analyze the testimony."
The essential facts are as follows: On September 8, 1951, plaintiffs, Hattie Lynch and Lillian McClarren, were passengers for hire in a taxicab which was headed in a westerly direction on Six Mile road, also known as McNichols road, but hereafter referred to as Six Mile road, at the intersection of Woodward avenue in the city of Highland Park, Michigan. At the same time defendant, William A. Buck, was proceeding in a northerly direction on Woodward avenue. When he was 1 block away from Six Mile road he noticed the traffic signal changing from red to green. He stopped at the intersection with the front end of his motor vehicle approximately in the center of Six Mile road. He intended to make a left-hand turn at the intersection. His view to the right was blocked by other traffic. His car was the only car in the intersection waiting to make a left-hand turn. After the light turned green for traffic on the Six Mile road, defendant Buck started to turn into the westbound traffic.
The cab driver testified that when he was 75 feet east of Woodward avenue, proceeding on Six Mile road and traveling at a speed of 20 to 25 miles per hour, he did not see any car within the intersection facing north, but as he entered the intersection he noticed a westbound vehicle waiting to make a left-hand turn to go south on Woodward avenue. He attempted to pass north of the standing car, and at this time the Buck car moved forward, resulting in a collision of both cars and personal injuries to plaintiffs who were occupants of the cab. Defendant Buck claims that there was no traffic which *303 went across Woodward avenue going west until the the taxicab hit him.
The cause came on for trial, and at the conclusion of all evidence the trial court submitted the cause to the jury. In his instructions to the jury, the trial judge gave the instructions heretofore mentioned. The jury returned a verdict in favor of defendants. Thereafter plaintiffs made a motion for a new trial which was denied. From such denial plaintiffs appeal. In their claim of appeal they raised the issue now before us.
In Hicks v. Brown, 136 Tex 399, 402 (151 SW2d 790, 792), it was said:
"`The term "unavoidable accident" means such an unexpected catastrophe as occurs without any of the parties thereto being to blame for it.'"
See, also, Miller v. Panhandle & S.F.R. Co. (Tex Civ App), 35 SW2d 194.
In the case at bar the collision occurred in broad daylight at a controlled intersection. Both cars were in motion on their own power. No outside force caused or contributed to the collision. Under the facts in this case 1 or both of the drivers of the colliding cars were guilty of negligence. Under such circumstances it was error to give the quoted instructions to the jury.
In our opinion the instructions were prejudicial to the rights of plaintiffs. The judgments are reversed and remanded for a new trial. Plaintiffs may recover costs.
CARR, C.J., and BUTZEL, SMITH BOYLES, REID, DETHMERS, and KELLY, JJ., concurred.

=== CASE 9741010 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:47:30.126334+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE McCULLOUGH, dissenting: I respectfully disagree with the majority and would affirm the • trial court. The city in its motion for summary judgment alleges that the decedent’s activities just prior to his death amounted to participation in an ultrahazardous activity and that the plaintiff was barred from recovery on the basis of such participation. First, it should be pointed out that in the present posture this case does not reach the question of whether the cutting of the tree was, in itself, an ultrahazardous activity. The city of Lexington has waived this issue by failing to file a notice of cross-appeal from the order denying its motion to dismiss in conformity with Supreme Court Rule 303(a)(3) (103 Ill. 2d R. 303(a)(3)). The question presented by this appeal is whether the same duty of persons who authorize ultrahazardous activity which previous decisions have held extends to spectators and owners of nearby property also extends to one who, though not an employee, is present at the site of the activity for his or her own pecuniary benefit. As indicated in the majority opinion, no authority was cited in support of the motion. Illinois Pattern Jury Instruction, Civil, No. 115.01 (2d ed. 1971) ("Ultrahazardous Activities — Absolute Liability”), as applicable to this case, states: “When a person carries on an ultrahazardous activity such as _'_, he is liable for any injury proxi-(e.g. blasting) mately caused by that activity regardless of the amount of care used except to one who knows, or by the exercise of ordinary care should know of the dangers involved and voluntarily participates in the activity.” One who authorizes the performance of an ultrahazardous activity by an independent contractor is responsible for injuries received by spectators to the activity as a result of the performance of the activity. Clark v. City of Chicago (1980), 88 Ill. App. 3d 760, 763-64, 410 N.E.2d 1025, 1028-29. The record shows that the decedent did voluntarily participate in the activity and in fact received a pecuniary benefit therefrom. The pecuniary benefit was the receipt of firewood. It is clear that the decedent was helping the contractor for his (the decedent’s) own benefit in order to get the firewood and in fact used his truck in part of the tree felling operation. The granting of summary judgment was correct.

=== CASE 2225847 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:56.454856+00 ===

343 Mich. 27 (1955)
72 N.W.2d 10
BLAKE
v.
BRAMA.
Docket No. 12, Calendar No. 46,268.
Supreme Court of Michigan.
Decided October 3, 1955.
Hutson & Merritt and Cary & BeGole, for plaintiff.
Moll, Desenberg, Purdy & Glover, for defendant.
BOYLES, J.
Plaintiff, administratrix with will annexed of the estate of Wayne Earl Blake, deceased, brought this suit in the circuit court for Wayne county against the defendant as administrator of the estate of Ludwig Brama, deceased, to recover damages for the death of Blake caused by an automobile collision, which occurred in Nebraska. The case was tried in Wayne county by jury and at the conclusion of the plaintiff's proofs the trial judge granted a motion of the defendant for a directed verdict of no cause for action. Judgment for the defendant was entered accordingly, from which plaintiff appeals.
Defendant's motion was planted on 3 grounds  that the plaintiff had not introduced sufficient proof to go to the jury (1) as to who was driving the defendant's automobile at the time of the accident or (2) to show gross negligence under the Nebraska guest statute; and (3) even if it was shown that the defendant's decedent was driving the car, plaintiff's decedent had assumed the risk of excessive speed. *29 The court charged the jury that there was sufficient proof to submit plaintiff's proofs to the jury as to the first and second questions raised, as issues of fact, but directed a verdict for the defendant on the third ground that under the Nebraska law the plaintiff's decedent had assumed the risk of the manner in which the defendant's decedent was driving the car when the accident occurred. The court also said, "at least they were engaged in a joint enterprise," but that question is not raised or briefed here on the appeal. Of course the plaintiff-appellant agrees here with the trial judge in holding with the plaintiff on the first 2 questions raised on the motion  that there was sufficient proof to go to the jury as to who was driving the car, and as to gross negligence of the defendant's decedent. But plaintiff-appellant disagrees with the trial court's holding that plaintiff's decedent, as a matter of law, had assumed the risk of the defendant's decedent having been grossly negligent in driving at an excessive rate of speed when trying to pass to the left of another automobile on the highway.
The defendant-appellee argues here that even if the trial court gave a wrong reason by directing a verdict for the defendant on the third question raised in the motion, nonetheless the directed verdict for the defendant should stand, on either 1 or both of the other 2 grounds urged by the defendant for a directed verdict.
Necessarily, decision here must depend on the facts adduced by the plaintiff, and the Nebraska law to be applied. For the purposes of decision on the motion for a directed verdict, plaintiff's proofs must be viewed in the light most favorable to the plaintiff. On or about September 8, 1950, the 2 decedents, Blake and Brama, left Michigan in the automobile of the defendant's decedent, Brama, on a hunting trip to Wyoming. They were to take *30 turns driving. There was testimony tending to show that when they arrived at a point about a mile west of Cody, Nebraska, on US-20, defendant's decedent was driving. However, this is a question of fact now disputed by the defendant. The claim of the plaintiff that the car was being driven at a very high rate of speed, claimed to have been 85 miles per hour, is also now disputed. Plaintiff's proofs show that the defendant's decedent driver attempted to go to the left of another car traveling in the same direction approximately 15 miles per hour, the driver of which had signaled intention to make a left turn into a connecting highway. Mr. Wobig, the driver of the slower car, a Ford pickup truck, testified:
"I was going up the highway and I looked back and seen this car coming a considerable distance, 3 or 4 hundred yards to the rear; I had a short distance to travel before it would be reasonable to signal; just a short distance, 150 feet or so, then I started my signal for a left-hand turn, straight out, like that (witness demonstrated arm signal); as I approached the turn I was moving up toward the center of the road, I started to turn past the center of the road and I kind of took a half look to see how close this car would be  it was up to the back end of my pickup  within about 3 feet of the back end of my pickup, clear over to the extreme left side of the highway, going around me; I tried to stop, and this car, the car from Michigan, kind of swayed over and caught my bumper and the fender on my pickup and then it kept going; it went across the intersection and 1 wheel went over the edge of the highway; went up the shoulder of the highway for  oh  250 feet; then it was pulled back to the center of the highway where it turned over about 3 times; there was so much dust I couldn't just exactly see it all. * * *
*31 "Q. And to your best judgment, about how far were you from the place where you would turn south across the highway when you first saw this car coming from the east?
"A. Well, it was quite a ways back down the road when I first saw it; I looked back before I got anywheres near the turn off,  oh  I would say it was 300 or 400 yards possibly more, back.
"Q. Then after you saw it that far back about how far did you travel before you started to turn to the left?
"A. Well, I moved up a short distance; otherwise it would be too long a signal; I didn't think that was necessary; so I moved up; possibly 150 feet before I started my signal, then I signalled for a city block, or better than 300 feet.
"Q. Then you turned off to the left?
"A. Yes, from where I was to turn.
"Q. Then about how far, when you did signal that you were going to turn to the left, about how far back of you was this car that later turned over?
"A. Well, I took a second look; it was almost up to my pickup; it was over on the left side and going around me already, when I went to take the second look.
"Q. Were you able to form an opinion, by that time, from and after when you first saw this car, as to the speed that this car was travelling?
"A. About 85 miles an hour."
He testified further that he was not able to see or identify the man who was driving the Michigan car; that the smaller man (Brama) was found about 30 feet closer than the other man to the turned-over car; also, that the time of the accident was near sundown, but that he could still see for quite a distance and that the headlights of both cars were lighted. There was no other traffic in sight. Mrs. Wobig, his wife, who was with him in the front seat of the pickup with their children, also testified (without *32 objection) that in her opinion the Michigan car, from the speed which she had looked back and observed its approach, was at least 80 miles per hour. There was further testimony for the plaintiff from the owner of a filling station where the 2 decedents had stopped, about 38 miles before they reached the place of the accident. He testified that "the big fellow" (Blake) was driving the car when they came in, that they visited for 15 or 20 minutes, and that "the little fellow" (Brama) was driving when they left. This was "around 5:30 or a quarter to 6." They, the 2 decedents, talked about how long it had taken them to drive from Michigan. Arguing from that testimony, and assuming that they had been driving continuously since leaving home, and had come by the most direct route, about 1,200 miles, appellee claims that they had averaged more than 57 miles per hour. But there is no testimony to show whether the 2 men had driven continuously, nor whether, when, or for how long, they may have stopped en route. Granting whatever probative value may be allowed this testimony, and as to whether the "little fellow" (Brama) was still driving, perhaps less than an hour after leaving the filling station, the appellant argues that both were issues of fact which should have been submitted to the jury. In that connection, appellant also points to other testimony as to the physical facts, from a highway patrolman for the State called to the scene of the accident  the skid marks, distance traveled, the position of the wrecked car, location of debris, and his opinion as to the speed, from 70 to 85 miles per hour. He testified that the "large man" lived 30 to 40 minutes after the accident, without regaining consciousness.
At the close of plaintiff's proofs, the trial court granted the defendant's motion for a directed verdict of no cause for action. Consequently there was no *33 opportunity or occasion for the defendant to offer any testimony. We conclude that the court erred in granting the motion. There was testimony, undisputed, to raise a question of fact as to who was driving the car at the time of the accident, that it was being driven at an excessive rate of speed, that the driver passed another car on the left at an intersection and apparently failed to observe or heed a signal of its driver of an intention to make a left turn. The Nebraska statute, like that in this State, requires proof of gross negligence to establish liability of the operator of a motor vehicle for damages to a guest passenger.
"The owner or operator of a motor vehicle shall not be liable for any damages to any passenger or person riding in such motor vehicle as a guest or by invitation and not for hire, unless such damage is caused by the driver of such motor vehicle being under the influence of intoxicating liquor or because of the gross negligence of the owner or operator in the operation of such motor vehicle." 3 Neb Rev Stat 1943, § 39-740.
Gross negligence, under the Nebraska law, has been well defined in many decisions by the supreme court of that State. See Morris v. Erskine (1933), 124 Neb 754 (248 N.W. 96); Swengil v. Martin (1933), 125 Neb 745 (252 N.W. 207); Thompson v. Edler (1940), 138 Neb 179 (292 N.W. 236); Gummere v. Mudd (1941), 139 Neb 370 (297 N.W. 622); Landrum v. Roddy (1943), 143 Neb 934 (12 NW2d 82, 149 A.L.R. 1041); Sautter v. Poss (1951), 155 Neb 62 (50 NW2d 547); Lusk v. County of York (1954), 158 Neb 662 (64 NW2d 338); Ottersberg v. Holz (1954), 159 Neb 239 (66 NW2d 571).
See, also, Slayton v. Boesch (1946), 315 Mich. 1, and cases cited, deciding an automobile collision case tried here, which occurred in Nebraska.
*34 Competent testimony for the plaintiff which, under the motion, must be taken in the light most favorable to the plaintiff, raised questions of fact, including the issue as to whether there was an absence of the requisite care by defendant's decedent when he attempted to pass the Ford pickup at the rate of speed shown by plaintiff's proofs, and under all of the circumstances shown. The trial court was in error in granting the defendant's motion for a directed verdict at the close of the plaintiff's proofs.
Reversed and remanded for new trial. Costs to appellant.
CARR, C.J., and BUTZEL, SMITH, SHARPE, REID, and KELLY, JJ., concurred with BOYLES, J.
DETHMERS, J., concurred in the result.

=== CASE 2225849 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:56.492622+00 ===

72 N.W.2d 820 (1955)
161 Neb. 217
Robert GRIESS, by mother and next friend, Johanna Griess, Appellee,
v.
Dean BORCHERS, Appellant.
No. 33774.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
November 4, 1955.
*823 John E. Dougherty, York, for appellant.
Massie, Bottorf & Massie, Clay Center, Perry, Perry & Nuernberger, Lincoln, for appellee.
Heard before SIMMONS, C. J., and CARTER, MESSMORE, YEAGER, CHAPPELL, WENKE and BOSLAUGH, JJ.
CHAPPELL, Justice.
Plaintiff Robert Griess, a minor 17 years old at time of the accident, brought this action by his mother and next friend against defendant Dean Borchers, seeking to recover damages for personal injuries alleged to have been proximately caused by negligence of defendant when, about 11:50 p. m. April 10, 1954, a car owned and driven by defendant and one driven by plaintiff collided at an open intersection of graveled county highways about 6 miles southeast of Clay Center. By answer and *824 cross-petition defendant admitted that an accident occurred at such time and place, but denied that he was negligent, and alleged that the sole and proximate cause of plaintiff's injuries and damages was plaintiff's own negligence. Defendant prayed for dismissal of plaintiff's petition and to recover for personal injuries and damages to his car. Plaintiff's reply to defendant's answer and answer to defendant's cross-petition denied generally and alleged that the negligence of defendant was gross in character. Motions for directed verdict made by defendant at close of plaintiff's evidence and renewed at close of all the evidence, were overruled, and the issues were submitted to a jury which returned a verdict filed and entered of record by the court finding for plaintiff and awarding him $15,000. Defendant's motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict or in the alternative for new trial, was overruled. Therefrom he appealed to this court, assigning substantially: (1) That the trial court erred in failing to sustain his motions for directed verdict; (2) that the judgment against defendant was not sustained by sufficient evidence but was contrary thereto and contrary to law; (3) that the trial court erred in giving certain instructions; and (4) that the trial court erred in receiving, excluding, and striking certain evidence. We conclude that the assignments should not be sustained.
Turning to assignment of error Nos. 1 and 2, we have examined the evidence in the light of well-established rules. In Pahl v. Sprague, 152 Neb. 681, 42 N.W.2d 367, 369, it is held: "A motion for directed verdict or for judgment notwithstanding the verdict must, for the purpose of decision thereon, be treated as an admission of the truth of all material and relevant evidence submitted on behalf of the party against whom the motion is directed. Such party is entitled to have every controverted fact resolved in his favor and to have the benefit of every inference that can reasonably be deduced from the evidence.
"In negligence cases the trial court should sustain a motion for directed verdict or for judgment notwithstanding the verdict, only when the evidence, viewed in the light most favorable to the party against whom the motion is directed, fails to establish actionable negligence.
"In a law action, it is error for the trial court to direct a verdict for either of the parties on an issue of fact on which the evidence is conflicting. Such issue should be submitted to the jury for its determination.
"Negligence is a question of fact and may be proved by circumstantial evidence. All that the law requires is that the facts and circumstances proved, together with the inferences that may be legitimately drawn from them, shall indicate, with reasonable certainty, the negligent act complained of.
* * * * * *
"When a person enters an intersection of two streets or highways he is obligated to look for approaching cars and to see those within that radius which denotes the limit of danger. If he fails to see a car which is favored over him under the rules of the road, he is guilty of contributory negligence sufficient to bar a recovery as a matter of law. If he fails to see an automobile not shown to be in a favored position, the presumption is that its driver will respect his right-of-way and the question of his contributory negligence in proceeding to cross the intersection is a jury question.
"Where different minds may draw different conclusions from the evidence in regard to negligence, the question should be submitted to the jury. It is only where the evidence shows beyond dispute that plaintiff's negligence is more than slight as compared with defendant's negligence, that it is proper for the trial court to instruct the jury to return a verdict for defendant or enter a judgment notwithstanding the verdict."
As held in Becks v. Schuster, 154 Neb. 360, 48 N.W.2d 67, 68: "Where two motorists approach an intersection at or *825 about the same time, the driver approaching from the right has the right-of-way, and he may ordinarily proceed to cross, having a legal right to assume that his right-of-way will be respected by the other driver, but if the situation is such as to indicate to the mind of an ordinarily careful and prudent person in his position that to proceed would probably result in a collision, then he should exercise ordinary care to prevent an accident, even to the extent of waiving his right-of-way."
On the other hand, as held in Long v. Whalen, 160 Neb. 813, 71 N.W.2d 496, 498: "A vehicle which has entered an intersection and is passing through it at a lawful speed has the right-of-way over a vehicle approaching the intersection from a different direction into its path." Such case also reaffirmed that one having the right-of-way may not on that account proceed with disregard of the surrounding circumstances, nor is he thereby relieved from the duty of exercising ordinary care to avoid accidents.
In Stark v. Turner, 154 Neb. 268, 47 N.W.2d 569, 570, we held: "The lawfulness of the speed of a motor vehicle within the prima facie limits fixed is determined by the further test of whether the speed was greater than was reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing."
In Granger v. Byrne, 160 Neb. 10, 69 N.W.2d 293, 295, we reaffirmed that: "The verdict of a jury, based on conflicting evidence, will not be disturbed unless clearly wrong."
The record discloses competent evidence, part of which is without dispute, the rest of which is conflicting, from which the jury could reasonably have concluded, as it evidently did, as follows: Plaintiff, 18 years old at time of trial, who had been graduated from high school, was employed doing construction work and earning $58 a week. Prior to the accident he was driving his brother's 1949 Ford car from the south toward the north on his right side of a 27-foot double-track gravel highway with his left wheels near the center line. The car was in good condition and the lights had been turned on bright at all times since he left Edgar, some 10 or 12 miles from the point of accident. Plaintiff was traveling at about 50 miles an hour and continued at that speed up to the point of accident. It was a clear night and the highway was dry with the view unobstructed for one-half mile each way from the intersection where the collision occurred. A young man, 18 years old at time of trial, was riding with plaintiff. He had been drowsy, but upon being aroused he turned his head and saw defendant's lights coming from the west a couple of feet from the back of plaintiff's car.
Defendant, a senior in high school at time of the accident, who had been graduated at time of trial, was driving his 1950 Studebaker car from the west toward the east over a double-track gravel highway, the travel portion of which was 26 feet wide. His girl friend, a junior in high school at that time, was riding with him.
When plaintiff was about one-fourth mile from the intersection he looked to the left and saw defendant's car headed east about one-half mile away from the intersection. Plaintiff could not tell then whether or not defendant's car was moving. When plaintiff was about one-eighth of a mile from the intersection he looked again and saw defendant's car coming from the west about one-fourth mile from the intersection Plaintiff did not actually turn his head to look again, but he could and did see the beam of light from defendant's approaching car at all times before entering the intersection. Believing that he had plenty of time, since defendant was then at least three car lengths west of the intersection, plaintiff went into the intersection, and, thinking that he was through the intersection, the front of his car having passed beyond the intersection to the north, he turned and saw defendant's car right behind his own and they collided. There in the northeast quarter of the intersection the left front end of defendant's car hit the left rear of plaintiff's car which was hurled into the air off the highway toward *826 the northeast a distance of 15 or 25 feet, where, sliding sideways, it turned over on its side or top, slid about the length of the car, then struck the bank to the northeast, and went north, stopping upright, headed north in the east ditch about 156 feet from where the impact occurred north of the middle of the intersection. Plaintiff was thrown from his car out upon the highway and was found unconscious about 35 feet north of his car. As a result of the accident his spinal cord was severed at about the fifth or sixth cervical vertebrae, causing permanent and total disability by almost completely paralyzing his body from that point to his waist, and completely and permanently paralyzing his body from his waist down. He was hospitalized from April 11, 1954, until July 3, 1954, during which period surgery, medical care, and hospital attention were required at great expense. He did and will in the future suffer great pain and anguish and require future medical and nursing care. His life expectancy was shortened and his future earning capacity was destroyed. No contention is made here that plaintiff was not so permanently and totally disabled.
Before the impact, defendant's car skidded and swerved sideways from a point close to the south or right side of the east and west highway toward the left and northeast for about 35 feet to the point of impact north and east of the center of the intersection. From that point defendant's car went end over end, then slid and swirled around into the east bank and stopped, headed west, in the north ditch and on the east bank in the north and east portion of the intersection about 35 feet from the point of impact.
Within a short time after the accident, defendant told one witness: "* * * there was nothing he could do; he slammed the brakes and that is all he could do. * * * from the time he seen what was going to happen, it was beyond help."
To another witness defendant said: "* * * that he seen the car coming and he stepped on his brakes to stop and he slid a ways and then he decided maybe he could make it so he stepped on it."
To another witness both defendant and his girl companion said: "They saw the lights and * * * thought they could beat it across the intersection. * * * if they would have stepped on the gas they know they could have gotten across the intersection. * * * `I am sure we could have made it if we would have stepped on the gas.'"
To another witness they said: "* * * that they hit Bob. They had seen his lights, but they thought that they could get over the intersection before he come. * * * they saw the lights and thought they could get across there first * * *."
To plaintiff's brother they said: "* * * they hit my brother's car, and they were coming from the west and my brother from the south" and they "saw him, but they figured they would beat him across the intersection before he got there. * * * they had seen him coming, but they thought they would get across before he got there."
On the other hand, defendant and his companion both denied that the foregoing statements were true or that they were ever made by them. Their testimony was substantially that during the last one-half mile, before reaching the intersection, they drove about 40 or 45 miles an hour; that as they approached the intersection, they slowed down to about 35 or 40 miles an hour and looked right and left several times but saw no lights approaching; that when they were about 40 feet from the intersection and driving on the right side of the highway, they saw the lights on plaintiff's car turn on when he was about 65 feet from the intersection; that plaintiff's car was then coming from the south at a speed of 65 or 70 miles an hour; whereupon defendant slammed on his brakes hard but slid and swerved slightly to the left for about 35 feet, and the impact occurred just north and east of the center of the intersection when defendant was traveling about 15 miles an hour.
In the light of the foregoing evidence and rules of law we conclude that the issues of negligence were for determination by the jury. There was ample *827 competent evidence to sustain the verdict and a judgment rendered thereon. Therefore, assignments of error Nos. 1 and 2 have no merit.
Instruction No. 1, Part I, summarized the allegations of plaintiff's petition. Subparagraph 3 thereof contained the allegation that defendant was negligent because he "drove said vehicle at an excessive and unlawful rate of speed under the circumstances, to-wit, approximately sixty-five miles per hour." Defendant argued that the record contained no specific evidence that defendant was driving 65 miles per hour, and it was prejudicially erroneous to submit such allegation. In that connection, instruction No. 1 also told the jury that the statements contained therein were simply an outline of the claims and contentions of the parties and were not to be considered as proof or evidence unless admitted to be true by either or both of the parties. Further, there was ample competent evidence from which the jury could have concluded that defendant was driving at an excessive and unlawful rate of speed under the circumstances.
In Becker v. Hasebroock, 157 Neb. 353, 59 N.W.2d 560, 563, which presented a comparable situation, this court said: "Under such circumstances there was no error prejudicial to the rights of the defendant. Nama v. Shada, 150 Neb. 362, 34 N.W.2d 650." The applicable rule reaffirmed therein is that: "Errors in instructions not prejudicial to the complaining party do not require a reversal of a judgment otherwise correct." Defendant's contention should not be sustained.
Subparagraph 4 of instruction No. 1, Part I, also submitted plaintiff's allegation that defendant "failed to make proper and adequate use of the braking facilities on his car." Contrary to defendant's contention, as heretofore set forth, there was competent evidence to support such allegation.
Instruction No. 1, Part I, also submitted plaintiff's allegations that as a direct and proximate result of defendant's alleged negligence, plaintiff proximately received described severe permanent and complete personal injuries and damages. It then said: "Plaintiff further claims that at the time of said accident, he was earning $58.00 per week and that by reason of such injuries plaintiff has been totally and permanently injured to his damaged (damage); that plaintiff will incur hospital, doctor and medical bills in a substantial amount and that plaintiff will be required to obtain and receive special hospital care and attention the rest of his life; that plaintiff has suffered and will be forced to continue to suffer extreme severe and continuous pain to his damage.
"For all of which plaintiff prays damage in the sum of $60,000.00."
Defendant argued that the last sentence aforesaid was prejudicial to defendant's rights because it set forth the amount which plaintiff sought to recover. In Tate v. Barry, 144 Neb. 517, 13 N.W.2d 879, 880, this court held: "In summarizing the allegations of the petition, it is not prejudicial error to set out in an instruction the amount for which the plaintiff prays damages." Such case was cited with approval in Remmenga v. Selk, 152 Neb. 625, 42 N.W.2d 186, 188, wherein we held: "While in a personal injury action the better practice is to state to the jury in suitable words that plaintiff sues for an amount sufficient to compensate him for the loss sustained, it is not ordinarily prejudicial error to state the amount for which the action is brought." Such cases are applicable and controlling here. Defendant's contention has no merit.
Defendant also argued that such part of instruction No. 1, Part I, as referred to hospital, doctor, and medical bills and further medical attention and hospitalization, was erroneously submitted as a part of plaintiff's cause of action, because the obligation to keep, maintain, and support plaintiff, a minor, was the obligation of his parents who were entitled to his wages during minority. The contention should not be sustained.
*828 In that connection, the record discloses that by pleadings, evidence, stipulation, and waiver, without any objection, the case was tried and submitted as if and upon the theory that plaintiff had been emancipated and was entitled to his wages and was personally liable for such obligations, therefore, if the jury found for plaintiff, he would be entitled to recover the same. Further, the question was raised for the first time in this court. In Welch v. Reeves, 142 Neb. 171, 5 N.W.2d 275, this court held: "When a certain theory as to the measure of damages is relied upon by the parties in the trial court as the proper one, it will be adhered to on appeal whether it is correct or not." Also, it is the rule that: "A party cannot predicate error upon a ruling which he procured to be made." Pahl v. Sprague, supra [152 Neb. 681, 42 N.W.2d 368].
In a similar manner, and for like reasons, defendant argued that instruction No. 8 relating to the measure of damages recoverable if the jury found for plaintiff, was erroneous because it also submitted the elements among others of "the reasonable value of hospitalization, nursing services and medical care" and "the reasonable value of the time lost from work to date and loss of earning capacity that plaintiff will suffer * * *." For reasons just heretofore stated, that contention should not be sustained.
In that connection, defendant also argued that instruction No. 8 was erroneous because it submitted the question of plaintiff's "pain and suffering * * * and the extent" thereof and the reasonable value of plaintiff's "time lost from work to date and the loss of earning capacity that plaintiff will suffer" without confining it to such loss as is shown by the evidence with reasonable certainty. In that respect, instruction No. 8, conjunctive in character, specifically told the jury: "If you find for the plainiff (plaintiff) you will then proceed to assess the amount of the plaintiff's damages at such sum as will fairly and reasonably compensate him for any and all injuries, pain, suffering, reduction of his life expectancy, reduction of his earning capacity, and any other loss which the evidence shows with reasonable certainty proximately to have been caused by the defendants (defendant's) negligence, and you should consider all of the evidence shown to be the pain and suffering, if any, so caused and the extent of the same, * * * and the reasonable value of the time lost from work to date and the loss of earning capacity that plaintiff will suffer by reason of his injuries arising out of such acts of the defendant driver." (Italics supplied.) It will be noted that the words "with reasonable certainty" are all-inclusive and qualify the elements of damage about which defendant complains. The instruction was not prejudicially erroneous.
Instructions No. 2 and No. 3 with relation thereto submitted in proper form the burden of proof imposed upon plaintiff and the question of plaintiff's alleged contributory negligence which was an issue pleaded in defendant's answer and cross-petition. Contrary to defendant's contention, instruction No. 3 was correct in every respect. It appears also that plaintiff's reply to defendant's answer and his answer to defendant's cross-petition denied each and every allegation contained therein and alleged that the negligence of defendant was gross in character. In that respect, instructions No. 4 and No. 5 with relation thereto, submitted the burden of proof imposed upon defendant and the question of defendant's contributory negligence involved in his alleged right to recover upon his answer and cross-petition controverted by plaintiff's reply and answer thereto. Contrary to defendant's contention, plaintiff did put in issue the question of defendant's contributory negligence when in his petition plaintiff pleaded that defendant was negligent and pleaded in his reply and answer that defendant was guilty of gross negligence. Defendant's contention requires no further discussion except to cite Tempero v. Adams, 153 Neb. 331, 44 N.W.2d 604, and Hamilton v. Omaha & Council Bluffs Street Ry. Co., 152 Neb. 328, 41 N.W.2d 139, which are controlling.
Defendant also argued that instruction No. 4, relating to the burden of *829 proof imposed upon defendant with regard to plaintiff's alleged contributory negligence, was prejudicially erroneous because it failed to inform the jury that in such respect defendant was entitled to receive the benefit of any evidence adduced by plaintiff tending to prove that he was negligent. Defendant relied upon Mundy v. Davis, 154 Neb. 423, 48 N.W.2d 394, 396, which held: "If the defendant pleads that the plaintiff was guilty of contributory negligence the burden is upon him to prove that defense and this burden does not shift during the trial of the case. However, if the evidence adduced by the plaintiff tends to prove that issue the defendant is entitled to receive the benefit thereof and the court must instruct the jury to that effect." We decide that although it could be reasonably concluded that the evidence adduced by plaintiff did in some respects tend to prove that he was negligent, the omission to specifically include such direction aforesaid in instruction No. 4 was not prejudicially erroneous when all of the instructions are considered together.
An applicable rule is found in Blanchard v. Lawson, 148 Neb. 299, 27 N.W.2d 217, 218, wherein we held: "Instructions should be considered together in order that they may be properly understood, and when, as an entire charge, they properly submit the issues to the jury, the verdict will not be set aside for harmless error in one of them.
* * * * * *
"If an examination of all the instructions given by the trial court discloses that they fairly and correctly state the law applicable under the evidence, error cannot be predicated thereon." See, also, Granger v. Byrne, supra.
In that connection, instruction No. 6, after setting forth every and all involved issuable rules of the road alleged to have been respectively violated by the parties, said: "You are instructed that failure on the part of either the Plaintiff Robert Griess or the defendant Dean Borchers to follow any of the above rules of the road and duties above set out would not of itself be negligence on his part, but you may take into consideration any evidence tending to show such a violation in connection with all the other evidence in the case in determining whether either the plaintiff or the defendant or both of them was negligent." (Italics supplied.) Instruction No. 13, relating to credibility of the witnesses and the weight to be given their testimony, told the jury among other things that it should take into consideration "all other evidence, facts and circumstances proved tending to corroborate or contradict such witnesses * * * and give such wieght (weight) to the testimony of any witness as in your judgment it should have fnder (under) all the circumstances of the case." (Italics supplied.)
All of such statements in the instructions aforesaid relate to a determination of the issues which distinguish the case at bar from Krepcik v. Interstate Transit Lines, 154 Neb. 671, 48 N.W.2d 839, 842. In such case, referring to the rule in Mundy v. Davis, supra, we said: "The better practice, of course, is that the instruction to that effect be included in the instruction on contributory negligence. That it was not so included here is patent. We recognized, however, in the above decision that if other instructions could reasonably be construed to properly advise the jury in that regard, it would be sufficient." The last sentence thereof is controlling here. See, also, City of Beatrice v. Forbes, 74 Neb. 125, 103 N.W. 1069, cited in both Mundy v. Davis, supra, and Krepcik v. Interstate Transit Lines, supra. We conclude that under the circumstances, the omission of the direction from instruction No. 4 was not prejudicial error. The jury could not have been misled.
Instruction No. 5½ about which defendant complains simply told the jury that both parties could not recover and that "as already stated" the case was grounded upon negligence, each party claiming himself free from negligence and charging that the injuries sustained by them respectively or the property of either was caused by negligence of the other. Contrary to defendant's contention, the primary *830 issue was the respective alleged negligence of the parties as already theretofore stated by the court in other instructions and the fact that the instruction itself did not mention contributory negligence was not prejudicial error.
The first paragraph of instruction No. 9 defined "intersection" by use of the identical material language contained in subdivision (7) of section 39-741, R.R.S. 1943. The instruction read: "An intersection is defined as the area embraced within the prolongation of the lateral curblines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of two or more highways which join one another at an angle, whether or not one such highway crosses the other." (Italics supplied.) Defendant argued that inclusion of the words "the lateral curblines" was erroneous since there were none involved, the accident having occurred at an intersection of open country highways which crossed each other at right angles, and should have been defined only as the area embraced within "the prolongation of the lateral boundary lines of two or more highways which join one another at an angle, whether or not such highway crosses the other." It will be noted that the latter language was included in the instruction as an alternative if there were no lateral curb lines. True, the court could as well have omitted any reference to "the lateral curblines" but under the clear language of the instruction and the specifically undisputed evidence in this case with regard to the boundary lines and measurements of the highways and intersection thereof, the jury could not have been misled by the instruction. It was not prejudicially erroneous.
Upon direct examination, after the plaintiff had testified that he was able to and did observe the beam of defendant's lights, he was asked without objection: "Q. Were you able from that to tell about how far he was away? A. Oh, pretty close. Q. And from that were you able to tell whether or not you thought you had time enough to go through the intersection? Answer that yes or no. A. Yes." Plaintiff was then asked: "And di (did) you have time to go through the intersection ahead of this car?" Over objection by defendant that such question was incompetent, irrelevant, and immaterial, no proper and sufficient foundation laid, and called for a conclusion of the witness and not a statement of fact, the witness was permitted to answer "Yes." Defendant argued that the court erred prejudicially in overruling the objection and permitting the answer to be given. In that regard, the objection might be said to be well taken, but it was not prejudicial error to overrule the objection because prior thereto plaintiff was permitted without objection to testify that: "Before entering the intersection I seen it. I had plenty of time so I went on through." Further, no motion was made by defendant to strike such answer.
During the trial defendant was asked by his counsel: "Now, after you saw those lights coming on and after applying the brakes, was there anything else you could do to avoid that accident?" Objection thereto as asking for a conclusion of the witness and invading the province of the jury was sustained. The same objection to an offer of proof that defendant would say there was nothing more he could do was also sustained. Contrary to defendant's contention, the objections were properly sustained.
Defendant had testified that he was driving 35 or 40 miles an hour when he applied his brakes, and about 15 miles an hour when the impact occurred. Upon cross-examination, defendant's girl companion was asked: "And you are not saying he is incorrect about the speed at the point of impact itself, and that you are not certain that is right, is that right?" Defendant's objection that the question was argumentative, asking her to interpret somebody else's testimony, incompetent, hearsay, and calling for a conclusion of the witness, was overruled, whereupon she answered: "As to what speed he was traveling at the point of impact, I couldn't say one way or the other. I imagein (imagine) he is pretty well right." The objection might be said to be well taken, but since the answer was favorable to defendant, *831 the overruling of the objection could not have been prejudicial error.
Upon cross-examination, defendant testified: "Q. And when you looked the last time you saw the lights? A. The lights snapped on just like that?" Plaintiff's motion to strike the answer as not responsive was sustained, whereupon defendant answered "Yes." He was then asked: "And that is the first time you had seen the lights? A. Yes, that is when the lights came on." Plaintiff's motion to strike the last part of such answer as not responsive and a voluntary statement was sustained, leaving the answer "Yes." Contrary to defendant's contention, such rulings of the court were not erroneous and could not have been prejudicial in any event because upon direct examination, as heretofore observed, defendant had already been permitted affirmatively to testify fully with relation to the matter thus stricken.
We find that the verdict and judgment were sustained by competent evidence and that there was no error in the record prejudicial to the rights of defendant. Therefore, the judgment of the trial court should be and hereby is affirmed.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 9741011 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:47:33.205135+00 ===

Thompson, J.
The appellant-defendant, William G. Karston, shot and killed Wendell W. Jones on July 25, 1954. The victim was a substantial and highly respected farmer living in Davis County, and the killing occurred at his home during the course of a robbery of Mr. Jones and his wife • perpetrated by the appellant and his half brother, Aimer M. Anderson. The two fled in Mr. Jones’ automobile, but were shortly after apprehended in Illinois, were returned to Davis • County and there *34jointly charged with the crime of murder by'county attorney’s information. The record shows these facts without dispute: the ■ rbbbery- and killing were admitted by both defeádants, "by'written confessions and by testimony in open court upon hearing to determine the degree of guilt and the penalty to' be imposed. The crime which deprived Wendell W. Jones of .his .life was wanton, brutal and entirely without justification so far as appears from the record before us. The actual shooting was admittedly done by Karston, the appellant, while his' codefendant and accomplice was in another room of the Jones home engaged in robbing Laura E. Jones, the wife of the. deceased.- .Karston was twenty-nine j^ears of age at the time, Anderson twenty-two. Karston had served a felony sentence for armed robbery in Minnesota, and voluntarily admitted and testified to. a long series of burglaries and armed robberies in many states. He also admitted that he was the instigator and leader in inducing his codefendant to accompany him upon the crime-filled week end of which the murder of Wendell Jones was the culminating event.
I. When the defendants were firs¡t brought into court on July 29, 1954, it appeared they had no counsel or means of employing counsel. , The court, appointed Russell Swartz, an attorney of Ottumwa, Iowa, to represent them. The record shows Mr. Swartz has had long experience in handling criminal matters, and the trial court believed his skill and experience fitted him to serve the defendants’ interests to the best advantage. He came to Bloomfield, the county seat of Davis County, on the early afternoon of July 29-, and after consultation with the defendants appeared in court with them for arraignment. Upon arraignment each defendant pleaded guilty to the offense charged. The court thereupon fixed August 3, 1954, at 10 a. m., as the time of hearing to determine the degree of murder, as provided by section 690.4, Code of Iowa 1954. At this hearing, which began on August 3 and was concluded on August 4, a considerable amount of evidence was taken. There was no dispute in the essential facts, which were fully testified to by the defendants and in particular by the appellant here, as well' as by the ■ State’s witnesses. At the conclusion of the hearing, the trial court announced it found the defendants guilty of murder *35in the first degree, and fixed the next day, August 5, as the time for sentence. Both defendants waived further extension of time and agreed that sentence might be pronounced on the date fixed.
On August 5, both defendants appearing in person and with their court-appointed counsel, the court heard arguments as to the sentence to be imposed. It is of the greatest importance here to note that the Iowa law applicable, section 690.5 of the Code of 1954, fixes only two possible punishments upon a conviction of murder of the first degree, whether by jury verdict or plea of guilty and finding of that degree by the court. The sentence must be either death or life imprisonment. The jury must fix one or the other if it finds a verdict upon trial; the court must do so if it has before it a plea of guilty and determines the murder is of the first degree.
The court having given defendants’ counsel the privilege of being heard upon the question of the sentence, Mr. Swartz made a frank and generally able plea for the degree of leniency permitted the court within the limits of the statute, for each defendant. He was compelled to recognize, however, that there was some difference in the ages, past records, leadership in the criminal forays indulged in, and the actual responsibility for the shooting, of the two men. Inadvertently, perhaps, and under the compulsion of the situation in which he found himself, he said to the court: “Now then, I realize that both of them are guilty of first-degree murder. I do think, however, there is a difference as to what the penalty should be.” (Italics supplied.)
No matter how ruthlessly he may have disregarded the rights of others, no matter how callously he may have deprived innocent citizens of their lives or property without notice or the slightest opportunity for defense, the wrongdoer, when brought to book in a court of justice, is always quick to insist upon his own rights, to the last technicality; and it is the settled and just policy of our law to give them to him. The more serious the offense of which he is accused, the more carefully will the safeguards of the law be thrown around him. It will not do in any ease to say that the accused is plainly guilty of an atrocious murder and so the means used to convict is justified by the end to be attained.
*36II. The only complaints of the appellant which we find necessary to consider are those pertaining to the appointment of counsel and the latter’s efforts in his behalf. The Sixth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States provides that “In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right * * * to have the Assistance of Counsel for his defence.” Article I, section 10, of the Constitution of the State of Iowa contains substantially similar language. It is appellant’s contention here that he did not have effective representation by counsel, in part at least because the same attorney was appointed to represent both defendants and their interests were to some extent adverse. Thus, appellant says that he was deprived of his right to a trial by due process of law, in violation of the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States, and of section 9 of Article I of the Iowa Constitution.
It should be noted that the state courts are bound by the federal courts’ interpretation of the law on this point, at least where capital offenses are concerned. Bute v. People of State of Illinois, 333 U. S. 640, 674, 68 S. Ct. 763, 780, 92 L. Ed. 986; Uveges v. Pennsylvania, 335 U. S. 437, 440, 441, 69 S. Ct. 184, 185, 186, 93 L. Ed. 127; Glasser v. United States, 315 U. S. 60, 70, 71, 62 S. Ct. 457, 464, 465, 86 L. Ed. 680; Powell v. Alabama, 287 U. S. 45, 53 S. Ct. 55, 77 L. Ed. 158, 84 A. L. R. 527. It is the definite holding of the Supreme Court of the United States that a failure of a state court to make an effective appointment of counsel may in all eases where the defendant is charged with a serious offense, and certainly does in capital cases, so offend the basic requirements of a fair hearing as to amount to a denial of due process of law contrary to the terms of the Fourteenth Amendment.
We turn then to the question whether the defendant-appellant had effective representation. We refer again to the italicized quotation from counsel’s address to the court set out in Division I above. Under the law in Iowa, as we have pointed out, the court had only two possible sentences for these two defendants, who then stood before it convicted of murder of the first degree. The court might sentence each to death by hanging; it might sentence each to life imprisonment; or it might sentence one to death and the other to imprisonment for life. *37After making the statement that he thought there was a difference in what the penalty should be for the two defendants whom he represented, counsel proceeded to make it clear which of the two — Aimer M. Anderson — was the more entitled to the leniency of the court. This left the appellant-defendant before the court with his own counsel having said, in substantial effect, that hanging might be what he deserved. If there was to be a difference in the penalty, it would necessarily be that one should hang while the other received life imprisonment. The statute permitted no other variation. Nor was there any doubt, if one was to hang, which one that should be. It would of course be the older brother, the one with the long list of crimes, the instigator and leader in the criminal foray, and the one who actually fired the fatal shot.
We have no criticism of counsel for his statement. He was placed in an impossible position, which perhaps both he and the trial court should have recognized, when he undertook to represent both defendants. It will generally be found when two or more are accused of a serious crime, that their interests are to some extent divergent. Often the question will arise as to which was the planner of the Crime, which took the leading part, or in many other ways each may desire to attempt to throw the onus upon the other. Separate lawyers for separate defendants may not in all cases prove an unmixed blessing; the result may be attempts by each to cast the blame upon the other, to the profit of the prosecution. But it is settled that where there may be adverse interests, each defendant is entitled to separate representation. Glasser v. United States, supra; People v. Lanigan, 22 Cal.2d 569, 140 P.2d 24, 148 A. L. R. 176, and annotations beginning on page 183 of 148 A. L. R.; People v. Rose, 348 Ill. 214, 180 N.E. 791; People v. Bopp, 279 Ill. 184, 116 N.E. 679.
III. The State thinks it incumbent upon the defendant to show prejudice resulting from the failure to appoint separate counsel. We said in State v. Martin, 243 Iowa 1323, 1334, 55 N.W.2d 258, 264, 34 A. L. R.2d 904, 914: “Since this is a capital case, when any substantial right of the defendant is transgressed prejudice will be presumed.” In Glasser v. United *38States, supra, at pages 75, 76 of 315 U. S., page 467 of 62 S. Ct., is this language:
“To determine the precise degree of prejudice sustained by Glasser as a result of the court’s appointment * * * is at once difficult and unnecessary. The right to have the assistance of counsel is too fundamental and absolute to allow courts to indulge in nice calculations as to the amount of prejudice arising from its denial.”
But if prejudice were necessary to be shown, it abundantly appears here. What counsel said to the court was, in substantial effect, that he thought there was a difference in the penalty it should impose; that Anderson should have the lesser sentence of life imprisonment. What that left for the appellant needs no elaboration.
IY. The State also contends that the appellant acquiesced in the appointment of joint counsel, and has waived any right to object thereto. That a defendant in a criminal case may waive his right to the assistance of counsel is well settled. But it should be clear from the record that he has done so. A waiver is a voluntary relinquishment of a known and understood right. Again we quote from Glasser v. United States, supra, at page 70 of 315 U. S., page 465 of 62 S. Ct.: “To preserve the protection of the Bill of Eights for hard-pressed defendants, we indulge every reasonable presumption against the waiver of fundamental rights.” See also Patton v. United States, 281 U. S. 276, 50 S. Ct. 253, 74 L. Ed. 854, 70 A. L. R. 263. We find no reason for discussing the question of waiver further, since it must be apparent that, even if it could be said the appellant waived his right to separate counsel (which we do not hold), he had no reason to expect his attorney would advise the court as he did. It is true that the record shows that counsel frankly told Karston that he could not promise he could do anything for him, and that he might hang. It may also be true that Karston felt himself to be the guiltier of the two, largely responsible for his younger brother’s predicament, and willing to bear the burden if one of them must receive the death penalty. But he was not bound to anticipate the unfortunate statement made. We see no escape from the conclusion *39that he did not have effective representation by and assistance of counsel, and so was not tried by due process of law, within the meaning of the Federal and State Constitutions.
Other questions urged are lacking in merit and are not likely to be raised upon a retrial. — Reversed and remanded.
Oliver, C.J., and Wennerstrum, Hays, Smith, and Larson, JJ., concur.
Garfield and Bliss, JJ., dissent.

=== CASE 2225856 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:56.610157+00 ===

21 Mass. App. Ct. 212 (1985)
486 N.E.2d 84
COMMONWEALTH
vs.
ELVIN A. MAYO, JR.
Appeals Court of Massachusetts, Middlesex.
September 19, 1985.
December 12, 1985.
Present: BROWN, KAPLAN, & PERRETTA, JJ.
John C. McBride for the defendant.
Scott Harshbarger, District Attorney, & Karen J. Kepler, Assistant District Attorney, for the Commonwealth.
PERRETTA, J.
Following a jury trial in the Superior Court, the defendant was convicted of rape. See G.L.c. 265, § 22. He raises three questions on appeal: (1) whether the victim's out-of-court and in-court identifications of him should have *213 been suppressed where there was a repetition of his picture in four, perhaps five, successive photographic arrays; (2) whether statements heard by the jury concerning New Hampshire arrest warrants for the defendant were so prejudicial as to require a mistrial; and (3) whether the verdict is tainted by "cumulative prejudice." We affirm.
1. The Out-of-Court Indentifications.
The defendant makes no argument that the judge's subsidiary findings are not warranted by the evidence; rather, he challenges the ultimate finding and ruling and argues that the "photographic identification procedures were so suggestive as to give rise to a very substantial likelihood of irreparable misidentification." We, therefore, recite the facts as found by the judge, noting in any event that they are well supported by the evidence. See Commonwealth v. Moon, 380 Mass. 751, 756 (1980).
About 4:30 A.M., on July 20, 1980, the victim, who has extensive training and experience as an artist, including portraiture, was raped on her bed in her apartment. Her window was open, and there was a substantial amount of light entering her room from artificial illumination in the vicinity. The victim was able to observe her assailant throughout the attack, which lasted about fifteen minutes. During that time the victim remained calm, and she "purposefully focused her attention" on her assailant's facial and other features.
When the asailant left her apartment, the victim called the police. Within about a half an hour of the crime, she gave the police a detailed description of the assailant's clothing, voice, size, and facial features. She described him as a black male, about five feet, ten to eleven inches, tall, one hundred and sixty-five pounds, good muscle tone, and large biceps. His hair was close-cropped, and he had a scraggly beard and hair in the center of his chin. His eyes were deep-set and bloodshot, his eyebrows thick, and he had furrows on his forehead. She described his nostrils as wide and his ears as flat. She was also able to describe his shirt in detail.[1]
*214 a. Array of July 20, 1980. That afternoon the victim went to the police station where she was shown two books with photographs of black and white males and females. The victim made no identification on this date, and the police are unable to state which photographs were in the books shown to the victim. The victim then worked with a police officer on the peparation of a composite drawing.
b. Array of July 22, 1980. On or about this date, the victim returned to the police station to view the finished composite. She was somewhat dissatisfied with the composite,[2] so she prepared her own drawing and gave it to the police. That drawing has been lost.
At this time, the victim was shown an array of between eight to sixteen pictures of black males. Photographs of the defendant and one Mark Mullins were included in this array. The victim did not make a positive identification. Instead, she stated that the photograph of Mullins looked very much like her assailant, but she could be only sixty percent certain; she might be more certain if Mullins' picture depicted a slimmer person.[3] As to the defendant's photograph, the victim thought that it could be her attacker except that in the photograph the person depicted was heavier than her assailant.
c. Array of September 5, 1980. A mug book containing photographs of black and white males and females, including one of the defendant, was shown to the victim. She looked through the book, noted one in the middle, and looked through the remainder. The photograph which she noted was of the *215 defendant, and it was the same picture of him that she had seen before. She did not, however, remember that she had seen the photograph earlier. She stated that she was eighty-five percent certain that this photograph depicted her assailant.
d. Array of May 6, 1981. In May of 1981, the victim reported to the police that she was struck by a resemblance between her assailant and a ten year old girl who had visited the victim's daughter in her home. The child was the defendant's daughter and lived around the corner from the victim.
On May 6, 1981, the victim was again shown photographs, twelve, which included a more recent picture of the defendant as well as pictures of at least two others (including Mullins) who had been included in the earlier array. The defendant's picture, however, was different from all the others in the array in that the other pictures had placards with printing on them.[4] In this more recent picture of the defendant, he appeared slimmer, and the victim made a positive identification of him as her assailant.
e. Array of June 10, 1983. In June, 1981, the defendant had been in court on the present charges, but for a large portion of the time between that appearance and the proceedings on the 1983 indictment, the defendant was in default. He was apprehended in New Hampshire in March of 1983, and at that time his picture was taken by the police in New Hampshire.
On June 10, 1983, the victim was again shown an array of twelve photographs. This array was identical to that shown to her on May 6, 1981, except that the most recent picture of the defendant replaced the photograph of him shown to her on that occasion. Again, the victim positively identified the picture of the defendant.
As to the 1980 and 1981 arrays, the judge found that the police said and did nothing, suggestive or otherwise, to draw the victim's attention to the defendant's picture. The victim was never shown a single photograph of the defendant. The judge also found that the defendant's photographs shown on *216 September 5, 1980 (c above), and May 6, 1981 (d above), "were very different in appearance" and that the defendant "appears thinner in the photographs included in the array of June 10, 1983."
We are mindful of the "danger of misidentification" where a defendant's photograph is included in successive arrays shown to a witness. Simmons v. United States, 390 U.S. 377, 383 (1968), quoted and discussed in Commonwealth v. Paszko, 391 Mass. 164, 169 (1984). However, although the showing of numerous arrays is a significant fact, it is by no means controlling in determining whether the resulting identification must be suppressed. Id. at 169-170, and cases therein collected. Rather, the question is "whether, in the totality of the circumstances, the police have procured the identification by practices so impermissibly suggestive as to give rise to a very substantial likelihood of irreparable misidentification. Simmons v. United States, 390 U.S. 377, 384 (1968). Commonwealth v. Clark, 378 Mass. 392, 399 (1979). In essence, the reviewing court applies a test of fairness which focuses on the reasonableness of the police procedures in terms of avoidable prejudice ... [citations omitted]." Commonwealth v. Vasquez, 11 Mass. App. Ct. 261, 264-265 (1981).
In applying the appropriate test to the present circumstances, we first focus on the array of July 22, rather than that of July 20, because it is not known whether the defendant's photograph was even included in the first array. At the second array, the victim equivocated between the pictures of Mullins and the defendant. She leaned toward Mullins until September 4, 1980, when she confronted and then rejected Mullins as a suspect. (See note 3, supra.) The next day, when viewing an array for the third time, she was more inclined towards the photograph of the defendant, perhaps because she had positively rejected Mullins. She still made no positive identification of the defendant, although she was eighty-five percent certain that it was he. Her hesitation on September 5, 1980, was consistent with her reluctance of July 22, 1980, because on both occasions she viewed the same picture of the defendant (she was unaware of this fact on September 5) in which he appeared to her heavier *217 than her assailant. See Commonwealth v. Paszko, 391 Mass. at 171 ("[The witnesses] were consistent in refraining from positively identifying the defendant at both arrays, while maintaining that his photograph was the one most representative of the man they had seen. Their adherence to their reservations at the second array `indicate[s] that "the police conduct was without significant effect."' Commonwealth v. Correia, 381 Mass. 65, 79 [1980], quoting United States v. Eatherton, [519 F.2d 603,] 609 [1st Cir.1975]").[5]
It was on May 6, 1981, when the victim was shown an array including a more recent picture of the defendant that she made a positive identification. Of the twelve pictures in the array, the defendant's photograph is the only one in which a placard with printing does not appear. The defendant places great emphasis on that fact and argues that the judge was in error in finding this difference to be without "significance" and the array to be "fair." However, it must be recalled that the defendant's appearance depicted in the more recent photograph was very different from that studied by the victim on September 5, 1980. As found by the judge, "In this photograph [May 6, 1981] defendant appeared slimmer." Again, the police neither said nor did anything to attract the victim's attention to a particular photograph, see note 5, supra, and the victim's selection of the "thinner" appearing defendant is consistent with her earlier equivocation. We will not say that the victim's identification of the defendant was likely due to the absence of a placard from his picture. "`The difference between [the defendant's] photograph and the other mug shots would hardly suggest to an identifying witness that [the defendant] was more likely to be the culprit; nor did the photograph single out any distinguishing personal characteristics of defendant not possessed by the men in the other photographs.' United States v. Magnotti, 454 F.2d 1140, 1142 (2d Cir.1972)." Commonwealth v. Clark, 378 Mass. at 400.
*218 Because of the victim's positive identification of the defendant on May 6, 1981, her subsequent identification from the final 1983 array "became of little significance." Commonwealth v. LaPierre, 10 Mass. App. Ct. 641, 644 (1980). Bearing in mind the victim's composure during her attack, the length of time she observed her assailant and the lighting conditions, her professional training as an artist, the facts that photographs of other individuals were also repeated in the arrays and that there were investigatory reasons for the repetition of the defendant's picture (the victim's rejection of Mullins and the defendant's weight loss), we are satisfied that the judge did not err in concluding that the "identification was the product of the victim's own recollection without inducement or reinforcement by impermissible suggestions." Commonwealth v. Vasquez, 11 Mass. App. Ct. at 266.
2. The Motion for Mistrial.
That there had been outstanding arrest warrants for the defendant was brought to the attention of the jury by a New Hampshire police officer in testifying to the circumstances of the defendant's apprehension. The Commonwealth does not argue that the testimony was admissible. See Commonwealth v. Tuitt, 393 Mass. 801, 809 (1985), quoting from Commonwealth v. Gibson, 357 Mass. 45, 48, cert. denied, 400 U.S. 837 (1970). Such testimony could improperly inform the jury of criminal activity by the defendant unrelated to the charges under consideration.
Upon hearing the testimony, the defendant immediately approached the bench and requested a mistrial, which was denied. However, the judge stated that he was going to give a curative instruction. The defendant did not object to such an instruction, but neither did he acquiesce in it, stating that "once you do that, you now highlight those warrants." The judge then put the question to the defendant: the motion for a mistrial was denied, did he or did he not want an instruction. The defendant's position, as we see it, was to want the instruction and the claim on any appeal that might ensue that no instruction could cure the error: "I leave that to your discretion. The relief I *219 wanted has been denied." The judge then forcefully instructed the jury to disregard the testimony.[6]
Whether to declare a mistrial is a matter within the judge's discretion. See Commonwealth v. Hoffer, 375 Mass. 369, 372-373 (1978); Commonwealth v. Simmonds, 386 Mass. 234, 241 (1982). The defendant claims that the judge here abused his discretion because no instruction could cure the prejudicial effect of the officer's testimony. No argument is made (nor could it be) that either the timing or the substance of the instruction was in any way deficient. See Commonwealth v. Crehan, 345 Mass. 609, 613 (1963); Commonwealth v. Gibson, 357 Mass. at 49, as examples of the established principle that immediate and forceful curative instructions can be sufficient to offset prejudice on the basis that jurors may be expected to follow instructions.
In concluding that the judge did not abuse his discretion, we have in mind that the officer's remark did not remotely touch upon the key issue at trial, identification, the testimony was a fleeting reference to a matter that was not of an inflammatory nature, and in the context of the officer's testimony, the "comment is an obscure one."[7]Commonwealth v. Simmonds, 386 Mass. at 241, in reference to testimony described at 240 & n. 1.
*220 Viewing these circumstances in conjunction with the immediate and forceful instruction, "we are not convinced that ... [the officer's statement] `could have appreciably influenced the jury or tainted their verdict.' Commonwealth v. Vanetzian, 350 Mass. 491, 495 (1966). Commonwealth v. Billings, 6 Mass. App. Ct. 884 (1978)." Commonwealth v. Simmonds, 386 Mass. at 241.
3. Cumulative Prejudice.
The defendant next argues that he was denied a fair trial by reason of the admission of certain evidence in three instances which, when considered cumulatively, resulted in prejudice to such a degree as to require a new trial. He cites first testimony concerning the New Hampshire warrants. We have disposed of the claim of prejudice on this point, and we repeat only that the testimony was struck from evidence. Compare ibid.
As to evidence of the defendant's flight, the trial judge properly admitted the evidence as consciousness of guilt. Respecting the defendant's preference, the judge did not give a contemporaneous limiting instruction but delayed discussion of the matter until his final charge. No objection to the final charge was lodged, and the defendant does not now argue that the instructions were not in compliance with Commonwealth v. Toney, 385 Mass. 575, 585 (1982).
The defendant cannot complain that he was harmed by evidence of the fact that his wife had obtained an order restraining him from entering their home. Such evidence was offered by the defendant as part of his alibi defense, and the Commonwealth had the right to pursue the matter in the manner that it did. See Commonwealth v. Atkins, 386 Mass. 593, 605 (1982) ("A conscious, tactical choice by experienced defense counsel cannot now be converted into a claim of error").
Judgment affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  The defendant is approximately six feet, three inches, tall and was twenty-eight years of age at the time of the rape. When the victim was asked at the hearing on the motion to suppress to observe the defendant and estimate his height and age, she described him to be about five feet, eleven inches, tall and about forty years old.
[2]  The judge found that the composite "bears only a gross resemblance" to the defendant.
[3]  On September 4, 1980, the victim called the police station and reported that she had seen a man in her neighborhood who could be her assailant. A confrontation was then arranged between the victim and the man, who was in fact Mullins. During the confrontation, the victim observed Mullins closely and stated that he definitely was not her assailant, even though some of their features were similar.
[4]  The judge found that this difference was not "significant" and that the "array was a fair" one.
[5]  The judge found that the police said and did nothing, suggestive or otherwise, to draw the victim's attention to the defendant's picture during her viewing of any of the arrays.
[6]  "[Y]ou just heard the witness testify to warrants, plural. The witness mentioned there was a warrant from the State of New Hampshire. That is not evidence in this case. And I instruct you, emphatically, to disregard that. You shall draw no inference, adverse to the defendant, by virtue of the fact that there may have or that this witness may have thought there was a warrant from the State of New Hampshire. I cannot instruct you emphatically enough, to disregard that. This is a Massachusetts case. I instruct you to put that out of your mind. It is not evidence in the case. It has been stricken." In his final instructions to the jury, with which the defendant was "satisfied," the judge made no reference to the testimony which he had struck.
[7]  The prosecutor asked, and the officer answered:
"Q. When you saw Mr. Mayo at that railroad crossing, did that trigger any response by you?
"A. I recognized that that was Mr. Mayo and I also knew, at that point, that there were warrants for his arrest.
"Q. From where?
"A. Massachusetts and New Hampshire."

=== CASE 9741013 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:47:34.061677+00 ===

PIVARNIK, Justice.
Defendant-Appellant Donald Ray Wallace, Jr., was found guilty by a jury in the Vigo Circuit Court of four Counts of Murder. The death penalty was sought on grounds that the killings were knowingly done in commission of a burglary and that Defendant had killed more than one person. The jury found Defendant guilty and ree-ommended the death penalty in all four cases. The trial court judge subsequently agreed with the findings of the jury and sentenced Defendant to death. Nine issues are presented for our consideration in this Direct Appeal as follows:
1. Rulings by the trial court in regard to Defendant's competency to stand trial;
2. Denial of motion for change of venue from the judge;
3. Permitting a state witness to testify when that witness was incompetent;
4. Denial of motions for mistrial following references in the testimony to Defendant's past criminal record;
5. Alleged improper search and seizure of items from automobile driven by Defendant;
*4496. Denial of Defendant's request to have certain questions asked of police officer witnesses;
7. Alleged improper testimony of rebuttal witness;
8. Error in presentence report;
9. Constitutional infirmity of Indiana's Death Penalty Statute.
The facts tend to show that on January 14, 1980, Indiana State Trooper, Thomas Snyder, was called to the home of Ralph Hendricks which had been reported burglarized. In connection with the investigation, Trooper Snyder went to the Gilligans' house, next to Hendricks' house, to inquire whether the residents therein might have seen or heard anything unusual. The window to the Gilligans' back door was broken. Snyder checked inside the house and discovered four dead bodies in the family room. They were Patrick and Teresa Gilligan and their two children, ages four and five. Mrs. Gilligan had her hands tied behind her, and the two children were tied together. Coroner, David Wilson, M.D., testified that the cause of all four deaths, as listed on the inquests, was brain damage from gunshot wounds.
The evidence also showed that Defendant Donald Ray Wallace, Jr., was seen driving a blue Plymouth automobile on the night in question. This automobile belonged to Richard Milligan. Milligan and Milligan's girlfriend, Debbie Durham, were known to have committed several prior burglaries using this same automobile. However, Richard Milligan was in jail on burglary charges this particular night. Witnesses recalled seeing this automobile in the neighborhood about the time the murders occurred.
Donna Madison was at the home of her sister, Debbie Durham, the night in question. Earlier that evening she witnessed Wallace driving the blue Plymouth. - Between 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m., Wallace returned to Debbie's home, and Donna heard him ask for matches. He found a cigarette lighter, and Donna saw him in the backyard burning the jacket he had been carrying over his shoulder upon arrival. Neighbor Sherry Grayson saw a fire at the same time and saw a man with shoulder length hair, which was characteristic of Wallace, standing by it. Officer John Crosser recovered the remains of the jacket and other items found on the ground. Among these items were a set of wedding rings without stones in them and some fragments of glass. State Police Specialist Oliver examined the glass and found the pieces fit into a pattern matching the hole in Gilligans' window.
(On the evening in question, Defendant Wallace and Debbie Durham had Carl Durham take pictures of them with many of the items taken from the Gilligan and Hen-drick residences. The pictures, also showing money and pistols connected with these burglaries, were admitted into evidence.
Debbie Durham gave Serologist William Kune the blue jeans worn by Wallace the night of the crime, upon which Kune found type AB human blood. Wallace had blood type O, but Mrs. Gilligan and one of the children had blood type AB. Kune also found type B blood on a brown cotton glovs, identified as one of a set Wallace wore while burglarizing homes. Mr. Gilligan had type B blood.
William Madison, brother of Debbie and Donna, came to Debbie Durham's home the evening in question and saw the Defendant come in. Defendant, wearing a gun in a holster, showed William Madison a briefcase with a couple of guns in it. Defend-aut also had in his possession a CB, a police scanner, and some rings. That same night Defendant attempted to sell to Randy Rhinehart some guns, a CB, and a scanner. Several witnesses testified that Debbie Durham displayed to them pieces of jewelry, which were later traced to the Gilligans. Debbie gave one of the rings to Officer O'Risky. It was identified by Dorothy Sahm, Teresa Gilligan's mother, as belonging to Teresa. A jeweler that had sized the ring and kept pictures of it also identified it as belonging to Teresa. There was a great deal of property in addition to that recited above which was found in Wallace's and *450Durham's possession and which was traced to the Gilligans. Much of the property recovered that night was also traced to the Hendricks' residence. Entry was gained in both of the homes by putting tape on the window and then breaking it in, in a manner that reduced the sound of breaking glass. Wallace and Milligan were known to gain entry for purposes of burglary in this manner.
Friends of Defendant, Mark Boyles and Anita Hoeche, testified they received a phone call on January 15th from Defendant who said he was in trouble and in need of a ride. While riding in the car, Defendant told them he had gotten too greedy the night before. He said he had broken into one house and never should have gone to the next house because he got caught there. He told them after he got caught a man in the house was giving him trouble, and he had to tie up the entire family. He said the little girl was crying and seream-ing, and it was bothering him. He felt he could not let the children grow up with the trauma of not having parents, and he did not "want to see the kids went [sic] through the tragedy of seeing their parents being killed," so he killed them also. (Record at 5083.) He said the woman was screaming, and he had to shut her up. Later that night Defendant, while hiding in the attic of Hoeche's house, was arrested.
Wallace's statements coincided with those given by Debbie Durham. Debbie Durham testified that when Wallace visited her on January 14th, around 9:30 p.m., he immediately took his clothes off and gave them to her so he could change. On his blue jeans there was a piece of fleshy-whitish-red matter. Debbie asked what it was, and Wallace stated it had to be a piece of brain because he had shot the residents, who had caught him, in the head. He told her a man had come in from the garage and surprised him. They struggled, and Wallace made him bring in the rest of the family. He said he tied up the man, made the woman tie up the children, and then Wallace tied her up. He shot the man in the head after possibly breaking the man's neck in the struggle. He said he then shot the woman twice. The children were crying for the mother, so he shot each one of them once. He said he shot the adults because they could identify him.
L.
Defendant raises several issues concerning his mental competency to stand trial. Four hearings were held before the trial judge found Defendant was competent to understand the proceedings and assist his counsel in his defense. Defendant claims the trial judge's finding was error. The first hearing was instituted by the trial judge during a pretrial motion because the judge detected in Defendant's demeanor reasonable grounds to believe that he lacked competency to proceed. The court notified the parties of his concern and then appointed two psychiatrists, Dr. Larry Davis and Dr. John Kooiker, to examine Defendant. Their subsequent reports stated their opinions that Defendant was incompetent to proceed with trial because he was suffering from acute paranoid schizophrenia.
At a hearing held in May, 1980, the doe-tors described elaborate delusions expressed by Defendant of plots against him. He had told the doctors about his belief that the CIA and Masons were attempting to place him before a firing squad to prevent his release of secret matters, including information on the Iranian hostage situation. He expressed concern about others plotting against him, including his attorney and court personnel. He imagined radio-listening devices were planted in his cell and in the room where the psychiatrists interviewed him. He expressed suspicion of the psychiatrists and of all those with whom he came in contact. The appointed doctors concluded Defendant was unable to assist counsel at the time or to participate in and understand the trial proceedings. Each stated Defendant's apparent condition would be very difficult to feign. The State's two witnesses, Defendant's cellmate and a member of the Sheriff's department, testified Defendant displayed these *451mannerisms only at selective times, the implication being Defendant was feigning the psychosis. After taking the matter under advisement, the judge found, in a May, 1980 Order, that Defendant was incompetent to stand trial. In that Order the judge stated that despite evidence to the contrary, his decision was based on an overwhelming evidence of incompetency given by the doctors.
Later, pursuant to Ind.Code § 85-86-8-8 (Burns Repl.1985), the Superintendent of Logansport State Hospital certified to the court that Defendant had now attained competency to stand trial. His certification was based upon a Dr. Matheu's opinion. However, the hearing scheduled pursuant to this certification was continued when Drs. Davis and Kooiker opined that Defendant needed further evaluation and treatment. After several ensuing months of treatment with Thorazine, Dr. Kooiker reported that Defendant had become ori ented with time, place, and person. Both psychiatrists considered Defendant competent at this point to stand trial.
However, at the second hearing Defendant appeared too heavily sedated from the medication. The psychiatrists testified that Defendant's dosage of psychotic medication could be modified such that he would maintain competency, but not experience the sedative side-effects. Over Defendant's objection, the court ruled that Defendant's competency depended upon an adjustment in his medication, and ordered Defendant back to Wishard Hospital for further treatment. However, by the next and third hearing on January 16, 1981, Drs. Kooiker, Davis, and Moore opined Defendant was incompetent to proceed with trial. All three psychiatrists testified Defendant was again suffering from symptoms of schizophrenia and that the suggested modified treatment from the previous hearing had failed. One of the psychiatrists characterized Defendant as a chronic liar, but the general consensus of the doctors was that Defendant was not feigning the psychosis. Dr. Moore testified that if Defendant was faking, he was "one of the best damn actors he had ever seen." (Record at 114.) Once again, the court found Defendant incompetent to stand trial and ordered him committed under Ind.Code § 16-14-9.-1-10 (Burns Repl.1983).
Seven months later, in February, 1982, the State moved for another competency hearing, informing the court it could produce evidence that Defendant had been faking his psychosis. The court indicated he would hold another hearing, stating he had suspected Defendant had been feigning his mental illness. On June 16, 1982, over Defendant's objection, another competency hearing was held.
The State produced at the hearing several witnesses and documentary evidence purporting to show Defendant feigned his mental illness from the beginning. More specifically, the State introduced letters Defendant had written to Debbie, his girlfriend, during the time between his arrest and the first pretrial court appearance at which his competency was put in issue. These letters indicated a full understanding of what he was doing and were intended to show he purposefully feigned incompetency to delay his trial and frustrate the State's attempt to have him sentenced to death. In the letters he discusses Debbie's loyalty to him, their sex lives, and his feelings toward his attorney. He wrote he had a higher I.Q. than his attorney and so was planning to hire an attorney from San Francisco with the assistance of his uncle. His uncle would furnish the money for an attorney with the reputation for gaining acquittals for persons charged with murder. He said he was studying from materials furnished to him by a friend who was a professor from a local law school. His studies concentrated on suppression of evidence and the art of cross-examination. He indicated he was becoming very well informed on these subjects so that he would be in a position to attack the State in court and frustrate their case. Defendant also told Debbie, who was in jail on a burglary charge herself, that she would not have to worry if she went to the Women's Prison because he had connections in the prison that would get her special considera*452tion. He expressed in the letters a knowledge of the legal system and the procedures he was facing and would face in his desire to undermine the system. Notably, no reference is made to the delusions which convinced his psychiatrist of his incompetency except in the last letter written just before the first pre-trial hearing. This letter was written in his psychotic style, referring to the secret service and Masons being after him. The trial judge suspected it was written in preparation for the upcoming hearing and fit into Defendant's plan to launch his incompetency plan.
A former jailmate of Defendant testified that sometime in February or March, 1980, Defendant told him he was using the Masons story to get out of going to trial and stated Defendant would act psychotic only when non-prisoners were present. Two jailmates from Vigo County, Lofston and St. John testified that during 1980 Defendant would act perfectly normal unless the doctors were around. Defendant told him he was fooling the psychiatrist by telling them he was collaberating with the Germans. Lofston testified that sometimes the Defendant would give his medication to Lofston and other inmates, which would make them drowsy. St. John testified Defendant told him he was pretending to be crazy to evade trial. Defendant told St. John he saved up his medication for a hearing so he would be extremely drowsy in the courtroom.
Several of the staff members from Lo-gansport State Hospital, where Defendant had been for most of the preceding two years, testified in the same manner. Robert Cosgray testified that when Defendant first came to the hospital he acted psychotic but shortly thereafter admitted to Cos-gray that he was feigning his mental illness. Defendant later denied this statement and told Cosgray that it was Cos-gray's word against his. He said he would rather spend his life in the hospital than go to the electric chair. William Hardesty testified Defendant exhibited his psychosis early in 1980, but later Defendant told Har-desty that he liked to "beat people at their own game." (Record at 1770.) Further, Defendant told Hardesty that the longer he drags this out the less chance the State had of convicting him. (Record at 1770.) Others at Logansport, James Campbell, Deborah Illes, Wilma McLaughlin, Richard Younee, and William Conn, each testified that during the two years of Defendant's hospitalization they saw Defendant's alleged psychotic delusions manifested very rarely. He appeared to have psychotic delusions perhaps once or twice, and then only when Dr. Keating was present or about to enter the room. Several of the staff members stated that Defendant gave them a contrasting impression; he was a sharp pool and card player.
There were also letters introduced into evidence from Defendant's friend, Cathy Kellams. He had written her from September, 1980 to March, 1981. The letters reveal no psychotic symptoms and include only a discussion of an upcoming hearing on "this insanity shit." (Record at 1677.) Kellams testified that she also received one letter from Defendant in which he threatened her if she testified against him, but she stated she did not have the letter and could not produce it.
After hearing all of this evidence, the trial court concluded that Defendant was faking his psychosis and that he was in fact competent to stand trial. Defendant later asked the trial court to order that all of his medication be withdrawn from him, but the trial court found this to be a medical matter and denied the motion.
Defendant claims the court had no authority to institute the last competency hearing on the motion of the State. Defendant contends that the only way an additional hearing can be ordered is by notice from the institution that Defendant has now become competent to stand trial. Defendant has misconstrued the role of two separate statutory judicial proceedings. The first proceeding, which refers to the competence of a criminal Defendant to stand trial, was governed by Ind.Code § 35-5-8.1-1 (Burns Repl.1979) [repealed effective September 1, 1982; replaced by *453Ind.Code § 35-86-3-1 (Burns Repl.1985) ]. The other proceeding comes about from the regular involuntary civil commitment proceedings pursuant to Ind.Code § 16-14-9.-1-10 (Burns Repl.1979) [amended by PL. 200-1983, § 2; now Ind.Code § 16-14-9.1-10 (Burns Supp.1985) ]. The Title 35 Statute provides a means by which the issue of Defendant's incompetence to stand criminal trial may be raised and tested. This statute requires the court to hold a competency hearing whenever it has reasonable grounds for believing Defendant lacks the ability to understand or assist counsel. If the defendant is found incompetent, this custody is transferred to the Department of Mental Health. Title 85 also requires that after a nine-month period, defendant may not be retained absent a procedure for civil commitment under the Title 16 Stat ute. Ind.Code § 35-36-3-2 (Burns Supp. 1982) provides:
"Whenever the defendant attains the ability to understand the proceedings and assist in the preparation of his defense, the department of mental health, through the superintendent of the appropriate psychiatric institution, shall certify that fact to the proper court, which shall enter an order directing the sheriff to return the defendant. The court may enter such order immediately after being sufficiently advised of the defendant's attainment of the ability to understand the proceedings and assist in the preparation of his defense." (emphasis added.)
The trial court properly ordered a hearing to inquire into Defendant's competency at the first pretrial hearing when it appeared there were reasonable grounds for believing Defendant was incompetent. An accused has a constitutional right not to be tried if he does not have the ability to comprehend the proceedings or to assist in his defense. Pate v. Robinson (1966), 383 U.S. 375, 86 S.Ct. 836, 15 L.Ed.2d 815. However, the court further had the authority and duty to hold a hearing to determine the competency of Defendant when the court had been notified that Defendant had attained the ability to understand the proceedings and assist in the preparation of his defense.
Defendant contends that when he was committed to the Department of Mental Health, pursuant to Ind.Code § 16-14-9.1-10, that the court lost jurisdiction to further inquire into his current competency to stand trial. This is not the law. When a Defendant is found mentally incompetent to stand trial, the trial court does not lose jurisdiction under Title 85, but retains jurisdiction to reconsider the matter at any time. Marx v. State (1957), 236 Ind. 455, 141 N.E.2d 126 Finkenbiner v. Dowd (1952), 231 Ind. 416, 108 N.E.2d 261, reh. denied. The trial of a defendant can be deferred because of a determination of his mental inability to stand trial. Meanwhile, the State continues to hold him pursuant to the probable cause that gave rise to his arrest and the charges filed against him. However, mental illness may be prolonged, and it is considered repugnant in our legal system to hold a person indefinitely pursuant to an arrest warrant without trial. So, a judicial determination must be provided to determine that he is mentally ill and gravely disabled, or dangerously in need of custody and treatment pursuant to Title 16. See Wilson v. State (1972), 259 Ind. 375, 287 N.E.2d 875. A Title 16 commitment determination of insanity is not a determination on the issue of a defendant's competence to stand trial and does not affect the jurisdiction to conduct criminal trial proceedings. Marx, supra. This is made apparent by the two distinct requirements of the Title 85 Statute. First, Title 385 requires the Department of Mental Health notify the court whenever in the opinion of that institution the defendant has attained the ability to understand the proceedings and is able to assist in the preparation of his defense. Second, it requires the trial judge to hold a hearing when he becomes aware of facts that reasonably appear to show defendant is now in a position to return for trial. This Court has held that the decision, whether to hold a hearing on competence to stand trial, lies in the province of the trial judge and should be dis*454turbed on review only upon a showing of clear error. Malo v. State (1977), 266 Ind. 157, 361 N.E.2d 1201. Here the trial judge was informed by the prosecutor that the State intended to show that Defendant had been feigning his psychosis from the beginning. These were sufficient grounds for the court to institute a fourth hearing and inquire further into the subject. The trial court committed no error in instituting and conducting the hearing and in making findings based on the evidence presented to him. On review this Court will not reweigh the evidence and will not overturn the trial court's factual determination unless it is not supported by the facts and their inferences. Gosnell v. State (1979), 268 Ind. 429, 376 N.E.2d 471. The trial court was not bound by the experts' testimony. Howard v. State (1976), 265 Ind. 503, 355 N.E.2d 833. There was a great deal of evidence, from a number of disinterested witnesses, that Defendant had been feigning his psychosis and which justified the trial court's finding that Defendant was competent.
Defendant claims he was denied due process of law because the Indiana statute on competency hearings does not state the burden of proof. He makes no specific allegations that the competency hearings were in fact unfair or that he was misled, surprised, or suffered from any misallocation of a burden. He cites a line of Illinois cases which held unconstitutional an IIli+-nois statute on competency to stand trial and which allocated the burden of proof to the accused. People v. McCullum (1977), 66 Ill.2d 306, 5 Ill.Dec. 836, 362 N.E.2d 307; People v. Thompson (1967), 36 Ill.2d 332, 223 N.E.2d 97; People v. Bender (1960), 20 Ill.2d 45, 169 N.E.2d 328. However, Indiana's statute, Ind.Code § 85-86-8-1, does not allocate the burden to the Defendant. Our statute provides that whenever the court has reasonable grounds for believing the defendant lacks the ability to understand the proceedings and assist in the preparation of his defense, he shall immediately hold a hearing and determine whether the defendant has that ability. The statute further provides that any evidence relative to defendant's abilities along those lines may be introduced. In a situation with a similar statute, the Missouri Court of Appeals in Missouri v. Clark (1976), Mo.Ct.App., 546 S.W.2d 455, trans. denied, declared that the only burden which exists rests on the trial judge to satisfy himself that the accused is or is not competent to stand trial. With regard to our competency statute, we maintain the same reasoning. There is no burden on the defendant to prove himself incompetent.
In the instant case, Defendant was not denied due process. The judge exhibited his understanding of the statutory law and his inclination to follow it. When it became apparent to him Defendant appeared to lack sufficient understanding, he ceased further proceedings and took the steps indicated by the Title 85 Statute. Despite the judge's reservations and doubt due to a conflict in the evidence, indicating Defendant may have been feigning his mental illness, the judge determined that the evidence of Defendant's incompetence outweighed those doubts and found Defendant incompetent. Thereafter, the judge ordered Defendant committed for treatment. Only when the judge was presented the very strong evidence in the fourth and final hearing did he change his ruling. Defendant, therefore, makes no showing of a lack of due process in the provisions of the statute and the ways in which they were applied to him by the trial court.
Appellant also claims the trial court erred in regard to the fourth and last competency hearing because the judge permitted the State to present evidence which was not newly discovered and that could have been introduced at earlier competency hearings but was not. Defendant is referring to the evidence introduced by the State of witnesses indicating Defendant was feigning his psychosis from the beginning and was determined to be incompetent to stand trial. Defendant's argument seems to be that this evidence was stale and not probative of his mental state in *4551982. We do not agree. It certainly was relative to the trial court's determination of competency in 1982 that Defendant had expressly been carrying out a plan of feigning psychosis all during these proceedings. It is true Defendant's actions and attitude in 1980 could not be conclusive of Defendant's mental condition in 1982. However, the fact that the same psychiatrist noted the same indication of psychosis in Defendant in 1982 as in 1980 and 1981, and that other witnesses believed for good reason Defendant was feigning these indicators, was clearly relevant to the judge's duty to determine competency in 1982. In this light, the witnesses' testimony attacked by Defendant was not stale since it tended to show a pattern over the period of more than two years. It helped the trial judge to assess Defendant's true state of mental health under consideration in 1982. In matters bearing on the related issue of insanity at the time of the offense, this Court has held that all evidence is admissible which relates to Defendant's behavior or environment and has some logical reference to the issue of his sanity. Howard v. State, supra. It was, therefore, not an abuse of discretion for the trial court to admit evidence of earlier and successful attempts to feign incompetence which were in fact based on the same symptoms.
After Defendant was ruled competent to stand trial he filed a "Motion To Determine The Propriety Of The Defendant Receiving Medication." (Record at 414.) The motion stated that since the time the court determined Defendant competent to stand trial, Defendant's prescription for antipsychotic medication had been renewed by the Vigo County jail physician and was being administered. In his motion, defense counsel stated his concern that the medication might affect Defendant's ability to assist counsel and understand the proceedings and that it might affect his demeanor, thereby prejudicing the jury against him. The motion also stated that if the drugs were necessary to render Defendant competent, that such chemical competency was not proper. The motion went on to allege the court could not consistently decide Defendant was feigning and at the same time leave him on antipsychotic medication. He, therefore, requested the court to determine and rule whether the medication was necessary to maintain Defendant's competency and whether such chemical competency was permitted under Indiana law. He then requested the court to order the Sheriff to halt the administration of the drugs if it was determined that drugs were not necessary. In responding to this motion the court generally found that this was a medical and not a legal issue. The court responded with written findings and conclusions that counsel's concern that the medication was rendering Defendant incompetent was unfounded since he had just been declared competent. The court ruled that although he believed an accused could constitutionally be made chemically competent, he did not believe Defendant required the medication to be competent. Therefore, he would not rule specifically on chemical competency since that question was not before him. The court did find, however, that Defendant understood the effects of the drugs and could competently discuss with his psychiatrist whether or not to continue taking it. It was a medical and not a legal issue. Defendant does not claim, nor does the record reveal, that he was in fact medicated at trial or that medication altered his demeanor in any manner. He shows no prejudice from the trial court's ruling. Furthermore there is no showing nor a claim by the Defendant that any mishap occurred during trial that required the trial judge to take any action with regard to the issue raised in this motion. He merely states the trial judge erred by not making a definite ruling at the time the motion was presented. No error is shown on this issue.
IL.
Appellant claims the trial court erred by denying him a change of judge requested about the time of his fourth and last competency hearing. Defendant had already been granted an initial change of venue from Vanderburgh to Vigo County. *456The basis for the motion for change of judge was an allegation of bias and prejudice. It was supported by a letter written by the judge in 1980 in which he inquired of the Department of Mental Health information regarding a determination of competency of the Defendant to stand trial. In the letter the judge referred to concerns expressed by jailers about an alleged escape scheme and coded letters being exchanged by Wallace and a friend. He also expressed the fact that this was a very serious matter involving four murders and that there was some evidence that Defendant may be feigning his alleged incompetency. In this motion Defendant also referred to the trial judge's expression at the fourth hearing that the judge had had doubts all along that Defendant may be feigning his incompetency.
The posture of the trial court for a change of judge at this point in the trial is a discretionary matter and a trial court will be found in error on appeal where it is shown that the judge was clearly biased and prejudiced. Such clear bias or prejudice only exists where there is an undisputed claim or where the judge has expressed an opinion on the merits of the controversy before him. Holguin v. State (1971), 256 Ind. 371, 269 N.E.2d 159; Pollard v. State (1969), 252 Ind. 513, 250 N.E.2d 748, reh. denied. In the letter to the Department of Mental Health the trial judge expressed concern over allegations, relayed to him by jailers and the prosecuting attorney, regarding an escape attempt and conflicting indications that there was an issue of competency before him. The letter was written on May 19, 1980, about the time of the first competency hearing in May 1980. The record shows the trial court stated that there was some evidence that the psychosis was being feigned but still found, in favor of the weight of evidence, that Defendant was incompetent. Although the trial judge stated that he had these doubts, he still followed the law by finding Defendant incompetent and ordering him to be committed on three different occasions. Only after hearing very strong evidence from a number of witnesses that Defendant was in fact competent and was feigning his psychosis did the trial judge change his findings. Defendant does not show that the court was biased on the issue of his guilt or innocence nor is there any showing that the conduct of the trial on the merits was affected in any manner by the trial judge's bias. Prejudice must be shown by trial conduct of the judge and not inferred from his subjective views. U.S. v. Menk (1968 7th Cir.), 406 F.2d 124, cert. denied (1969), 395 U.S. 946, 89 S.Ct. 2019, 23 L.Ed.2d 464. There is no error on this issue.
IIL
It is Appellant's contention the trial court erred in permitting witness, Richard Milligan, to testify based on the questionable mental competence of Milli-gan. Milligan had been diagnosed as a paranoid schizophrenic and had a history of hallucinating. The trial court conducted a hearing outside the presence of the jury for voir dire examination of Milligan and found him to be competent. Milligan testified that his condition was being controlled by anti-psychotic and mood-elevating drugs and that he was not then suffering from the symptoms. He stated that as long as he took the prescribed drugs he would not have the symptoms. His testimony was that he had not been hallucinating since the previous winter when he had been off of his medication for a few days. He said that he was able to tell when he was having problems and was hallucinating. He testified he was taking his drugs and was not having any problems at that time. His testimony involved his commission with Defendant and a third person of several burglaries in which they taped the glass before breaking it. This was the same manner in which the glass was broken in this case. His testimony was that the Defendant was the "brains" of their operation and had devised the system of entry without detection. Entry was gained in this manner in the prior crimes about which he testified. Thus, his testimony tended to show a common plan or scheme, identifying Defendant as the perpetrator of the instant crime. It *457appears the witness inadvertently referred to some other burglaries he, Defendant, and a third person had committed. This court will not disturb a trial court's determination of a witness's competency to testify if the court had an opportunity to observe the witness and if the evidence on his competency is susceptible of conflicting inferences. Page v. State (1980), 274 Ind. 264, 410 N.E.2d 1304. In Gosnell v. State (1978), 268 Ind. 429, 376 N.E.2d 471, this Court held that it is a general rule that witnesses are clothed with a presumption of competency and when that competency is placed in issue it is the duty of the trial court to schedule a hearing in order to properly determine whether the witness is in fact competent to testify. We further stated that the trial court has wide disceretion in disposing of petitions of this kind and will be reversed only if it has clearly abused that discretion. Here the trial court did conduct such a hearing, was able to observe this witness and make a determination as to his apparent incompetency. He was also able to observe whether or not the witness's competency was in such doubt that further investigation such as examination by a psychiatrist was necessary. Milligan, in fact, testified in cogent, narrative style and responded to questions while relating facts in both voir dire and before the jury. There is no showing that this witness demonstrated any incompetency before the jury and, of course, the jury had before them all of the information of his mental problems and was able to determine his credibility based on these facts. Accordingly, there is no error in this issue.
IV.
Defendant claims the court committed reversible error when it refused to grant a mistrial in two instances in which witnesses volunteered statements referring to Defendant's past criminal involvements. Richard Milligan testified that he and Defendant committed three burglaries together in December, 1979. Milligan testified Defendant was the leader in each of the three burglaries and Defendant used masking tape on the windows to reduce shattering and noise. Because tape was also used on the Gilligans' window, this testimony was admitted under the common scheme or plan exception to the general rule against admittance of evidence of prior crimes. Defendant has raised no question about the admission of these three offenses of burglary and does not claim that the use of masking tape insufficiently constituted a common scheme. His complaint comes with reference to the answer Milligan gave to the prosecutor's question, "I guess you testified that your first burglary was on the 25th?" Milligan's answer was, "We did some before then, but I didn't get charged with them." (Record at 4852.) Defendant then moved for a mistrial. Also, State's witness, Mark Boyles, testified that he and Anita Hoeche drove Defendant around Evansville the day after the murders. Defendant was a suspect by then. The state questioned Boyles as follows:
Q. "Okay. When you got-when the defendant got in the car, did anyone ask him what the police were after him about?"
A. "Uhh-no. Anita had an idea when we went to go pick him up. I seen his picture on the news that night and knew the police were after him, but I didn't know what for. I knew he had been in the penitentiary before and was-."
(Record at 5004.) Defendant moved for a mistrial on the basis of the reference to the defendant having been in the penitentiary. Defendant claims both of these statements by these witnesses prejudiced him at trial and during the death penalty proceedings. Both motions for mistrial were denied by the trial court but he admonished the jury to disregard the unresponsive answers. The granting of a mistrial lies within the sound discretion of the trial court, and its determination will be reversed where an abuse of that discretion can be established. Ramos v. State (1982), Ind., 433 N.E.2d 757, reh. denied; Chombers v. State (1981), Ind., 422 N.E.2d 1198, reh. denied. A mistrial is an extreme remedy and is *458warranted only where lesser curative measures will not suffice. Furthermore, even if error occurred, it may be harmless if the evidence admitted was merely cumulative and the conviction was otherwise supported by independent evidence. Hazzard v. State (1980), 274 Ind. 679, 413 N.E.2d 895.
The trial court ruled that Milligan's reference to the other burglaries could not have substantially prejudiced Defendant in light of Milligan's proper testimony about the three burglaries showing a common scheme. Defense counsel asked a previous State's witness, who spoke with the Defendant the day after the murders, if Defendant was concerned about the sentence he could receive since he had already been in so much trouble. The witness had responded in the affirmative. Mark Boyles' statement that Defendant had been in the penitentiary occurred after defense counsel asked this question of the witness. Also, Carl Durham, had testified earlier that Defendant wanted the photograph of himself and the drugs, money, and guns to send to his friends in prison. Moreover, Milligan had already testified about the December burglaries he and Defendant had committed together. Given that the jury had already heard considerable testimony, strongly implying Defendant's active criminal past, it does not appear that the statements by the two witnesses could have substantially influenced the verdict. Any error committed was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt since the testimony was cumulative of a substantial amount of other evidence. There was also substantial evidence of Defendant's involvement in this crime, the seriousness of which far outweighed any general references to previous burglaries or time spent in a prison institution. Chapman v. California (1967), 386 U.S. 18, 87 S.Ct. 824, 17 L.Ed.2d 705, reh. denied. There is no error demonstrated by this issue.
v.
Defendant contends the court erred in denying his motion to suppress evidence seized during the search of Richard Milli-gan's Plymouth automobile. The automobile was searched after a warrant was obtained and Milligan's consent to search the automobile was obtained. Appellant does not contest the issuance of the search warrant to search the interior of the automobile as being without probable cause nor does he allege that the search of the interi- or of the automobile was improperly conducted pursuant to the search warrant. His only claim is that the initial seizure of the automobile was improper and that therefore any evidence obtained from it thereafter was tainted and inadmissible.
The automobile belonged to Richard Mil-ligan and had been used by Milligan and 'Defendant in the December burglaries. However, after they were both arrested and incarcerated only Defendant was released on bond. Milligan gave Defendant permission to drive the automobile, which he did during January and on the night of these murders. The morning after the murders, Debbie drove the car to the grocery store. After breakfast Defendant left without the automobile and without telling Debbie. It was apparent at that time that he was a suspect and that the police would be looking for him. Debbie drove the automobile to an apartment on Eichel Street to sell some furniture. She was arrested there, and the police took custody of the automobile, having it towed and impounded. Then they obtained a search warrant and searched the interior of the automobile, finding many items traced to the Gilligan and Hendricks burglaries.
There is a legitimate question as to whether Defendant had standing to contest the search of this automobile. The owner of the automobile had given consent to the police to search it. Defendant's possession was only temporary, and he had apparently abandoned it at the time of the search, and it was in the possession of a third person. It is questionable that he had a legitimate expectation of privacy in it at the time it was seized. Pollard v. State (1979), 270 Ind. 599, 388 N.E.2d 496. However, beyond this question there is ample evidence that police had probable cause to *459seize the vehicle since they had many facts justifying them in suspecting that it had been used in the commission of these crimes. First, the police knew the automobile belonged to Milligan and had been used in previous burglaries by Milligan, the Defendant, and a third person. Second, the police had early on that morning learned that entry into the Gilligan house had been gained by the same method used by Milli-gan and the Defendant in the past. They were therefore familiar with the Plymouth automobile from previous investigations of Defendant and Milligan and knew it had been used in this manner before. Defendant was the only suspect because Milligan was in jail at the time. Third, there were also witnesses who indicated this automobile was in the Gilligan neighborhood at the time of the murders. Next, Donna Madison had told police officers earlier that Defendant had come to the house in this automobile in possession of guns and jewelry and burned his jacket the night in question. However, it is not known with certainty whether the police who did the towing actually knew about this particular statement. There is ample evidence, however, that the police had information that gave them sufficient probable cause to take the vehicle into possession at the time they arrested the driver. This is true particularly since it would have involved leaving the vehicle on a public street accessible to the suspect who was then at large while obtaining a warrant. The mobility of the vehicle has long been a justification for warrantless seizures based on probable cause. These were exigent circumstances that justified the trial court in finding the seizure was justified. Chambers v. Maroney (1970), 399 U.S. 42, 90 S.Ct. 1975, 26 L.Ed.2d 419, reh. denied. Stuck v. State (1970), 255 Ind. 350, 264 N.E.2d 611.
VI.
Appellant next assigns as error the trial court's granting to the State a motion in limine regarding two questions Defendant requested to be asked of a State witness. The court granted the motion in limine, but the Defendant preserved the question by attempting to elicit the testimony from the police officer, the State's witness, and was prohibited from doing so by the trial court. It is this final ruling denying his attempt to introduce this evidence which is alleged as error.
After Defendant's arrest, he requested a polygraph test and requested that he be asked two questions: whether he was present when the murders occurred and did he pull the trigger. The State objected to any mention of offers to take polygraph tests, and then the defense sought to introduce evidence that Defendant had said he wanted to be asked these two questions, omitting the context of the offer to take a polygraph test. During the testimony of the police officer, Defendant requested permission to ask him if it was not a fact that he had requested these two questions be asked of Defendant after his arrest. AL though it is not clear, apparently Defendant's purpose in requesting these questions was to give him an opportunity to state he was not in the Gilligan house at the time of the murders but was in the Hendricks' house committing robbery. This would imply his accomplice had gone into the Gilli gan house and committed the murders. He is not claiming he was prevented from putting testimony in that regard into evidence. He is only complaining that he could not show to the jury that he made a request for those two questions, and the request was refused.
The State's contention is that any evidence tending to show that Defendant sought to have these questions asked of him was both irrelevant and prejudicial as self-serving utterances. We agree. Defendant's argument is that answers to these questions would not have been self-serving. He argues the answers would have put him at the scene of a burglary of the neighboring house and would have been an admission against interest since it would be tantamount to a guilty plea to burglary. It is apparent, of course, being found guilty of burglary of one house would be far preferable to being found guilty of being in the Gilligan house and *460committing four murders for which the death penalty was sought.
The trial court is accorded with wide latitude in ruling on the relevancy of evidence. Snider v. State (1981), 274 Ind. 401, 412 N.E.2d 230, reh. denied. This latitude is vested in the trial court to determine the probative value of evidence vis-a-vis its prejudicial impact. If the offered evidence is only marginally relevant, it is within the sound discretion of the trial court to determine its admissibility. Chittenden v. State (1982), Ind., 436 N.E.2d 86; Marchand v. State (1982), Ind.App., 435 N.E.2d 284, reh. denied. Defendant fails to demonstrate the relevancy of his request of these questions to the determination of guilt or punishment for the crime under investigation. It is speculative, at best, that it would have allowed him a substantial opportunity to prove he was in the other house at the time of the murders. If such were the facts, this did not foreclose him an opportunity to bring such facts to the jury. We therefore see no abuse of discretion in the trial court in denying his efforts to get the questions asked.
VIL.
Appellant next claims it was error for the trial court to permit the testimony of the mother of Theresa Gilligan regarding the ownership of a pair of gloves. During its investigation the police found a pair of brown jersey gloves at the scene of the murders. The gloves, which were bloodstained, were introduced by the State. During its case in chief the defense introduced a pair of Isotoner gloves. On Friday, the defense called Donna Madison who testified that the Isotoner gloves belonged to Defendant, that he had been wearing them the night of the murders and that she found them in her house after the murders. The purpose of the defense presenting this evidence was to promote the inference that Defendant was next door burglarizing the neighbors' house. That is, if Defendant wore Isotoners and brought them to Donna Madison's house, then the brown jerseys at the scene must have belonged to an accomplice and not to the Defendant. After Donna Madison's testimony on Friday, the Defendant succeeded in getting the Isotoner gloves placed into evidence. During the weekend recess, the State learned from Mrs. Gilligan's mother, Mrs. Sahm, that the Isotoners belonged to her daughter who had been wearing them the night she was murdered. Thus, she could testify that the gloves in Donna Madison's house were brought there by the Defendant and were the property of one of the victims of this crime. The record shows that the gloves were rather distinctive in that they had tan leather strips on each finger and thumb and across the back, and also had a decorative label. Mrs. Sahm was able absolutely to identify the gloves as belonging to her daughter and further testify that her daughter was wearing those gloves on the night she was murdered.
(On Monday morning when the trial resumed the defense brought police officers who corroborated Donna Madison's testimony by stating that she had told them during the investigation that the Isotoner gloves found in her house belonged to Defendant. The State then called Mrs. Sahm in rebuttal to give her testimony indicated above. Defendant claims the State did not inform him of Mrs. Sahm's expected rebuttal testimony, although it did communicate with defense counsel on other matters. Defendant asserts that because he was not armed with the knowledge of Mrs. Sahm's statement, he called two police officers on Monday morning who placed him in a position of being "sandbagged" by Mrs. Sahm's testimony. Generally, when discoverable evidence is not revealed until the State seeks its introduction, the defense has two courses of action that it may seek: a continuance or the exclusion of the evidence. Reid v. State (1978), 267 Ind. 555, 372 N.E.2d 1149. Defendant moved first for exclusion of the evidence and then for a continuance. Exelusion would be the appropriate remedy where the State has acted in bad faith and failed to comply with the discovery order or where exclusion is the only remedy which would avoid a substantial prejudice to the defendant's rights. It *461is within the trial court's discretion to determine if any harm resulted from such alleged violation. However, absent clear error this Court will not reverse the ruling of the trial court. Id.
Here it is clear, and the defendant does not deny, that the State did not learn of Mrs. Sahm's statement until after Donna Madison had testified on Friday. It is also clear that the testimony Defendant introduced Monday morning via the police officers was nothing more than cumulative of the direct testimony given by Donna Madison and the Isotoner gloves which had been introduced into evidence. Clearly, the trial court could have determined in its discretion that Defendant was not prejudiced by the alleged discovery violation because it was cumulative of other evidence. Reversal should not be predicated on the erroneous admission of evidence when evidence of the same probative value is admitted without objection. Sutton v. State (1981), Ind.App., 422 N.E.2d 430. Even improperly admitted evidence does not require a reversal if it is cumulative of other evidence already before the jury. Hazzard v. State, supra. The trial court did not abuse its discretion to the prejudice of Defendant in permitting the testimony of Mrs. Sahm. Chandler v. State (1981), 275 Ind. 624, 419 N.E.2d 142.
VIIL
Appellant claims error was committed in his sentencing in that the presen-tence investigation report from the probation officer did not conform to the mandates of Ind.Code § 85-4.1-4-10 [85-50-1A-10 (Burns 1979)] [repealed and replaced by Ind.Code § 35-88-1-9 (Burns Repl.1985) ]. Ind.Code § 35-4.1-4-10 provides as follows:
"Scope of presentence investigation and report-Solicitation of victim's statements.-(a) The presentence investigation consists of the gathering of information with respect to the circumstances attending the commission of the offense, the convicted person's history of delinquency or criminality, social history, employment history, family situation, economic status, education and personal habits. Such investigation may also include any other matter which the probation officer conducting the investigation deems relevant to the question of sentence, and must include:
(1) Any matters the court directs to be included;
(2) Any written statements submitted to the prosecuting attorney by a victim under IC 35-5-6 (85-5-6-1-85-5-6-5); and
(8) Any written statements submitted to the probation officer by a victim.
(b) If there are no written statements submitted to the probation officer, he shall certify to the court:
(1) That he has attempted to contact the victim; and
(2) That, if he has contacted the victim, he has offered to accept the written statements of the victim, or to reduce his oral statements to writing, concerning the sentence, including the acceptance of any recommendation.
(c) As used in this section, the terms 'recommendation' and 'victim' have the meanings set out in IC $5-5-6-1." {(emphasis added.)
In the instant case there was no statement from a victim in the presentence report, nor any certification from the probation officer that there was an attempt to obtain one. Appellant contends that as a result of this inaction, he should now be entitled to have his case remanded to the trial court for resentencing, citing Busam v. State (1983), Ind.App., 445 N.E.2d 118. We disagree.
Appellant is incorrect in his assertion that Mrs. Sahm, Theresa Gilligan's mother, was a "victim" under Ind.Code § 35-4.1-4-10. Reference in this statute to the definition of "victim" is to a plea bargaining statute found at Ind.Code § 35-5-6-1 (Burns Repl.1979), which provides as follows:
"Definitions. -As used in this chapter:
(a) 'Prosecutor' means prosecuting attorney or deputy prosecuting attorney.
*462(b) 'Recommendation' means a proposal by the prosecutor to a court that:
(1) A charge be dismissed; or
(2) A defendant, if he pleads guilty to a charge, receive less than the maximum penalty permitted by law.
(c) 'Vietim' means a person who has suffered harm as a result of an offense. [IC 835-5-6-1, as added by Acts 1975, PL. 382, § 1, p. 1768; 1978, PL. 146, § 1, p. 1881.1"
The intention of the Legislature in Ind. Code § 35-4.1-4-10 is clearly to provide the victim an opportunity to make a statement to the sentencing judge. It refers only to the immediate and actual victims of an offense, which in this case were obviously unable to make any statements.
Appellant attempts to have subsequent provisions of the plea bargaining statutes, which provide that the next of kin of the actual victim be contacted when the actual victim cannot be contacted, apply to this case. In the chapter governing the plea bargaining process, Ind.Code § 85-5-6-5 (Burns Repl.1979) [recodified at Ind.Code § 85-35-3-7 (Burns Repl.1985)] provides that if a victim is deceased or under the age of eighteen (18) years, the prosecuting attorney is required to go to the next of kin or the parent/guardian or custodiam of the victim. It further provides for corporate or governmental entity representation. Under that same chapter, Ind.Code § 85-5-6-4 (Burns Repl.1979) [recodified at Ind. Code § 35-35-8-5 (Burns Repl.1985) ] provides as follows:
"Certification of notice to victims required-Effect of a part of the recommendation submitted to the court, the prosecutor must certify that he has offered to show the proposed recommendation to the victims of the felony, if any, and that they have been offered an opportunity to present their opinion of the recommendation to the prosecutor. This section is for the benefit of the victim and gives no additional rights to the defendant. Failure to comply gives no grounds for post-conviction relief. [IC 835-5-6-4, as added by Acts 1978, P.L. 146, § 8, p. 1881.1" (emphasis added.)
These sections expand the definition of "victim," thereby expanding the duty to receive input from the "victim," but only in the context of plea bargain proposals. We do not construe these expansive provisions as applicable to Ind.Code § 85-4.1-4-10 governing presentence reports in general.
It is clear that these statutes were primarily intended to address the social concerns for victims' rights so that a victim of a crime might have an opportunity to address the court concerning proper punishment. This was seen to counter societal perceptions that the Legislature and Courts are unconcerned with the victims' sense of justice in a particular case. In the instant case, Defendant is being sentenced after being tried and convicted, as opposed to engaging in the plea bargaining process in which charges may be dismissed or sentences reduced. Note, that the definition of "recommendation" contemplated in the plea bargaining statutes, and incorporated in Ind.Code § 385-4.1-4-10 by language therein, means a proposal that a charge be dismissed or a defendant receive less than the presumptive sentence. The Legislature specifically referred to Ind.Code § 85-4.1-4-10 to Ind.Code § 35-5-6-1, and not to any other subsequent provisions in Chapter 5. In addition, the Legislature separately and specifically expanded the definition of "victim" when the proceedings entail plea bargaining. We interpret this to mean the Legislature did not intend for Ind.Code § 35-4.1-4-10 to incorporate any other provisions except Ind.Code § 35-5-6-1, referring to actual victims.
Further, there is no indication these statutes were intended as Defendant would have us construe them, namely: to create a right on the part of Defendant to have particular information included in his pre-sentence report. On the contrary, Ind. Code § 85-5-6-4 explicitly states it is designed for the benefit of the victims and gives no additional rights to defendants. Ind.Code § 35-5-6-5 broadened the definition of "victim" and created more stringent *463requirements by bringing the actual vie tim's next of kin into the process. It is obvious that the intent of these statutes is to respond to an attitude of victims that might feel the defendant will be sentenced too leniently and not as an additional provision to benefit the defendant.
It follows from this analysis that we do not agree with the Court of Appeals' decision in Busam v. State, supra, wherein remand was ordered to the trial court because the victim's statement contained nothing concerning the sentence. It is true Ind.Code § 35-4.1-4-10 is mandatory and should be complied with by the courts. However, it does not necessarily follow that failure to comply strictly with the statute gives a defendant a right to require any action on appeal or requires this Court to find error in the sentencing. It is well settled that a defendant is not entitled to relief on appeal unless he can demonstrate he was prejudiced by the error he asserts. Pettit v. State (1979), 272 Ind. 143, 396 N.E.2d 126. There was no actual victim remaining alive in this case, and the rights accorded under Ind.Code § 85-4.1-4-10 do not inure to the benefit of Defendant. Therefore, there is no showing that Defendant was in any way harmed by his allegations of error with regard to the pre-sentence report.
IX.
Finally, Appellant claims our death penalty statute is unconstitutional in that it lacks a definite procedure governing both the penalty phase jury hearing and the appellate review of the death penalty. He claims that the Legislature has not established a meaningful procedure for review by this Court and this Court has failed to establish guidelines or rules for such review, that the statute fails by reason of not requiring the trial court to make findings of fact, that the statute fails to require specific findings on capital issues and that the statute does not sufficiently define the scope of the evidence relevant and admissible at the penalty phase hearing. This Court has repeatedly dealt with these precise issues and decided them adverse to Defendant's position. Averhart v. State (1984), Ind., 470 N.E.2d 666, Burris v. State (1984), Ind., 465 N.E.2d 171; Schiro v. State (1983), Ind., 451 N.E.2d 1047, cert. denied, 464 U.S. 1003, 104 S.Ct. 510, 78 LEd.2d 699; Williams v. State (1982), Ind., 430 N.E.2d 759, cert. dismissed, 459 U.S. 808, 103 S.Ct. 33, 74 L.Ed.2d 47. No error is presented in this issue.
This Court must now decide whether the death penalty is appropriate considering the nature of this offense and the character of the offender. At the commencement of the sentencing hearing the court recited for the jury the possible aggravating and mitigating factors. Following trial, the jury recommended the death penalty.
The court then found that the State had proved beyond a reasonable doubt the aggravating factors provided for in Ind.Code § 35-50-2-9 (Burns Repl.1985), that each of the murders was committed during the perpetration of a burglary, and that Defendant had murdered more than once. Al though the court did not list each possible mitigating factor and dispose of it, he found that there were absolutely no mitigating factors to be weighed against the aggravating ones. The trial court's findings are amply supported by the record. As to its finding that no mitigating factors existed, the presentence report as well as the evidence at trial showed Defendant had a significant criminal history. Although evidence was adduced at sentencing that Defendant suffered from an insecure and loveless childhood, there was no evidence that he suffered from extreme mental disturbance. The evidence was clear that the four victims in no way participated in or consented to Defendant's conduct. Although Defendant attempted to show that an accomplice committed the murders while he was committing a burglary in a neighboring house, the evidence to the contrary is overwhelming. There was substantial evidence that Defendant committed these acts without the aid of anyone else and that he was not under someone else's domina*464tion. All circumstances further showed that Defendant appreciated the wrongfulness of his act, demonstrated by his detailing the deed to many others, his expressions that he was clever enough to and had "beat the system," and his having his picture taken with items from the Gilligan and Hendricks homes for the purpose of sending them to his friends in prison. He not only appreciated the wrongfulness of his acts but showed no remorse and, furthermore, considered his acts creditable accomplishments. There is overwhelming evidence here sufficient to convict this defendant of these crimes beyond a reasonable doubt and to prove the aggravating factors beyond a reasonable doubt. No reasonable person could find that the death penalty in this case was arbitrarily or capriciously applied or that it is unreasonable or inappropriate. We therefore affirm the trial court in all things, including the imposition of the death penalty. >
This cause is remanded to the trial court for the purpose of setting a date for the death penalty to be carried out.
GIVAN, C.J., and SHEPARD, J., concur.
DeBRULER, J., concurs in result and dissents with separate opinion in which PRENTICE, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9741014 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:47:34.068293+00 ===

DeBRULER, Justice,
concurring in result and dissenting.
Among the trial court's written findings of fact on the imposition of the death penalty, are the following two:
"I find that the Defendant Donald Ray Wallace, Jr.'s conduct and behavior following the commission of the offenses indicated his intent to conceal his act, that his conduct surrounding the cireum-stances of this case showed a total disregard for human life, and that the imposition of anything less than the death penalty would depreciate the seriousness of the offense."
"8. The Court finds that the State has proved beyond a reasonable doubt that two aggravating cireumstances exist that warrant the imposition of the death penalty:
A. That the Defendant, Donald Ray Wallace, Jr., murdered Patrick Gilligan, Theresa Gilligan, Lisa Gilligan and Gregory Gilligan, while committing the crime of Burglary on the 14th day of January, 1980, in Vanderburgh County, State of Indiana. (I.C. 35-50-2-9(b)(1).
B. That the Defendant, Donald Ray Wallace, Jr., murdered Patrick Gilligan, ..." {emphasis added)
The sentencing court has departed in these findings from the death penalty statutes in two respects. In the first, the court has utilized a factor applicable only in non-death sentencing as an aggravating cireum-stance. 1.0. 85-88-1-7(b)(4) governing non-death sentences provides:
(b) The court may consider the following factors as aggravating circumstances or as favoring imposing consecutive terms of imprisonment:
* * * * * *
(4) Imposition of a reduced sentence or suspension of the sentence and imposition of probation would depreciate the seriousness of the crime."
To the extent that the judge's death decision rests upon this criterion as an aggravating circumstance, it is erroneous. The death sentence statutes does not incorporate this criterion as an aggravating circumstance. This court has said, and I agree, that the death sentence statute ".. gives clear and specific guidance to the sentencing authority and adequately protects each individual's constitutional rights". Williams v. State (1982), Ind., 430 N.E.2d 759, Davis v. State (1985), Ind., 477 N.E.2d 889 (separate opinion of DeBru-ler, J. concurring and dissenting, Smith v. State (1985), Ind., 475 N.E.2d 1139 (separate opinion of DeBruler, J. concurring and dissenting). By the same token a departure from the guidance of the statute undermines that protection against an arbitrary decision that the defendant deserves death rather than imprisonment.
The second departure is in the court's critical finding of the aggravating cireum-*465stance alleged on the basis of I.C. 85-50-2-9(b)(1). That statutory aggravating circumstances is as follows:
"(1) The defendant committed the murder by intentionally killing the victim while committing or attempting to commit.... burglary ..."
As trial prosecutor Leveo accurately argued during his statement to the jury in the death penalty phase of the trial, the jury's attention under this alleged circumstance, in the aftermath of the verdicts of guilty of felony murder pursuant to I.C. 35-42-1-1(2), must focus upon whether the killings were intentional. There is no finding by the sentencing court in its written findings set forth above, that appellant intentionally killed the victim, rather the court finds that the appellant "murdered" them, the term murder encompassing both a knowing and intentional killing. While the evidence supports a finding of intentional killings, that finding is for the sentencing judge to make and accurately record, and is not for this court in reviewing the sentence. I would therefore remand for further proceedings to conform to the death statute.
There is a nagging doubt, arising from this court's frequent confrontation in reviewing death sentences with the finding of absolutely no mitigating circumstances, that the mitigating circumstance search required by the death statute is either being misunderstood, misapplied, or not reflected in sentencing court findings. In my opinion it needs to be reiterated and emphasized for the guidance of judges and lawyers that a finding of the existence of a mitigating cireumstance does not preclude a positive death decision. Second, to regard the aggravating circumstance or circumstances as so horrendous as to withstand all and any conceivable mitigating cireumstances, without identifying appropriate mitigating circumstances on the record, clearly "creates the risk that the death penalty will be imposed in spite of factors which may call for a less severe penalty." Lockett v. Ohio, 438 U.S. 586, 98 S.Ct. 2954, 57 L.Ed.2d 973 (1978). I would therefore add to the remand in this case, the requirement that the trial court make a special finding dealing with appellant's long history from childhood of special mental health care, the court's own previous finding that he was not competent to stand trial, and the fact that appellant was being administered drugs during the trial. It is difficult to accept the proposition that such history should have no weight whatever in making the death decision.
PRENTICE, J., concurs.

=== CASE 2225860 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:56.700497+00 ===

486 N.E.2d 598 (1985)
E. BIERHAUS & SONS, INC., Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
Dennis R. BOWLING, Defendant-Appellee.
No. 1-485A96.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, First District.
December 19, 1985.
*599 H. Brent Stuckey, Hart, Bell, Deem, Ewing & Stuckey, Vincennes, for plaintiff-appellant.
Glenn G. Hancock, Law Offices of Daniel G. Burke, Jr., Rebecca G. Looney, New Albany, defendant-appellee.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
NEAL, Judge.
Plaintiff-appellant, E. Bierhaus & Sons, Inc. (Bierhaus), appeals an adverse decision rendered by the Floyd Circuit Court, without a jury, in favor of defendant-appellee, Dennis R. Bowling (Bowling), in Bierhaus' suit on a check of Bowlings returned for insufficient funds.
We affirm.
STATEMENT OF THE FACTS
The facts most favorable to support the judgment are as follows. Bowling, David Dabney and their families were neighbors in New Albany, Indiana, and best friends who visited and vacationed together. Bowling was a small contractor and Dabney owned and operated four retail grocery stores. Dabney lived in a nice home, drove a Cadillac automobile, his wife drove an expensive sports car, he owned race horses, lived comfortably, and represented that he owned a lot of real estate as well as the stores. In short, he emanated an aura of prosperity and affluence.
In late September of 1983, Dabney represented to Bowling that he had "cash flow" problems and needed $40,000.00 for 60 days. At the same time, he commenced discussions with Bowling in which he explored the possibility of Bowling coming into the grocery business with him as a 50% partner. Though Bowling deferred decision on any partnership matter until January *600 1, 1984, he did raise the $40,000.00 by means of a loan obtained by Bowling's parents secured by a mortgage on their real estate. Dabney later obtained additional loans from Bowling of $500.00 for taxes and $8,000.00 for debts. Interest was to be paid at the 14% rate Bowling was required to pay.
Sometime later Dabney, while still pursuing partnership possibilities, represented to Bowling that he was terminating Bierhaus as the wholesale supplier of grocery stock for his stores and would purchase such stock elsewhere. Dabney indicated that in contemplation of the new partnership, he would need a financial statement from Bowling for a potential new supplier. Bowling furnished him one dated October 11, 1982, made out on the letterhead of United States Fidelity and Guaranty Company (USF&G) which had been prepared by Bowling for USF&G and addressed to it for his purpose in obtaining construction bonds. Dabney did not tell him that the financial statement would be for Bierhaus, and nothing on it indicated that it was directed to Bierhaus. Though there were other talks and though Bowling visited Dabney's stores, no terms of partnership were ever agreed upon and no partnership agreement was ever entered into. The loans, according to Bowling, were made to Dabney as a friend.
At some time shortly before November 23, 1983, Dabney again came to Bowling and asked him for a check to be signed in blank, which was to be deposited with the new supplier as security and would not be cashed unless Bowling was first notified. In such event Dabney would reimburse Bowling's account. Bowling told him he had only $1,500.00 in his account, but Dabney assured him it would not matter. Bowling assumed the whole matter was connected with efforts to terminate Bierhaus, and there was no mention that the check was for Bierhaus. Until then, Dabney had never been dishonest with Bowling and Bowling had no knowledge of any financial failure facing Dabney. Bowling signed the check in blank and delivered it to Dabney.
During the time discussed above, Dabney was facing business failure, and among other creditors, he owed Bierhaus $400,000.00. Bierhaus had placed Dabney on a cash or cashier's check basis for grocery stock. Dabney had written 10 to 20 bad checks to Bierhaus for grocery stock, and Bierhaus had taken a mortgage on the stores and security interests in stock and fixtures prior to October 11, 1983. Dabney had delivered Bowling's financial statement to Bierhaus in late October and represented to Jim K. Neeley, Bierhaus' treasurer, that Bowling would be his partner. Neeley caused the ownership of the real estate listed in the statement to be confirmed by Bierhaus' lawyers, and even directed them to prepare a guaranty agreement up to $50,000.00 to be signed by Bowling for Dabney's debt to Bierhaus. Neeley also directed Bierhaus' lawyers to prepare a partnership agreement between Dabney and Bowling, but Neeley later testified he only gave instructions to the lawyers regarding the real estate and guaranty agreement.
At the time that these activities were being performed, and until the receipt of the check in question, Neeley did not know Bowling and had made no contact with him whatever, even though the financial statement bore Bowling's address. He based Bowling's authority on misrepresentations by Dabney. When questioned by the trial judge as to why his lawyers prepared a partnership agreement and a guaranty agreement for Bowling, a total stranger, without ever having consulted him, Neeley was astonishingly vague. He merely explained his reasons for the confirmation of real estate, the partnership agreement and the guaranty agreement by stating: "[W]e wanted assurances that Dennis Bowling was going to do this." Neeley had no knowledge, prior to the issuance of the check in question, of any of the loans Bowling made to Dabney. In addition, Bierhaus had received from Dabney checks for grocery stock signed by Harpers Rest Home, one which had been dishonored prior to November 23, 1983. There appears to have *601 been a number of checks signed by other people, delivered to Bierhaus by Dabney prior to November 23, 1983, including Dabney's father, totaling several hundred thousand dollars, though there is uncertainty as to whether they had been dishonored by that date. There are suits similar to this one pending brought by Bierhaus on those checks.
Against this background, Dabney, without Bowling's authority, on November 23, 1983, filled out Bowling's signed blank check, payable to Bierhaus for $10,606.79, which amount was prearranged between Neeley and Dabney. When grocery stock was delivered to one of Dabney's stores, the driver, by Neeley's prior directions, accepted the check in payment and delivered it to Bierhaus. Bowling received nothing for the check. The date of the receipt of the check by Bierhaus was November 25. Though Bowling's home address and phone number were on the check, Neeley made no call or inquiry.
Bowling's check was returned for insufficient funds, and Dabney is in bankruptcy. Bierhaus filed suit against Bowling on the check. Paragraph I of his complaint proceeded under IND. CODE 28-2-8-1 for the amount of the check, interest, costs of collection, attorney fees, and court costs, and in Paragraph II he proceeded under IND. CODE 35-43-5-5 and 34-4-20-1 for the proceeds, costs, attorney fees and treble damages. The trial court entered a general judgment for Bowling from which Bierhaus appeals.
ISSUES
Bierhaus presents five issues for review as follows:
I. Whether Bowling authorized Dabney to complete a blank check executed by Bowling, and therefore whether the judgment of the trial court was clearly erroneous when it relieved Bowling of his obligation to the payee of the check, Bierhaus, which payee had sold groceries in an amount equal to the check in exchange for its check.
II. Whether Dabney materially and fraudulently altered a signed check received from Bowling, which had been supplied to him by Bowling for the purpose of providing the check to a supplier of Dabney, when Dabney filled in the amount of the check, the date of the check and the payee of the check, Bierhaus, and therefore whether the judgment of the trial court was clearly erroneous when it relieved Bowling of his obligation on the check to Bierhaus.
III. Whether Bowling was precluded by his negligence in giving an executed blank check to Dabney from raising the defense of alteration against the payee of the check, Bierhaus, and therefore whether the judgment of the trial court was clearly erroneous when it relieved Bowling of its obligation on the check to Bierhaus.
IV. Whether the payee Bierhaus, which supplied grocery products in an equal amount of the check, but which knew Dabney was in serious financial difficulties, was a holder in due course taking free of any defense Bowling may have against Dabney, and therefore whether the judgment of the trial court was clearly erroneous as a matter of law when it relieved Bowling of his obligation on the check to Bierhaus.
V. Whether Bowling violated the check deception statute IND. CODE 35-43-5-5 when he executed a blank check and delivered same to Dabney, relying upon Dabney to put funds in his account to pay the check.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
Standard of Review.
The trial court did not make specific findings of fact or conclusions of law, and under such circumstances we will neither *602 reweigh the evidence nor adjudge the credibility of witnesses, but will consider only the evidence most favorable to support the judgment together with all reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom. St. Paul Fire and Marine Insurance Co. v. State Bank of Salem (1980), Ind. App., 412 N.E.2d 103; Payroll Check Cashing v. New Palestine Bank (1980), Ind. App., 401 N.E.2d 752. If sufficient evidence is found to support the judgment on any legal theory, we must affirm, and we will reverse only if the judgment is clearly erroneous. St. Paul Fire and Marine Insurance Co., supra; Payroll Check Cashing, supra.
Issues I and II. Authorization.
Bierhaus cites IND. CODE 26-1-3-115 [all future references to the Uniform Commercial Code within title 26, article 1 will be according to chapter and section number] which states:
"Incomplete instruments.  (1) When a paper whose contents at the time of signing show that it is intended to become an instrument is signed while still incomplete in any necessary respect it cannot be enforced until completed, but when it is completed in accordance with authority given it is effective as completed.
(2) If the completion is unauthorized the rules as to material alteration apply (section [26-1-]3-407), even though the paper was not delivered by the maker or drawer; but the burden of establishing that any completion is unauthorized is on the party so asserting."
Under 3-407 an alteration of an instrument is material when an incomplete instrument is completed otherwise than as authorized, or as against any person other than a holder in due course, alteration by a holder which is both fraudulent and material discharges any party whose contract is thereby changed. One who signs a blank check will be liable on it as completed in the hands of a holder in due course. Griffin v. State (1976), 171 Ind. App. 543, 357 N.E.2d 917 trans. denied.
Bierhaus argues that under the evidence Bowling signed the check in blank and delivered it to Dabney giving him the authority to give it to a supplier. Bowling also knew that a supplier was relying on his financial condition in accepting the check. Bierhaus further argues that whether it is a holder in due course is relevant only if the check was completed contrary to Bowling's authority and Bowling bears the burden of proof of such issue as a defense. See 3-307(2).
Bierhaus' assertion that the evidence shows that the check was completed in accordance with the authority given asks us to reweigh the evidence. The trier was justified in finding from the evidence that the authority was intended by Bowling to apply to persons and purposes other than Bierhaus and the purchase of Bierhaus' stock. The evidence most favorable to the judgment shows that Bowling intended the check to be made to a new supplier other than Bierhaus for security only. No authority existed to fill in Bierhaus' name and the amount of $10,606.79. It is undisputed that filling in as payee the name of a person other than that intended is material. From the entire circumstances, consisting of the stratagems employed, Dabney's straitened financial condition, similar bad check ploys on Harpers Nursing Home and his father, the court was justified in finding that Dabney's acts were fraudulent.
Issues III and IV. Negligence and Holder in Due Course.
These two issues are the heart of Bierhaus' appeal, and from the record, the trial court considered them to be the principal issues. Bierhaus argues that though a fraudulent and material alteration may discharge Bowling under 3-407, he is precluded from asserting that defense because of his negligence and because Bierhaus is a holder in due course. Regarding the issue of negligence, Sec. 3-406 provides:
"Negligence contributing to alteration or unauthorized signature.  Any person who by his negligence substantially contributes to a material alteration of the instrument or to the making of an unauthorized signature is precluded from asserting the alteration or lack of authority *603 against a holder in due course or against a drawee or other payor who pays the instrument in good faith and in accordance with the reasonable commercial standards of the drawee's or payor's business."
Our court in Griffin, 171 Ind. App. at 553, 357 N.E.2d at 924 stated:
"It is well settled that one who signs a blank check will be liable on it as it is completed. Geddes v. Blackmore (1892), 132 Ind. 551, 32 N.E. 567; Snodgrass v. Sweetser (1896), 15 Ind. App. 682, 44 N.E. 648. This rule survives under the UCC.IC 1971, 26-1-1-103. A holder in due course may enforce an incomplete check as completed. IC 1971, 26-1-3-407(3). But see IC 1971, 26-1-3-304(1)(a) and (4)(d). Others who without negligence pay a check which was fraudulently and materially altered by the holder may enforce it against a negligent drawer. IC 1971, 26-1-3-406 and 26-1-3-407(2)(a). The Indiana Comment to IC 1971, 26-1-3-406 states:
`The Code now treats the signing of an incomplete instrument as conclusive evidence of negligence under Sec. 3-407.'
See also IC 1971, 26-1-3-115 and 26-1-3-401(1)."
Nevertheless, in matters of negligence, contributory negligence, the failure of the plaintiff to use ordinary care, will bar his recovery under 3-406. J. White & R. Summers, Handbook of the Law Under the Uniform Commercial Code, Sec. 16-7, 16-8 (2d ed. 1980). Negligence or contributory negligence is a question of fact for the trier in any particular case. Insurance Company of North America v. Purdue National Bank of Lafayette (1980), Ind. App., 401 N.E.2d 708. Such result necessarily follows from the use of the words "reasonable commercial standards" in 3-406. The case of Clark v. Griffin (1985), Ind. App., 481 N.E.2d 170, concerning a forged endorsement under 3-419(3) which affords protection to a bank who has in good faith paid the instrument "in accordance with reasonable commercial standards," we held that there was imposed upon the bank a duty of inquiry when confronted by the suspicious circumstances therein existing. In short, an objective standard was created by the words "reasonable commercial standards."
Though the signing and the delivering of a blank check may be negligence, it remains to be determined whether, as a matter of law, Bierhaus acted in accordance with reasonable commercial standards or was a holder in due course. A holder in due course is defined in 3-302:
"Holder in due course.  (1) A holder in due course is a holder who takes the instrument
(a) for value; and
(b) in good faith; and
(c) without notice that it is overdue or has been dishonored or of any defense against or claim to it on the part of any person.
(2) A payee may be a holder in due course."
A holder is a person in possession of the instrument. 1-201(20). A holder takes for value when he takes the instrument in payment of or as security for an antecedent claim whether or not it is due. 3-303(b). Good faith means honesty in fact in the conduct or transaction concerned. 1-201(19). Under 3-304 a purchaser has a notice of a claim or defense if he "(b) ... has notice that the obligation of any party is voidable in whole or in part... ." Section 1-201(25) defines notice:
"(25) A person has `notice' of fact when:
(a) He has actual knowledge of it; or
(b) He has received a notice or notification of it; or
(c) From all the facts and circumstances known to him at the time in question he has reason to know that it exists.
A person `knows' or has `knowledge' of a fact when he has actual knowledge of it. `Discover' or `learn' or a word or phrase of similar import refers to knowledge rather than to reason to know. The time and circumstances under which a notice *604 or notification may cease to be effective are not determined by IC 26-1."
After a defense is shown the person claiming the rights of a holder in due course has the burden of establishing that fact. 3-307.
The critical legal question now becomes whether the conduct of the holder is measured by a subjective or objective standard. The Indiana Comments to 3-302 lay this matter to rest, including matters of burden of proof;
"(1) A holder in due course must take the instrument for value and in good faith, which is defined to mean honesty in fact. Compare Sec. 1-201 (19). The holder must establish subjective honesty, and, as under prior law, circumstances or knowledge of circumstances which would cause a reasonable man to make further inquiry are not enough to establish bad faith. E.G., First Nat. Bank v. Garner, 187 Ind. 391, 118 N.E. 813 (1918); Colvert v. Harrington, 61 Ind. App. 608, 112 N.E. 249 (1916) (indorsee taking note `without recourse' not guilty of bad faith). However, a holder in due course must also take the instrument without `notice' that it is overdue or has been dishonored, or of any defense or claim on the part of any person. Since notice is defined as `reason to know' from all the facts and circumstances known to him at the time in question, the Code requires the holder in due course to establish that he has fulfilled the `reasonable man' standard of inquiry as to facts within his `knowledge.' See Sections 1-201(25), 3-304(3). This means that the jury must be instructed on both the matter of good faith and the matter of notice. A holder may take in bad faith, but without notice of defense and the like. He may take with notice, but in good faith. He must pass both tests. This seems to adopt the law substantially as it was prior to the N.I.L. Cf. State Bank v. Lawrence, 177 Ind. 515, 96 N.E. 947, 42 L.R.A. (n.s.) 326 (1912).
* * * * * *
Under Section 3-307(3) the burden of pleading and proof on due course holding is placed upon the holder. Indiana cases are reluctant to allow a verdict to be directed for the party carrying the burden of proof although his evidence is not disputed. See the following cases where the court refused to direct a verdict in favor of the holder or held that the question of due course holding was a question for the triers of fact. Mesel v. Farmers' & Merchants' Bank, 95 Ind. App. 33, 178 N.E. 305 (1931) (in suit against indorser evidence was disputed as to whether or not holder had notice  court emphasized that verdict should not be directed in favor of party with burden of proof); Commercial Sav. Bank v. Raber, 90 Ind. App. 335, 168 N.E. 697 (1929); Ohio Contract Purchase Co. v. Bolin, 90 Ind. App. 85, 168 N.E. 196 (1929) (although testimony of officer of holder as to due course holding was unrefuted, `There may have been something in his demeanor, and in some things he said, that had the effect of impeaching his testimony'); Woodsmall v. Myers, 87 Ind. App. 69, 158 N.E. 646 (1927) (verdict against holder sustained on possibility of holder's demeanor as witness, purchase of $1000 note for $750, fact that transferor not called as witness, and inconsistencies in pleadings); National City Bank v. Kirk, 85 Ind. App. 120, 134 N.E. 772, (1922) (applied rule that court would not direct verdict in favor of holder carrying burden of proving due course holding)."
Clearly, a person claiming holder in due course status has the double hurdle of proving good faith, a subjective test, plus lack of notice, an objective test. Such rationale was followed in Western State Bank of South Bend v. First Union Bank and Trust Company of Winamac (1977), 172 Ind. App. 321, 360 N.E.2d 254. The cases of Greencastle Production Credit Association v. Riddell National Bank (1965), 137 Ind. App. 686, 210 N.E.2d 872, and Woodsmall, supra, stand for the proposition that where matters are known to a holder or are brought to his attention which would put a reasonably prudent man *605 on inquiry, such inquiry must be made at the peril of being deprived of holder in due course status. A holder may not be permitted to willfully close his eyes and excuse himself on the grounds he did not see. The trier has a right to consider, along with other circumstances, the fact that such inquiry with reasonable opportunity was not made.
Bierhaus relies heavily upon St. Paul Fire and Marine Insurance Co., supra. In that case a check, intended to be $478.00 which was inserted in the place for numbers, bore the amount in the place for writing $100,478.23, imprinted by a check writer. A 100 was crudely inserted before the 478. The check was written by a grain buyer whose writer mistakenly inserted the larger amount to a farmer with a known history of bad credit and bad checks. Though the bank officer indicated suspicion, because the check was so large, he accepted the check. The trial court, applying the objective test to 3-304, concluded that the bank officer had acted as a reasonably prudent man and the bank was a holder in due course. We said, in affirming the trial court's decision in accordance with our standard of review, that "we cannot say as a matter of law that the bank acted unreasonably in relying upon the amount expressed by the check writing machine." Id. 412 N.E.2d at 111. This matter, as well as the case at bar, is fact sensitive. Under our standard of review we may not second guess the trial court on factual matters. Thus, Bierhaus may not rely on factual similarities as conclusive as to the ruling here, where the trial judge determined that Bierhaus was not a holder in due course.
A factor to consider here is that the check was not received in the usual course of business. Older cases, discussing the negotiable instrument law existent prior to the UCC, but which did not define a holder in due course materially different than does 3-302, used the expression in describing a holder in due course as one who accepts the instrument in the usual course of business. Chicago District Electric Generating Corp. v. Evans (1946), 117 Ind. App. 280, 69 N.E.2d 627 trans. denied. In truth, the term holder in "due course" implies that such matters as exist here are extraordinary. The check here was received by Bierhaus only after a succession of events, set out above, that do not attend the ordinary course of selling grocery stock.
In a recapitulation we state: signing and delivering a blank check is such negligence which can expose the maker to liability to a holder in due course or to a person who pays the instrument in accordance with reasonable commercial standards. The term reasonable commercial standards and notice under 1-201(25) invoke an objective standard wherein the conduct of the holder is measured against that of a reasonably prudent man. Under an objective standard where a holder comes into possession of information which would dictate further inquiry by a reasonably prudent person, he may be denied holder in due course status if he fails to make such inquiry. The holder has the burden of proving that he was acting in accordance with reasonable commercial standards, or that he was acting in good faith and he was without notice. Such question is a question of fact for the trier.
Under the facts of this case we cannot say that Bierhaus carried its burden of proof, or that the court erred in finding that Bierhaus was not a holder in due course. The court could have easily inferred that Bierhaus, facing a $400,000.00 loss, either knew of the circumstances, or closed its eyes and in bad faith simply did not seek the truth in order to get its money. Bierhaus received a number of bad checks from Dabney, bad checks from other people, and an old financial statement of Bowlings addressed to USF&G confirming only part of it. Extraordinarily, it caused its attorney to prepare a partnership agreement and a guaranty agreement for Bowling's signature based upon Dabney's representation. All this dealing by Bierhaus with the gullible Bowling's interests was done without once contacting Bowling whom it did not know, but whose address it *606 had. Not only could the trial court infer that Bierhaus knew or had reason to know of the problems with the check, it could have, with equal facility, inferred that Bierhaus helped build the trap for the hapless Bowling.
Issue V. Check Deception.
Here Bierhaus argues that since Bowling intentionally issued the draft for payment knowing that it would not be paid, he committed check deception under IND. CODE 35-43-5-5 entitling Bierhaus to recover under IND. CODE 34-4-30-1. We again remind Bierhaus of our standard of review. The trial court was not compelled to accept its interpretation of the facts.
For the above reasons, this cause is affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.
RATLIFF, P.J. and ROBERTSON, J., concur.

=== CASE 9741015 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:47:37.116823+00 ===

GARRARD, Judge.
The construction company was engaged in constructing sanitary sewers for the Town of St. John. On October 20, 1981 it allegedly damaged NIPSCO's electric transmission facilities which were buried in the easement where it was excavating. NIPSCO repaired the damage on October 20th or October 21st. On October 26, 1983 NIPSCO commenced this suit for damages arising from the incident. The trial court granted summary judgment on the basis that the two year statute of limitations for damage to personal property had expired. See IC 34-1-2-2(1).
On appeal NIPSCO contends this was error because its claim should be governed by the ten year limitation period provided by IC 34-4-20-2. The version of that statute that would apply to this proceeding stated:
"No action to recover damages whether based upon contract, tort, nuisance or otherwise
(a) For any deficiency or alleged deficiency in the design, planning, supervision, construction or observation of construction of an improvement to real property, or
(b) For an injury to property, either real or personal arising out of any such deficiency, or
*634(c) For injury to the person, or for wrongful death arising out of any such deficiency shall be brought against any person performing or furnishing the design, planning, supervision, construction or observance of construction of an improvement to real property, unless such action is commenced within ten [10] years from the date of substantial completion of such improvement."
The parties agree that the claim sounded in tort, that NIPSCO's damaged cable was personal property and that the construction company was engaged in constructing an improvement to real estate.
The initial question is whether the claim falls or could fall within the requirements of subparagraph (a).
The word "deficiency" normally means either inadequate or defective. The legislature has given it no special meaning in the statute.1 Accordingly, we should employ its common meaning.
The complaint charged that the construction company negligently cut the transmission cable. Under the charge NIPSCO could prove that inadequate or defective planning or supervision of the project or observation of construction was responsible for the damage. The complaint did not negative such proof. The complaint arguably states a claim within the purview of IC 34-4-20-2.
Even so, should the ten year limitation displace the two year limit usually applicable to injuries to personal property?
The construction company's argument suggests that this is not the sort of situation the legislature envisioned when it enacted IC 34-4-20-1 et seq. We do not disagree, but the words employed provide no such limitation.
Furthermore, familiar principles of construction provide that where statutes such as these appear to be in conflict the special statute should prevail over the general one, especially when it is also the more recently enacted one. State ex rel. Eastern Pulaski Comm. School Corp. v. Pulaski Circ. Ct. (1975), 264 Ind. 37, 338 N.E.2d 634. It is also the general rule that where either of two statutes of limitation may apply to a claim, any doubt should be resolved in favor of applying the longer limitation. 51 Am.Jur.2d, Limitation of Actions, Section 63; 53 C.J.S., Limitations of Actions, Section 107.
We conclude the court erred in granting summary judgment.
Reversed and remanded.
YOUNG, P.J. (sitting by designation), concurs.
NEAL, J. (sitting by designation), dissents and files separate opinion.
. IC 34-4-20-1 provides definitions for some of the other terms employed.

=== CASE 9741016 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:47:37.120536+00 ===

NEAL, Judge,
dissenting.
IND.CODE 84-1-2-2 provides a two year statute of limitation for injuries to personal property measured from the date the cause of action accrued. This section was last amended in 1981 and the particular provision was not changed. A cause of action ordinarily accrues when there occurs a union of the negligent act and ascertainable injuries. Babson Brothers Company v. Tipstar Corporation (1983), Ind.App., 446 N.E.2d 11. This statute of limitation is viable and there is no suggestion of legislative intent in IND.CODE 34-4-20-2 that it was to be repealed or restricted.
I repeat and emphasize IND.CODE 34-4-20-2:
"Time limitation for deficiency in design or construction of improvements.-No action to recover damages whether based upon contract, tort, nuisance, or otherwise, for:
(a) Any deficiency, or alleged deficiency, in the design, planning, supervision, construction, or observation of construction of an improvement to real property;
(b) An injury to property, either real or personal, arising out of any deficiency; or
*635(c) Injury to the person, or for wrongful death, arising out of any such deficienCY;
shall be brought against any person who designs, plans, supervises, or observes the construction of, or constructs an improvement to real property, unless the action is commenced within the earlier of ten (10) years from the date of substantial completion of the improvement or twelve (12) years after the completion and submission of plans and specifications to the owner if the action is for deficiency in design." (Emphasis added.)
This section does not use the word injuries, but the word deficiencies, which the majority opinion correctly states as meaning either inadequate or defective. The statute measures the time limitation of 10 years not from the date of injury, but from completion. Thus IND.CODE 34-4-20-2 addresses a tort arising out of a completed but deficient building or improvement.
To me this conjures up an image of a cornice falling, inadequate roof supports, defective steps and the like, which, after the building is completed and accepted, causes injuries to a third party. The section does not contemplate casual and ordinary acts of negligence committed by a workman on a machine while digging a trench on the property of a third party, which has nothing to do with a completed but defective improvement. Such would repeal IND.CODE 84-1-2-2.
IND.CODE 34-4-20-2 was meant to limit the time period in which a builder and architect would remain liable for latent de-feets where the injury occurred many, many years later after which the plaintiff could bring his suit within two years. Because of the lapse of time the builder and architect, not being in possession, would be helpless to defend themselves. It is noted that the owner in possession remains liable and all responsibility is shifted to him after the period of limitation has run. Because of this section a cause of action may be barred before it accrues. See Cory Beecher and Frances Spalding v. Howard L. White, AIA and James Associates (1988), Ind.App., 447 N.E.2d 622.
Under IND.CODE 34-4-20A-5, the statute of limitation for products liability, the plaintiff faces a limitation of two years from the accrual of the action, or ten years from delivery. We cannot implant the same two year limitation in this section, though it seems implicit. However, in my opinion, the injury must arise out of a completed but deficient improvement, and not casual acts of negligence wherein the cause of action acerues during construction.

=== CASE 2225864 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:56.799841+00 ===

486 N.E.2d 1 (1985)
Stephen M. MAISH, Defendant-Appellant,
v.
TOWN OF SCHERERVILLE, Plaintiff-Appellee.
No. 3-785A195.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, Third District.
December 19, 1985.
Maish & Mysliwy, Merrillville, for defendant-appellant.
David M. Austgen, John M. O'Drobinak, P.C., Crown Point, for plaintiff-appellee.
GARRARD, Judge.
Maish was charged and in a court trial convicted of violating a speeding ordinance of the Town of Schererville. The town failed to introduce the ordinance into evidence at the trial. Maish moved for judgment on the evidence for this failure of proof, but his motion was denied. He appeals.
In Indiana the courts may not take judicial notice of municipal ordinances. They are subject to proof. Matter of Public Law No. 305 and Public Law No. 309 (1975), 263 Ind. 506, 334 N.E.2d 659; Woods v. Brown Co. Plan Comm. (1983), Ind. App., 446 N.E.2d 973; Enyart v. Blacketor (1976), 168 Ind. App. 214, 342 N.E.2d 654.
The town seeks to avoid the impact of a long line of authority to this effect by urging that those decisions have no application where a municipal corporation is seeking to enforce one of its ordinances. We disagree.
The town relies upon IC XX-X-XX-X(b). That section of the statute provides:
"A proceeding to enforce an ordinance shall be brought in the name of the municipal corporation. The municipal corporation need not prove that it or the ordinance is valid unless validity is controverted by affidavit."
The reliance is misplaced. The statute relieves the municipality from the necessity of proving that the municipal corporation was validly created or that an ordinance was validly enacted in the absence of a verified contention controverting such validity. The municipality must nevertheless establish the provisions of the ordinance. This it must do by the introduction of competent evidence or the stipulation of the parties. To hold otherwise would simply establish the constitutional invalidity of this section under Matter of Public Law No. 305, supra. See Woods v. Brown Co. Plan Comm. (1983), Ind. App., 446 N.E.2d 973; cf. Viccaro v. City of Ft. Wayne (1983), Ind. App., 449 N.E.2d 1161.
There was a failure of proof. The judgment is reversed and the case is remanded *2 to the trial court with instructions to enter judgment for the defendant.
Reversed and remanded.
STATON, P.J., and HOFFMAN, J., concur.

=== CASE 2225866 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:56.831804+00 ===

486 N.E.2d 1007 (1986)
Roland C. CARPENTER, Appellant (Defendant below),
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee (Plaintiff below).
No. 484S156.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
January 2, 1986.
Sheila Suess Kennedy, Mears, Crawford, Kennedy & Eichholtz, Indianapolis, for appellant.
Linley E. Pearson, Atty. Gen., Lee Cloyd, Deputy Atty. Gen., Indianapolis, for appellee.
PRENTICE, Justice.
Defendant (Appellant) was charged with attempted murder, a class A felony, Ind. Code §§ 35-42-1-1, 35-41-5-1 (Burns 1979 Repl.), robbery, a class A felony, Ind. Code § 35-42-5-1 (Burns 1979 Repl.), confinement a class B felony, Ind. Code § 35-42-3-3 (Burns 1982 Cum.Supp.), resisting law enforcement, a class D felony, Ind. Code § 35-44-3-3 (Burns 1982 Cum.Supp.), and carrying a handgun without a license after having been convicted of the same offense, a class D felony, Ind. Code §§ 35-23-4.1-18, 35-23-4.1-3 (Burns 1979 Repl., subsequently amended and recodified at Ind. Code §§ 35-47-2-23, 35-47-2-1 [Burns 1985 Repl.]). Following a bench trial, the trial court convicted him of the lesser-included *1008 offense of class B felony robbery, confinement and carrying a handgun without a license as charged. At sentencing the court vacated the conviction for confinement, then sentenced Defendant to consecutive terms totalling twenty-four (24) years imprisonment for the robbery and handgun convictions.
We restate the issues raised in this direct appeal as follows:
1. Whether the trial court erred in refusing to allow trial counsel to withdraw, and whether Defendant was provided with adequate representation by counsel.
2. Whether the composite 24-year sentence is manifestly unreasonable.
We affirm the convictions and sentence.
The Defendant and two other men were involved in the robbery of a restaurant in Indianapolis. A gun battle with police ensued and four (4) persons, including Defendant and a police officer, were wounded. Defendant, however, did not fire during the incident.
ISSUE I
After discovery and other pretrial procedures were well under way, but several months before trial, Defendant's trial counsel, a public defender, requested permission to withdraw, apparently at Defendant's request. The reasons for the request were not entirely clear, but apparently involved a complaint by Defendant that counsel should have more "communication" with him. The trial court denied the request to withdraw, which Defendant now claims was error. We do not agree.
An indigent defendant has the right to representation by counsel, but has no right to representation by counsel of his choice. Accordingly, the trial court may refuse a motion for permission to withdraw if the court determines that there will be a resultant delay in the administration of justice, and the trial court's decision in this regard is left to its sound discretion. See, e.g. Flick v. State (1983), Ind., 455 N.E.2d 339, 341.
The trial court did not abuse its discretion in this case. Various procedures to bring the case to trial were already in progress when the request was made. Defendant has made no showing of prejudice stemming from counsel's performance, and at sentencing stated that he was satisfied with trial counsel's representation. The trial court did not abuse its discretion in denying the motion for permission to withdraw.
Defendant also contends that he was not provided with adequate representation by trial counsel, but there is no merit to this contention.
This Court now reviews claims of ineffective assistance of counsel under the two-step test posited by the United States Supreme Court in Strickland v. Washington (1984), 466 U.S. 668, 104 S. Ct. 2052, 80 L. Ed. 2d 674, and integrated into our caselaw beginning with Lawrence v. State (1984), Ind., 464 N.E.2d 1291, 1294-97.
"Under the first step, or `performance component,' the defendant must demonstrate that the alleged acts or omissions by counsel fell outside the wide range of competent professional assistance. A strong presumption exists that counsel rendered adequate legal assistance. If the defendant satisfies step one of the test, he then must establish the second step, or `prejudice component,' under which the defendant will be entitled to relief only if the reviewing court determines that counsel's errors had an adverse effect upon the judgment." (Citations omitted.)
Richardson v. State (1985), Ind., 476 N.E.2d 497, 501. However, even in applying the Strickland test we have emphasized that isolated mistakes, poor strategy or bad tactics do not necessarily constitute ineffective assistance by counsel. Lawrence, 464 N.E.2d at 1295.
In this case trial counsel and the State prepared and entered a stipulation concerning Defendant's involvement in the incident. Defendant now claims that this stipulation was an egregious admission of his guilt and therefore serious error by counsel. *1009 We cannot accept this contention because the record demonstrates that counsel's decision to enter the stipulation was entirely a matter of strategy and tactics, fully justified under the circumstances. The State had overwhelming evidence of Defendant's participation in the robbery. In view of a possible sentence of 128 years, had Defendant been convicted on all the charges initially brought against him, trial counsel may well have decided to stipulate Defendant's involvement in some, but not all, of the acts which led to the charges. This strategy was borne out as Defendant was ultimately convicted of but one charged crime and a lesser-included offense of another. Defendant has demonstrated no error in counsel's performance.
ISSUE II
Defendant contends that the 24-year total sentence is manifestly unreasonable. We disagree.
Rule 2 of the Ind.Rules for the Appellate Review of Sentences provides:
"(1) The reviewing court will not revise a sentence authorized by statute except where such sentence is manifestly unreasonable in light of the nature of the offense and the character of the offender.
(2) A sentence is not manifestly unreasonable unless no reasonable person could find such sentence appropriate to the particular offense and offender for which such sentence was imposed."
In rejecting a contention that a sentence was manifestly unreasonable this Court recently stated:
"Within the parameters of applicable sentencing statutes, the trial court is vested with wide discretion to determine whether the presumptive sentence will be enhanced because of aggravating factors involving the particular defendant or crime, and whether the terms of imprisonment stemming from multiple convictions shall be served concurrently or consecutively. See Ind. Code § 35-50-1-2 (Burns 1979 Repl.), 35-38-1-7 (Burns 1984 Cum.Supp., formerly Ind. Code § 35-4.1-4-7, Burns Code Ed. 35-50-1A-7 [1979 Repl.]). Thus a trial court may, upon consideration of relevant facts and information, enhance the basic penalties, impose consecutive sentences, or both... . However, if the trial court enhances the penalties or imposes consecutive sentences, the record must demonstrate that `the determination was based upon the consideration of the facts of the specific crime, the aggravating and mitigating circumstances involved, and the relation of the sentence imposed to the objectives which will be served by that sentence.'" (Citations omitted.)
Shippen v. State (1985), Ind., 477 N.E.2d 903, 905. We further note that Ind. Code § 35-38-1-7(a) (Burns 1985 Cum.Supp., formerly 35-4.1-4-7(a), Burns Code Ed. 35-50-1A-7(a)) requires the trial court to consider the risk that the defendant will commit another crime, the nature and circumstances of the crime committed, and the defendant's prior criminal record, character and condition. Section 35-38-1-7(b)(2) (formerly 35-4.1-4-7(c)(2), Burns Code Ed. 35-50-1A-7(c)(2)) specifies as an aggravating factor justifying an enhanced or consecutive sentence the fact that the defendant has a history of criminal activity. Section 35-38-1-7(d) (formerly 35-4.1-4-7(d), Burns Code Ed. 35-50-1A-7(d)) provides that the trial court may consider any other relevant factor present in a particular case.
In this case Defendant was convicted of robbery as a class B felony and carrying a handgun without a license as a class D felony. The presumptive sentence for a class B felony is ten (10) years imprisonment, which may be enhanced by up to ten (10) years for aggravating circumstances, or reduced by as many as four (4) years for mitigating circumstances. Ind. Code § 35-50-2-5 (Burns 1979 Repl.) (retained in current Code). The presumptive sentence for a class D felony is two (2) years imprisonment, which may be enhanced by up to two (2) years. Ind. Code § 35-50-2-7 (Burns 1979 Repl.) (retained in current Code). The trial court sentenced Defendant in this case to the maximum term for each count, and *1010 ordered the sentences to be served consecutively.
The court cited as aggravating factors the facts that this was Defendant's third conviction for robbery and second conviction for carrying a handgun without a license. The court emphasized that four (4) persons, including a police officer, had been wounded during the incident and also determined that a reduced or suspended sentence upon the robbery conviction would "depreciate" the seriousness of that crime, see Ind. Code § 35-38-1-7(b)(4) (formerly 35-4.1-4-7(c)(4), Burns Code Ed. 35-50-1A-7(c)(4)). The record demonstrates that the trial court considered, in mitigation, Defendant's remorse and the fact that he did not fire during the incident but, nevertheless, found these factors to be outweighed by the aggravating factors previously recited.
The record supports the trial court's conclusions. We do not find the 24-year sentence to be manifestly unreasonable.
The convictions and sentence are affirmed.
GIVAN, C.J., and DeBRULER, PIVARNIK and SHEPARD, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2225879 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:57.11637+00 ===

72 N.W.2d 669 (1955)
161 Neb. 152
The GREYHOUND CORPORATION, a corporation, Appellant,
v.
LYMAN-RICHEY SAND & GRAVEL CORPORATION, a corporation, Appellee.
No. 33779.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
October 28, 1955.
*671 Fitzgerald, Hamer, Brown & Leahy, Omaha, for appellant.
Kennedy, Holland, DeLacy & Svoboda, L. J. Tierney, Omaha, for appellee.
Heard before SIMMONS, C. J., and CARTER, MESSMORE, YEAGER, CHAPPELL, WENKE and BOSLAUGH, JJ.
WENKE, Justice.
The Greyhound Corporation brought this action in the district court for Douglas County against the Lyman-Richey Sand and Gravel Corporation. The purpose of the action is to recover damages caused to a bus owned and operated by the Interstate Transit Lines when one of the defendant's trucks ran into it. Plaintiff alleged the proximate cause of the accident, which caused the damages, was certain acts of negligence on the part of the driver of the truck. Defendant filed a counterclaim based on the same accident. It recovered a verdict thereon in the sum of $1,312.58. Plaintiff thereupon filed a motion for new trial and has perfected this appeal from the overruling thereof.
At the time of the accident the bus that was damaged was owned and being operated by the Interstate Transit Lines, doing business as Overland Greyhound Lines. Whatever rights the Interstate Transit Lines had against appellee by reason of the accident were acquired by appellant, as of January 1, 1952, when appellant's purchase of the Interstate Transit Lines became effective. Admittedly its rights thereunder were subject to any and all defenses and claims, if any, which appellee might have thereto.
The accident happened about 10:45 a. m. on June 1, 1950, on U. S. Highway No. 275, also known as the West Dodge road. It happened about one-half mile east of the Ten Mile corner located west of Omaha which is the intersection of the Ten Mile road and U. S. Highway No. 275. At the time of the accident L. M. Woods, then assistant superintendent of the Interstate Transit Lines, was giving the bus a trial run to see if it had any water or oil leaks. This was necessary because a factory rebuilt motor, transmission, and radiator had just been installed therein. It was not the intention of the driver of the bus to pick up any passengers during this trial run nor did he do so. In making the test run the bus was driven north on the Ten Mile road and then onto the West Dodge road at the point where the Ten *672 Mile road and West Dodge road intersect. It proceeded to travel east toward Omaha in the south eastbound lane. This highway has a 42-foot paved surface with four lanes, two for eastbound and two for westbound traffic. As the bus entered onto the highway the driver of appellee's truck saw it do so. At that moment the truck, which was travelling east on the Dodge Street road, was just east of the main entrance to Boys Town. This point is about one-fourth mile west of the intersection. The truck, a K-8 International, was a "semi" with a dump type body constructed on the trailer for the purpose of hauling sand and gravel. At the time the truck was hauling about 11 tons of gravel. Both bus and truck proceeded east in the south lane until the accident occurred at a point just west of the crest of a long gradual uphill grade which starts at a point about 500 feet east of the intersection. The accident occurred when the right front of the truck ran into and against the left rear of the bus, damaging both vehicles. The point of the impact was just south of the north line of the south lane for eastbound traffic. The foregoing is a general summary of when, where, and how the accident happened. Later in this opinion we shall set forth the evidence more in detail as it relates to the several errors assigned and herein discussed.
Appellant's counsel complains of several instructions given by the trial court and contends the giving thereof was error and prejudicial to his client's rights. The first of these is instruction No. 6 which, among other things, placed upon appellant the burden of establishing by a preponderance of the evidence the nature and extent of the damage to the bus when, as a matter of fact, the parties had stipulated thereto.
We said in Zancanella v. Omaha & C. B. St. Ry. Co., 93 Neb. 774, 142 N.W. 190, 192: "The trial court should, as far as possible, eliminate all superfluous matters and submit to the jury only the controverted questions of fact upon which their verdict must depend. To submit to the jury matters not in issue, or to submit issues that are so wholly unsupported upon the one side, or so conclusively established upon the other, that reasonable minds could not differ with regard to them, is erroneous."
And, in Myers v. Willmeroth, 151 Neb. 712, 39 N.W.2d 423, 426, we said: "The trial court should eliminate all matters not in dispute and submit to the jury only the controverted questions of fact upon which the verdict must depend." See, also, Bee Building Co. v. Weber Gas & Gasoline Engine Co., 86 Neb. 326, 125 N.W. 518.
In view of the parties' stipulation the issue of damages should not have been submitted to the jury. The trial court should have instructed the jury that the amount of the damages had been admitted. But every error does not necessarily result in prejudice so as to require a reversal. Instruction No. 7 given by the court submitted the same issue with reference to the appellee's right to recover on its counterclaim, although a similar stipulation had been entered into by the parties fixing the amount thereof. It is apparent the jury was not confused by these instructions for when it found for the appellee on the counterclaim it fixed the amount of the verdict in the exact amount that the damages to the truck had been stipulated to be. In view thereof we find the giving of these instructions to have been error without prejudice.
Appellant complains that the court was in error in giving instructions Nos. 12 and 12½. These instructions are as follows:
No. 12. "You are instructed that under the laws of the State of Nebraska, it is required that no person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal, as hereinafter stated."
No. 12½. "You are instructed that under the laws of the State of Nebraska a person is bound to give a warning of his intention to stop a motor vehicle upon the highway by giving a hand signal and if a hand signal cannot be seen, then by an appropriate signaling device which would warn vehicles traveling of the intention of *673 the driver of said vehicle to stop said vehicle."
With reference to the duties of a driver in this regard the statutes then in force, so far as here material, provided as follows:
"No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal * * * to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear, when there is opportunity to give such signal, * * *." Section 39-7,111, R.R.S.1943.
"The signals required by sections 39-7,111 * * * shall be given either by means of the hand and arm or by a signal lamp or signal device of a type approved by the Department of Roads and Irrigation, but when a vehicle is so constructed or loaded that a hand and arm signal would not be visible both to the front and the rear of such vehicle the signals must be given by such a lamp or device." Section 39-7,116, R.R.S. 1943.
"All signals required by sections 39-7,111 * * * to be given by hand and arm shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner and such signal indicated as follows: (1) Left turn, arm and hand extended horizontally; (2) right turn, hand and arm extended upward; (3) stop or decreased speed, hand and arm extended downward." Section 39-7,117, R.R.S.1943.
It will be observed that the statute does not provide that one is bound to give a hand signal but, on the contrary, provides that such signal may be given either by means of the hand and arm, or by a signal lamp or signal device of a type approved by the Department of Roads and Irrigation. This has particular application here for the driver of the bus admitted he gave no hand signal when he slowed down to stop but depended entirely on the signal lamps on the rear of the bus, which lamps were automatically activated by the application of the foot brake. These lamps were located on each side of the rear about 4 feet from the level of the road. We find instruction No. 12½ placed a positive duty on the appellant which the law does not require and that, under the circumstances here shown, was prejudicial.
The court also gave instructions Nos. 15, 16, and 17 dealing with the same subject. These instructions, particularly No. 17, properly discuss the duties of appellant and appellee in this regard. It is true that we should consider the instructions given by the court as a whole to see if it can be said they properly submitted the issues to the jury. If they do then prejudice does not result merely because there may be error in one or more of the instructions given. But here, under the circumstances shown, we think the following principle controls: "Where two conflicting instructions are given on a question, one containing an incorrect, and the other a correct, statement of the law, the latter will not cure the former." Krepcik v. Interstate Transit Lines, 153 Neb. 98, 43 N.W.2d 609, 612.
And, as stated in Harsche v. Czyz, 157 Neb. 699, 61 N.W.2d 265, 267: "An instruction which conflicts with the propositions of law properly and correctly stated in another instruction in the same charge on a vital issue of fact and tends to mislead or confuse the jury in deliberating on conflicting evidence is erroneous and prejudicial."
Appellant also complains of instruction No. 18 given by the court as placing a positive duty on the driver of the bus to avoid the accident.
By this instruction the court advised the jury that: "You are further instructed that if you find from the evidence in this case that the plaintiff was able to avoid the accident, yet failed to do so, then your verdict should be for the defendant."
We think this instruction came very close to directing a verdict for the appellee and was clearly prejudicial. The rule in this regard has often been announced by this court.
*674 In Patterson v. Kerr, 127 Neb. 73, 254 N.W. 704, 710, we said: "One is required only to have his car under such reasonable control as to be able to avoid a collision with other vehicles whose drivers exercise due care. Complete control which is such as will prevent collision by the anticipation of negligence on the part of another in the absence of warning or knowledge is not required."
We think what was said in Spomer v. Allied Electric & Fixture Co., 120 Neb. 399, 232 N.W. 767, 769, has application here. Therein we said: "`Reasonable control' by drivers of motor vehicles is such as will enable them to avoid collision with other vehicles operated without negligence in streets or intersections, and with pedestrians in the exercise of due care; but `complete control' such as will only prevent a collision by anticipation of negligence or illegal disregard of traffic regulations, in absence of notice, warning or knowledge, is not required by the laws of Nebraska. The instruction given by the trial court in the present case imposed upon defendant too high a degree of control under the circumstances." See, also, Ficke v. Gibson, 153 Neb. 478, 45 N.W.2d 436.
In view of what we have already said the appellant is entitled to a new trial but before reversing the judgment for that purpose we shall briefly discuss the question raised as to the sufficiency of the evidence to sustain the verdict as a matter of law. The rule controlling is that: "The verdict of a jury on conflicting evidence will not be disturbed on appeal unless it is clearly wrong." Kohrt v. Hammond, 160 Neb. 347, 70 N.W.2d 102, 103.
Before entering into a discussion of the evidence we shall review two statutes cited by appellee. These statutes are apparently cited for the purpose of showing that, under the circumstances here shown, they created some duty on the part of the driver of the bus with which he failed to comply. Section 39-724, R.R.S.1943, relates, among other things, to the duty of the driver of any motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire to stop the vehicle before crossing at grade any track or tracks of a railroad, a situation not here involved. This statute does require vehicles used for carrying passengers for hire, a service in which the bus was ordinarily used, be equipped with electric signal stop lamps, red in color, located on the rear of the vehicle at a height of not less than 42 inches nor more than 60 inches above the surface of the highway and that the device shall be operated independently by a control in the driver's compartment of the vehicle. The evidence shows the bus was so equipped and that the type of signal stop lamps used on the bus for this purpose had been approved by and complied with the specifications adopted by the Department of Roads and Irrigation of the State of Nebraska. We do not think, because the statute provides, "all such vehicles shall be equipped with an electric signal stop lamp, red in color, located on the rear of the vehicle," that such lamps are required to have the word "stop" thereon unless the specifications adopted by the Department of Roads and Irrigation so provide. The evidence shows no such requirement.
Appellee also cites section 39-757, R.R.S. 1943, which provides: "No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or improved or main traveled portion of any highway, outside of a business or residence district, when it is practicable to park or leave such vehicle standing off the paved or improved or main traveled portion of such highway; Provided, in no event shall any person park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon any highway unless a clear and unobstructed width of not less than fifteen feet upon the main traveled portion of said highway opposite such standing vehicle shall be left for free passage of other vehicles thereon, nor unless a clear view of such vehicle may be obtained from a distance of two hundred feet in each direction upon such highway."
We think this statute was not intended to prohibit a momentary stoppage on the paved portion of the highway under *675 proper circumstances for a normal and reasonable purpose. A like statute was fully, and we think correctly, analyzed in Peoples v. Fulk, 220 N.C. 635, 18 S.E.2d 147, 148. Therein the court said: "The temporary stop of the bus on the hard surface portion of the highway to take on a passenger did not constitute a violation of Sec. 123(a), ch. 407, P.L.1937, which provides that `no person shall park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or improved or main traveled portion of any highway, outside of a business or residence district, when it is practicable to park or leave such vehicle standing off of the paved or improved or main traveled portion of such highway.'
"The clause `whether attended or unattended' limits the meaning of the word `park' as well as of `leave standing.' The two terms, as thus limited, are synonymous. A vehicle which is left standing is parked and a vehicle which is parked is left standing. Neither term includes a mere temporary stop for a necessary purpose when there is no intent to break the continuity of the `travel'.
"`Park' or `leave standing' means something more than a mere temporary or momentary stop on the road for a necessary purpose. State v. Carter, 205 N.C. 761, 172 S.E. 415; Stallings v. Buchan Transport Co., 210 N.C. 201, 185 S.E. 643, 42 C.J. 614; 2 Blashfield Cyc. Auto L. & P. 332, and cases cited; Billingsley v. McCormick Transfer Co., 58 N.D. 913, 228 N.W. 424; Axelson v. Jardine, 57 N.D. 524, 223 N.W. 32; Dare v. Boss, 111 Or. 190, 224 P. 646; Kastler v. Tures, 191 Wis. 120, 210 N.W. 415; Henry v. S. Liebovitz & Sons, 312 Pa. 397, 167 A. 304; American Co. of Ark. v. Baker, 187 Ark. 492, 60 S.W.2d 572; Delfosse v. New Franken Oil Co., 201 Wis. 401, 230 N.W. 31. Starting and stopping are as much an essential part of travel on a motor vehicle as is `motion'. Stopping for different causes, and according to the exigencies of the occasion, is a natural part of the `travel'. The right to stop when the occasion demands is incident to the right to travel. Fulton v. Chouteau County Farmers' Co., 98 Mont. 48, 37 P.2d 1025; Morton v. Mooney, 97 Mont. 1, 33 P.2d 262." See, also, Leary v. Norfolk Southern Bus Corp., 220 N.C. 745, 18 S.E.2d 426; Fritz v. York Motor Express Co., 358 Pa. 398, 58 A.2d 12; Naylor v. Dragoon, 116 Vt. 552, 80 A.2d 600; American Co. of Arkansas v. Baker, 187 Ark. 492, 60 S.W.2d 572.
James Million, driver of the truck, testified to the following: That he saw the bus enter the highway at the intersection of it with the Ten Mile road; that he was then on the highway traveling east at a point just east of the main entrance to Boys Town; that the main entrance to Boys Town is about one-fourth mile west of the intersection; that he caught up with the bus some 800 feet east of the intersection and then continued to travel about 100 feet behind it; that he was then traveling from 35 to 40 miles an hour; that both bus and truck continued to travel in the south lane of travel for eastbound traffic; that the bus just stopped; that he saw no signals indicating such intent on the part of the driver of the bus nor was he aware the bus was slowing down for that purpose although he was looking ahead and watching the bus; that when he noticed the bus had stopped it was about 50 feet ahead of him; that he estimated it would take a distance of about 100 feet to stop the truck at the speed he was then traveling upgrade; that he applied the brakes and turned to the left but was unable to avoid hitting the bus; and that he was not able to turn left into the passing lane for eastbound traffic because he observed, in his rear view mirror, that a semitrailer truck, loaded with hay, was about to pass him.
There were skid marks made by the tires of the truck from the point of impact for a distance of about 24 feet 5 inches to where the truck stopped on the highway. There were no skid marks of the bus tires, it being driven ahead some 50 or 60 feet from the point of impact.
We have often said: "As a general rule it is negligence as a matter of law for a motorist to drive an automobile on a highway in such a manner that he cannot stop in time to avoid a collision with an *676 object within the range of his vision. See, Buresh v. George, supra [149 Neb. 340, 31 N.W.2d 106]; Huston v. Robinson, 144 Neb. 553, 13 N.W.2d 885.
"The basis for this rule is stated in Buresh v. George, supra (149 Neb. 340, 31 N.W.2d 108), as follows: `The basis of this rule is that a driver of an automobile is legally obligated to keep such a lookout that he can see what is plainly visible before him and that he cannot relieve himself of that duty. And, in conjunction therewith, he must so drive his automobile that when he sees the object he can stop his automobile in time to avoid it.'" Murray v. Pearson Appliance Store, 155 Neb. 860, 54 N.W.2d 250, 255.
In regard to this duty we have held: "There is nothing that will excuse his failure to see what was plainly in sight if he had maintained a proper lookout." Buresh v. George, 149 Neb. 340, 31 N.W.2d 106, 109.
Accepting the truck driver's testimony, as we must for testing the sufficiency of the evidence to sustain the verdict, we think he was guilty of negligence as a matter of law. Admittedly he saw the bus at a considerable distance. The day was bright, the sun was shining overhead, and the pavement was dry. He was at all times able to view the movements of the bus and he was duty bound to look and observe its movements. That the bus must have been slowing down to stop, as the bus driver said it was, seems self evident from all the circumstances shown and there is no evidence from which it could be said that the slowing down was sudden or abrupt. In fact the evidence, without dispute, shows it was gradual. It seems to us that the truck driver was negligent in not observing this fact and acting accordingly and that his negligence was a proximate cause of the accident. It may be that when he finally became aware of the bus having stopped he was in a position from which he could not extricate himself, but it was a situation of his own making. In this regard we have not overlooked our holding in O'Brien v. J. I. Case Co., 140 Neb. 847, 2 N.W.2d 107, but that was a situation in which the jury could find there was a sudden and abrupt stop which is not the situation here.
The driver of the truck, who stated he was looking straight ahead and watching the bus, testified he never saw any signal that indicated it was going to stop. On the other hand the driver of the bus said such a signal was given. The occasion for the bus stopping was to advise a lady who was signaling to get on it that the bus was not carrying passengers. This lady was standing some 8 or 9 feet south of the paved portion of the highway and signaling with her hand indicating she wanted to get on the bus. The driver of the bus and his assistant, the latter being a mechanic who was riding with him, testified they saw this lady at some distance and then started to slow down in order to stop to so advise her. The driver testified he applied the brakes. The driver and his assistant both testified the accident occurred before the bus had come to a stop. The bus driver admitted he gave no hand signal of his intention to stop nor did he look in the rear view mirror to see if any vehicles were behind him but depended entirely on the rear stop lamps being activated by his use of the brakes. He admitted he never saw the truck until after the accident. This presented an issue of fact. The duty of a driver to give a signal under these circumstances is created by statute. See Section 39-7,111, R.R.S.1943, See, also, O'Brien v. J. I. Case, supra.
There is evidence from which a jury could find this duty was not complied with on the part of the bus driver and that he was negligent in that respect. We think the evidence is sufficient, under the circumstances disclosed by the record, to take the question of contributory negligence of the bus driver to the jury on the issue of appellant's right to recover.
We therefore reverse the judgment and remand the cause for a new trial in accordance herewith.
Reversed and remanded.

=== CASE 9741017 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:47:45.443166+00 ===

PIVARNIK, Justice.
This cause comes to us on a petition to transfer from the First District Court of Appeals. Petition is brought by Citizens Gas and Coke Utility, Defendant in the trial court and Appellant in the Court of Appeals. Petition for Transfer is granted and we vacate the opinion of the Court of Appeals, 477 N.E.2d 329, and reverse the trial court.
The cause was submitted to the trial court on stipulated facts that showed on April 8, 1972, Citizens Gas sold a water heater to Mr. and Mrs. George Barnes and installed it in their residence. The replacement water heater included a pressure relief valve also known as a T & P valve. The uniform plumbing code required that a drain be constructed near the valve and extend to the outside of the building. The obvious purpose of the drain was to disperse water which might leak out of the valve under three different circumstances. Water would be released from the valve if the water heater overheated, if it overpres-sured, or if the relief valve malfunctioned.
The Barnes residence was constructed on a concrete slab and there was no drain in the utility area in which the water heater was to be placed. In order to install such a drain, it would have been necessary to go through the concrete floor and the cost of such procedure was estimated to exceed the cost of the water heater itself. Before installing the water heater, Citizens Gas explained the need for and the requirement of such a drain to Mr. and Mrs. Barnes. It is not denied that a representative of Citizens Gas fully explained the potential danger to the contents of the house without the drain. Mrs. Barnes specifically told Citizens Gas to install the water heater without the drain. Citizens Gas then required Mrs. Barnes to execute a waiver by writing on the service contract that she assumed the cost of all damage caused if the valve malfunctioned. Mrs. Barnes did so. All of the parties stipulated that the installation of the water heater without the drain was in violation of the code but they also stipulated that such a violation did not pose any threat of personal injury.
Mr. and Mrs. Barnes sold their home to John and Mary Atkins. In July, 1979, the Atkins' were away from their home when the T & P valve malfunctioned and as a result the single story concrete slab residence was flooded, causing substantial damage to personal property and the structure. The Atkins' filed a claim under their homeowners insurance policy with American Economy. This claim was settled when American Economy paid $12,077.83 to the Atkins'. This amount included the loss sustained from the property and structural damage and relocation and living expenses incurred during repair and replacement. On July 28, 1980, American Economy filed their subrogation claim against Citizens Gas to recover the amount it paid its insured. The complaint alleged Citizens Gas as a contractor negligently installed the water heater in violation of the plumbing code. The trial court entered judgment in favor of American Economy and against Citizens Gas for $12,077.83 plus prejudgment interest.
Citizens Gas does not challenge the lower court's determination of negligence. It raises only the issue of whether lack of privity shields it from liability. Furthermore, as the Court of Appeals pointed out, this action was tried and facts were stipulated such that on review no presumptions arise in favor of the trial court. We are in as good a position as the trial judge in applying the facts to our determination of the privity issue. General Asbestos and Supply Company v. Aetna Casualty and Surety Company (1935), 101 Ind.App. 207, 198 N.E. 813. Furthermore, in view of our disposition the question of prejudgment interest allowed by the trial court is moot. Therefore, the only issue before us is that of privity.
*1000The requirements of privity have been abolished by this Court and the Court of Appeals for products liability and contractor liability involving personal injury caused by a product or work in a condition that was dangerously defective, inherently dangerous or imminently dangerous such that it created a risk of imminent personal injury. In the instant case, the Court of Appeals sought to extend the abolition of privity where the negligence of the contractor created an imminent danger of property damage only. This conclusion does not comport with our logic in previous cases and we accordingly find the Court of Appeals in error on this issue.
This Court established a general rule in Indiana in Daugherty v. Herzog (1896) 145 Ind. 255, 44 N.E. 457, that a contractor or repairman is not liable for negligent damages to third parties after acceptance of the work by an owner. Daugherty did involve a case where a young girl was killed by the collapse of the wall of a building which allegedly was due to the negligent construction of the defendant. Daugherty, nonetheless, held there was no liability to third parties that had no privity with the contractor. Daugherty acknowledged, however, a class of cases, where the law imposes a duty to third persons, independent of the contract, as in sales of dangerous goods, poisonous drugs or explosive oils. Daugherty, 145 Ind. at 260, 44 N.E. at 458.
An exception to the general rule espoused in Daugherty was created in Holland Furnace Company v. Nauracaj (1938), 105 Ind.App. 574, 14 N.E.2d 339, trans. den., where the work performed by the repairman or contractor was imminently dangerous to human life. Holland Furnace involved the placing of a furnace in a tenant house by Holland pursuant to a contract with one of the tenants. The furnace was installed on a wood platform in close proximity to wooden walls and in violation of building codes so as to create the hazard of fire which in fact did result. Action was brought by the owner of the building against the tenant and contractor. The Court of Appeals held that a structural contractor's liability to third persons may continue after he has turned over the work and it has been accepted by the owner where the work is so negligently defective as to be imminently dangerous to third persons. J.I. Case v. Sandefur Co. (1965), 245 Ind. 213, 197 N.E.2d 519 set out the exception to the need to show privity of contract in the case of products liability where a product that is imminently dangerous to the health and safety of members of the public is placed on the market by the manufacturer. This is true whether the action is brought on the theory of negligence or the theory of strict liability in tort. See also Lane v. Barringer (1980), Ind.App., 407 N.E.2d 1173, trans. den. The exception to the rule requiring privity was applied and extended by the Court of Appeals in Hiatt v. Brown (1981), Ind.App., 422 N.E.2d 736. Hiatt was seriously injured at the Indianapolis Airport when she was blown from a ramp by the jet blast from engines of a large aircraft. Defendant Eugene L. Brown was the architect who designed the ramp. It was charged that Brown did not follow ordinary standards of architectural practice in failing to study available information regarding the jet blast problem and designing the area so as to prevent such an occurrence. The Court of Appeals held in Hiatt that lack of privity between the architect and the injured third party would not bar the third party from suing the architect for his negligence if the architect's negligent design of the airport building allowed a jet blast to cause harm to those using the pedestrian ramp. A summary judgment entered by the trial court was accordingly set aside.
The reasoning behind all of these cases that has created the exception to the general requirement of privity is apparent and is based on humanitarian principles. One who sells a product or does construction work pursuant to a contract with the owner of a building or premises which presents imminent danger to the health and safety of not only the party he contracts with but to other members of the public, can be held liable for resulting injuries *1001even though the third party injured is not privy to the contract. It does not follow that the same exception would be applied where the risk is only that of property damage. In Essex v. Ryan (1983), Ind. App., 446 N.E.2d 368, 372, the Essexes sought to recover damages arising from a survey which Ryan had negligently performed for their predecessor in title in 1955. The Essexes claimed damages because of the deceased's professional incompetence and because they were assignees of their predecessors in interest. The Court of Appeals found, however, that the surveyor owed no duty to subsequent purchasers of property because he had no knowledge they would rely on his survey and because he was not in privity with them.
We agree with the dissenting opinion of Judge Neal in the instant cause wherein he found that the existing exception, abolishing privity where personal injuries are concerned, is based on humanitarian principles. No such humanitarian principle exists for the recovery of loss of property. Citizens Gas advised Barnes of the need for a drain in the area of the water heater. Barnes, however, requested the installation without the drain and, in fact, executed a release taking the responsibility for the risk of damage. We see no reason to extend the exception to the privity rule any further in this case or others not involving personal injury. The opinion of the Court of Appeals and the judgment of the trial court are vacated and the trial court is directed to enter judgment for the defendant.
GIVAN, C.J., and PRENTICE and SHEPARD, JJ., concur.
DeBRULER, J., dissents with separate opinion.

=== CASE 9741018 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:47:45.447094+00 ===

DeBRULER, Justice,
dissenting.
The nature of the legal duty imposed on the gas company is a keystone of this case. It is not a duty arising from general principles of the common law or from a contract. It arises instead from a public law, a plumbing code. Elder v. Fisher (1966), 247 Ind. 598, 217 N.E.2d 847.
The misconduct of the gas company in installing this water heater is not a failure to properly perform according to the terms of a contract or a warranty. The misconduct of the gas company is instead the failure to conform to the mandate of the plumbing code. Prest-O-Lite Company v. Skeel (1914), 182 Ind. 593, 106 N.E. 365.
The purpose of the plumbing code is not just to protect persons like the Barneses who contracted with the gas company to install the water heater. The plumbing code has instead the broader goal of protecting persons such as the Atkinses who may later use the water heater and have property in its proximity.
The gas company stipulated to the existence of its public law duty, to its actual negligent conduct in violation of the duty, and to the consequent injury befalling the Atkinses. Liability in this case is based upon negligence. The contract between the Barneses and the gas company is merely incidental. Consequently the legal concept of privity is totally irrelevant. Judge Ryan's determination of liability, based as 'it is upon the stipulation, should be affirmed.