=== CASE 9742130 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:07:13.71629+00 ===

OPINION
BAKER, Judge.
In this interlocutory appeal, appellant-defendant Shell Oil Company (Shell) challenges the trial court’s denial of its motion for summary judgment on appellee-plaintiff The Lo-vold Company’s (Lovold) action to recover corrective costs under Indiana’s Underground Storage Tanks Act. Specifically, Shell claims that it was entitled to summary judgment because it could not be considered an “operator” under the Act.
*384
FACTS
Lovold is the current owner of some property located in Brownsburg, Indiana. Before Lovold purchased the property, a gasoline station (Brownsburg Station) was operated on the property. While the station was in operation, gasoline for the underground storage tanks was purchased from an intermediate wholesaler who, in turn, purchased the gasoline from its wholesaler, Shell. Thereafter, Lovold discovered that the underground storage tanks had leaked gasoline, contaminating the soil in the surrounding area. As a result, Lovold expended $150,000 to clean the contaminated soil and remove the tanks.
On December 20, 1995, Lovold filed a civil action against Shell, pursuant to Indiana’s Underground Storage Tanks Act (Act). Specifically, Lovold alleged that Shell was hable for its corrective costs under the Act because it had operated the tanks at the time the leaks had occurred. In response, Shell filed a motion for summary judgment, in which it argued that it was not an “operator” under the Act because it was not responsible for the daily operation of the underground storage tanks. Following a hearing on March 18,1997, the trial court denied Shell’s motion. Shell now'appeals.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
Shell argues that the trial court erred in denying its motion for summary judgment. Specifically, Shell argues that it could not be hable under the Act because it did not “operate” the underground storage tanks.
In order for a party to be held hable for costs under the USTA, it must be shown that the party either “owned or operated the underground storage tank at the time” when the petroleum leak occurred. I.C. § 13-23-13-8(b). According to the statute, an operator is defined as a person “in control of, or having responsibility for, the daily operation of an underground storage tank.” I.C. § 13-ll-2-148(d).
Recently, another panel of this court concluded that the term “operator” was ambiguous because the legislature failed to define the words control and responsible. Shell Oil Co., Union Oil Co. v. Meyer, 684 N.E.2d 504, 514 (Ind.Ct.App.1997). As a result, the Meyer court apphed rules of statutory construction, and determined that an operator was someone who had the authority to control the underground storage tanks. Id. at 516. Unlike the Meyer court, we do not conclude that the terms “control” and “responsible” are ambiguous and, therefore, subject to statutory construction.
Our rules of statutory construction forbid this court from interpreting a statute that is facially clear and unambiguous. Benham v. State, 637 N.E.2d 133, 136 (Ind.1994). Further, when the legislature defines a word, we are bound by that definition. Id. As stated above, an operator is defined as a person “in control of, or having responsibility for, the daily operation of an underground storage tank.” I.C. § 13 — 11—2—148(d). Responsible is defined as “answerable” or “accountable.” Merriam Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary 998 (10th ed. 1993). Further, “control” is defined as “to exercise restraining or directing influence over.” Id. at 252. In order to be considered an operator under the Act, therefore, Shell must have had more than the “authority to control.” Rather, Shell must have exercised immediate control over or have been directly answerable for the daily operations of the storage tanks.
In the present case, nothing in the record indicates that Shell exercised such influence or was otherwise accountable for the daily operations of the storage tanks. The record reveals that the relationship between Shell and the operators of the Brownsburg station was tenuous. Shell, as a wholesaler, merely supplied gasoline to an intermediate wholesaler who, in turn, supplied gasoline to the Brownsburg station. R. at 97. However, there is no evidence that Shell had a contract with the station to supply the gasoline. R. at 98. Additionally, there is no evidence that Shell leased the facility; rather, the intermediate wholesaler, who leased the facility from a third party, sublet the station to the Brownsburg station operators. R. at 97. Finally, although Shell may have taken certain remedial actions over the past several years to ensure that the underground storage tanks would not pose a health risk to the local residents, these isolated acts were insufficient to make Shell responsible for the daily operations of the Brownsburg station’s un*385derground tanks. Under these circumstances, we cannot conclude that Shell was an operator under the Act. To hold otherwise, would impose a definition that the legislature could not Have intended. Because Shell could not be held liable under the Act, the trial court erred in denying its motion for summary judgment.
The denial of Shell’s motion for summary judgment is reversed and remanded for proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion.
STATON, J., concurs.
ROBERTSON, J., dissents with opinion.

=== CASE 2229973 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:33.236547+00 ===

687 N.E.2d 171 (1997)
293 Ill. App. 3d 246
227 Ill. Dec. 248
In re MARRIAGE OF Virginia R. SCHRIMPF, Petitioner-Appellee, and
Donald F. Schrimpf, Respondent-Appellant.
No. 5-96-0753.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Fifth District.
November 13, 1997.
*172 Donald E. Groshong, Williamson, Webster, Groshong, Falb & Gibson, Alton, for Respondent-Appellant.
James R. Heil, Alton, for Petitioner-Appellee.
Justice GOLDENHERSH delivered the opinion of the court:
Respondent, Donald F. Schrimpf, appeals from an order of the circuit court of Madison County denying his petition for the reduction or termination of maintenance. In this cause, the issues we are asked to address are (1) whether the circuit court's denial of a reduction or termination of maintenance was an abuse of discretion and/or against the manifest weight of the evidence and (2) whether respondent is entitled to a credit toward his maintenance obligation for social security benefits received by petitioner, Virginia R. Schrimpf, by virtue of contributions made by respondent. We affirm.
FACTS
The parties originally married on September 27, 1950, and divorced for the first time on June 2, 1967. The parties remarried on October 17, 1970. Two children were born during the parties' first marriage but were emancipated by the time the second dissolution was entered on November 28, 1979. That judgment required, inter alia, that respondent pay petitioner $750 "per month as and for permanent alimony and maintenance until the respondent-counterpetitioner's death, the petitioner-counterrespondent's death, or the petitioner-counterrespondent's remarriage, whichever occurs first, commencing immediately upon entry of this Judgment." The judgment further provided, in accordance with section 502(f) of the Illinois Marriage and Dissolution of Marriage Act (the Act) (Ill.Rev.Stat.1979, ch. 40, par. 502(f) (now 750 ILCS 5/502(f) (West 1996))):
"[T]he terms set forth in this judgment shall not, except as to those terms relative to alimony and maintenance for the petitioner-counterrespondent, be modifiable; and * * * as to such provisions relating to such alimony and maintenance, the same shall be modifiable only by way of decrease in the amount of such alimony and maintenance by reason of the economic and financial needs of respondent-counter-petitioner, it being expressly hereby provided that the amount of alimony and maintenance to be hereby awarded to petitioner-counterrespondent shall not for any cause whatever be increased above the amount provided herein."
On November 18, 1994, respondent filed a petition seeking to modify the maintenance provisions of the November 28, 1979, dissolution. Respondent alleged that a substantial and material change in circumstances occurred since the 1979 dissolution in that respondent retired after having reached the age of 66 and married his current wife, Charlene, who has significant disabilities, causing respondent to incur significant medical bills. Respondent further alleged a modification in that petitioner is able to support herself without maintenance from respondent because she owns her own home, has a vehicle, and receives social security benefits which she did not receive when the permanent maintenance order was entered in 1979. On May 20, 1996, a hearing was held on respondent's petition to modify.
*173 Respondent testified that he was 68 years of age and that he had twice been married to petitioner. The first marriage lasted 17 years; the second lasted nine years. Respondent married his present wife on July 17, 1982. On September 1, 1995, respondent retired from Piasa Motor Fuels, where he had been employed for 48 years. Respondent's Federal income tax returns showed that in 1993, his gross income was $67,912, in 1994, it was $68,954, and in 1995, the year respondent retired, it was $49,037. When the parties divorced in 1979, respondent's gross income was $42,000. In 1980, respondent's gross income increased to $56,000.
Respondent's current income consists of social security, a pension, and installment payments on a promissory note. In 1996, respondent's gross pension was $1,173.19 per month. Respondent received $1,306 in social security payments per month and $585.59 per month from the installment payments due on a promissory note from the 1987 sale of a service station. The service station was awarded to respondent as part of the 1979 property distribution. Respondent testified he was scheduled to receive the final installment in October 1999. Respondent further testified that his residential mortgage would be paid in full in 1998, resulting in a savings of almost $800 per month.
According to respondent, petitioner receives social security based upon his prior earnings. His present wife, age 56, is unemployed and has no income of her own. Charlene suffers from insulin-dependent diabetes, degenerative arthritis, and leg problems caused by an automobile accident. She underwent orthopedic surgery and fusion. Respondent testified that not all of Charlene's medical expenses are reimbursable and that in 1994 or 1995 he used his $6,500 tax refund to pay for Charlene's dental needs. Respondent submitted an affidavit itemizing his monthly expenses, which indicated that over the past six years his monthly expenses exceeded his gross monthly income by $1,674.76. Respondent estimated his expenses at $4,504.90 per month and his gross monthly income at $2,830.14. Respondent testified that he makes up the difference by drawing on reserves he has in the bank. These reserves came from the sale of a motor home. The motor home was purchased in 1994 for $84,000. In order to purchase the motor home, respondent traded in a motor home he owned and borrowed the additional $60,000 from a life insurance policy he purchased after his divorce from petitioner with proceeds he received from the sale of stock he inherited from his mother. Respondent sold the motor home one-and-one-half years later for $64,000 because Charlene was too sick to travel. With that $64,000, respondent and Charlene purchased a lot at Lake of the Ozarks for $49,500 and put the remaining money in the bank.
As of December 1995, the life insurance policy had a cash surrender value of $125,409.17 and generated gross yearly income of $10,211.25 at an annual premium cost of $2,740. The gross value of the policy is $213,000. Respondent reinvests the interest instead of using the money. The annual premium is also paid out of the interest. Respondent admitted that he has a right to withdraw funds from this policy at any time.
Respondent also owns a Northern Life Insurance single premium policy with a net cash value of $20,851.96. Charlene and respondent's children are the beneficiaries. Respondent held a joint tenant's interest in $650 in Dreyfus Funds. Respondent's retirement and pension plan as of June 30, 1994, was valued at $427,980.10. Respondent admitted that he can change the amount of his monthly pension income at any time. Charlene is the beneficiary of this plan. Respondent explained that if monthly benefits are increased, the survivor benefits are correspondingly decreased.
Petitioner testified to the terms of the 1979 dissolution. Petitioner was awarded the marital residence, valued at approximately $84,000 one year prior to the hearing in question. A 1974 Mercedes-Benz automobile was put in her name prior to the divorce. Petitioner still drives this vehicle. Petitioner also received household furnishings valued at $1,500 and a checking account containing $110. Petitioner testified that she owes her daughter $16,000 due to money she borrowed over the preceding 16 years in order to make *174 ends meet and maintain her standard of living.
For 11 years following the divorce, petitioner lived on the $750 per month paid to her by respondent. Respondent also paid petitioner's heating oil bill which ran approximately $700 per year, but he stopped doing that upon his retirement. In March 1990, petitioner began receiving $550 per month in social security based upon her former husband's earnings. Petitioner's only other income is the $35 per month which she receives in connection with renting her garage. Petitioner has been unable to save any money and does not have a savings account.
Petitioner was 70 years old at the time of the hearing. She did not work after the parties' divorce. For 10 years, from 1986 through the time of the hearing, petitioner cared for her granddaughter who has Down's Syndrome. She did this as much as three times per week. Petitioner testified that she does not think she is able to work, because she gets upset if she has to hurry or do anything precisely. She is not supposed to get too hot, be in the wind, or get too tired. Petitioner suffers from a heart condition. She underwent an angioplasty procedure in 1984. Petitioner testified that she could have possibly worked after that, but she did not because she was taking care of her granddaughter.
Petitioner pays $3,000 per year for medical insurance. Her monthly expenses are $1,419 per month. This includes a figure of $100 per month for entertainment. Petitioner explained that most of this $100 goes for her annual Florida vacation, which lasts for four or five weeks. Her daughter often accompanies her on her annual trip.
Respondent's current wife, Charlene, is 56 years old. She testified that she worked for Olin Corporation for 20 years prior to her marriage to respondent. In 1969, Charlene was injured in an automobile accident caused by a drunk driver. She sustained numerous injuries, resulting in months of hospitalization. Charlene testified that her health deteriorated after the marriage to respondent and that she now suffers from both degenerative arthritis and insulin-dependent diabetes. She is unable to drive. Respondent was aware of Charlene's medical problems when he married her and knew that she might have to quit work, which she did in October 1982. Five years later, Charlene attempted to work for a dentist but quit after three months because she could not stand for long periods of time. Charlene testified that if respondent dies, her only source of income will be his profit-sharing and life insurance.
After hearing all the evidence, the circuit court denied a reduction or termination of maintenance. Respondent filed a posttrial motion, which was also denied. Respondent now appeals.
ANALYSIS
I
The first issue we are asked to consider is whether the circuit court's denial of a reduction or termination of maintenance was an abuse of discretion or against the manifest weight of the evidence. Respondent contends that the trial court "was misled by and overemphasized the characterization of the original maintenance order as a `permanent' award." Respondent contends there has been a substantial change in circumstances since the 1979 maintenance order was instituted, due to respondent's retirement and increased medical costs because of his present wife's ill health. Respondent argues that he presented evidence that his monthly expenses totaled $4,504.90 per month, while his income is substantially less than that, specifically, $1,674.76 less per month. Accordingly, respondent concludes that since he was awarded 100% of his retirement and pension interests in 1979, forcing him to withdraw substantial amounts per month in order to meet his monthly maintenance obligation is tantamount to an increase in his maintenance obligation. We disagree.
Section 510(a) of the Act permits the modification of maintenance upon a showing of a substantial change in circumstances. 750 ILCS 5/510(a) (West 1994). In reviewing a maintenance order, a court should consider the elements listed under section 504(b) of the Act, namely, the standard of living established during the marriage, the age, physical, *175 and emotional condition of both parties, the ability of the spouse seeking maintenance to meet his or her needs independently, and the ability of the other spouse to pay. 750 ILCS 5/504(b) (West 1994); In re Marriage of Breuer, 259 Ill.App.3d 94, 96, 197 Ill. Dec. 121, 122, 630 N.E.2d 1245, 1246 (1994). Whether a spouse may rely on his retirement as a change in circumstances to justify the modification of maintenance depends on the circumstances of each case. The relevant factors to consider include his age, health, and motives, and the timing of his ability to pay maintenance after retirement, as well as the former spouse's ability to provide for herself. In re Marriage of Waller, 253 Ill. App. 3d 360, 362, 192 Ill. Dec. 403, 405, 625 N.E.2d 363, 365 (1993). On review, a maintenance order will not be reversed unless the record shows an abuse of discretion. Breuer, 259 Ill.App.3d at 96, 197 Ill. Dec. at 122, 630 N.E.2d at 1246. A reversal is justified only when it is obvious that the trial court acted arbitrarily or without conscientious judgment. Breuer, 259 Ill.App.3d at 96, 197 Ill. Dec. at 122, 630 N.E.2d at 1246.
In the instant case, respondent is 68 years old and petitioner is 70 years old. The parties were married for a total of 26 years. Petitioner's only sources of income are maintenance paid to her by respondent, social security, and rent paid to her for the use of her garage, for a total of $1,335 per month. Petitioner testified she has no assets beyond the marital residence awarded to her at dissolution. Petitioner did not work after the parties' second divorce. She did, however, baby-sit for the parties' granddaughter who was born with Down's Syndrome.
Respondent, on the other hand, worked at the same job for 48 years, earning $68,954 during his final full year of work in 1995. When the parties divorced in 1979, respondent was earning $42,000 per year. At that time, he agreed to permanent maintenance in the amount of $750 per month. Respondent's current income consists of $1,306 per month in social security payments, $1,173.97 per month in pension, and $585.59 per month in installment payments due on the sale of a service station respondent was awarded at dissolution. The final installment is due in 1999. Respondent's mortgage on his current residence will be paid in full in 1998, leaving him with an additional $800 per month in discretionary income. Respondent's pension fund as of June 30, 1994, was valued at $427,980.10. Respondent's other assets include a life insurance policy with a cash surrender value of $125,409.17 and a second insurance policy with a cash value of $20,851.96. Respondent admitted that he could get additional funds from both his pension and the life insurance policy, should he choose to do so. Instead, respondent chooses to reinvest the interest payments made on the life insurance policy valued in excess of $125,000. Additionally, respondent and his current wife own a lot at the Lake of the Ozarks, which they bought for $49,500 upon the sale of their motor home.
It appears to us that respondent has substantial assets from which to pay for his current wife's medical bills and the maintenance award made in 1979. Moreover, should respondent die, Charlene will in no way be left destitute. After reviewing the record as a whole and taking into consideration the financial resources and status of both parties, we cannot say that the denial of a termination or a reduction in respondent's maintenance payments was an abuse of discretion or against the manifest weight of the evidence.
Respondent cites In re Marriage of Munford, 173 Ill.App.3d 576, 123 Ill. Dec. 254, 527 N.E.2d 892 (1988), as authority for the proposition that forcing respondent to withdraw additional money from his retirement account in order to meet his maintenance obligation is tantamount to an increase in his maintenance obligation. However, we do not find the facts in Munford applicable to the situation before us. In Munford, it was the former wife who filed a petition to modify, seeking an increase in monthly maintenance from $300 per month to $750 per month. The trial court granted the increase, mainly on the basis that petitioner did not receive sufficient assets at the time the dissolution was entered so that there was an unequal distribution of marital property due to the husband receiving his full pension and/or profit-sharing plan. The Munford court *176 agreed with the former husband that the increase was actually a modification of the parties' property settlement rather than a modification of maintenance. Munford, 173 Ill.App.3d at 579, 123 Ill. Dec. at 255, 527 N.E.2d at 893.
In the instant case, petitioner was not the one seeking an increase. Instead, respondent was seeking a reduction. Respondent contends his monthly expenses exceed $4,500 per month while his income is only around $2,800 per month. However, respondent's pension is valued at over $427,000, and he has a life insurance policy valued in excess of $125,000. Respondent admitted that he can take out additional funds each month should he choose to do so. Respondent obviously planned well for his retirement, in that he was able to buy an $84,000 travel trailer and take a $20,000 loss on it less than two years later. While respondent contends that he cannot afford the $750 maintenance payment he was ordered to pay in 1979, the record establishes that he can. No issue was raised as to whether there was an equal distribution of property at the time of the parties' dissolution of marriage. Therefore, we cannot agree that Munford is applicable to the present situation.
II
The other issue we must consider is whether respondent is entitled to a credit toward his maintenance obligation for social security benefits received by petitioner by virtue of contributions made by respondent. Respondent contends he is entitled to a credit and in support of this proposition cites In re Marriage of Henry, 156 Ill. 2d 541, 190 Ill. Dec. 773, 622 N.E.2d 803 (1993).
In Henry, the respondent, a divorced father of two minor children, petitioned for a downward modification of his child support obligation for his child support arrearages. The respondent contended that the social security dependent disability allowance which began to be paid to his children at the time he was found disabled, October 1987, was well in excess of his child support obligation and arrearages accrued thereon so that he should be relieved of liability for his arrearages. The trial court agreed, and the Illinois Department of Public Aid, to which the petitioner, the mother of the respondent's two children, had assigned her rights as a recipient of public aid, appealed from the trial court's determination. On appeal, the Henry court affirmed, noting that unlike voluntary payments which are not made for the benefit of the noncustodial parent and which are gratuitous, social security dependent disability benefits are not gratuitous. They are generated by the noncustodial parent through labor and earnings and replace support the child loses upon the disability of the wage earner responsible for child support. 156 Ill. 2d at 551, 190 Ill.Dec. at 778-79, 622 N.E.2d at 808-09. Because social security dependent disability benefits are earned by the noncustodial parent, or made on behalf of such parent, and are paid at least in part with contributions from the noncustodial parent's own earnings, the Henry court concluded that payment of such benefits satisfies the noncustodial parent's support obligation. 156 Ill. 2d at 552, 190 Ill.Dec. at 779, 622 N.E.2d at 809. We find Henry distinguishable from the case at bar for numerous reasons, including but not limited to the following. First, Henry involved social security dependent disability benefits, whereas the instant case concerns social security old age insurance benefits. Second, the Henry court was concerned with child support payments, whereas we are concerned with an award of permanent maintenance. Third, Henry involves a petitioner who assigned her rights as a recipient of public aid. There was no such assignment here.
Social security dependent disability benefits are obviously much different than social security old age insurance benefits. Virtually no one plans to become disabled and luckily the percentage of workers who become disabled is low. On the other hand, assuming a worker lives long enough, it is inevitable and foreseeable that he will retire. When respondent and petitioner reached their settlement in 1979, respondent certainly planned to retire at some point. Respondent planned well enough to amass over $427,000 in a pension plan by 1996. This was over and above contributions he made to the Social Security Administration. The 1979 judgment *177 of dissolution provided that respondent pay petitioner $750 "per month as and for permanent alimony and maintenance until the respondent-counterpetitioner's death, the petitioner-counterrespondent's death, or the petitioner-counterrespondent's remarriage, whichever occurs first * * *." The order made no provision for a reduction in maintenance once petitioner began receiving social security benefits.
Respondent is entitled to both a pension and social security benefits. Likewise, we believe that petitioner should receive both social security and maintenance. Petitioner receives only $550 per month in social security benefits and $750 per month in maintenance. She appears to be able to survive in modest comfort on this amount, but a reduction of $550 per month would certainly cause her substantial hardships. Moreover, the record reflects that respondent is still able to afford to make the $750 payment as ordered in 1979. As previously stated, we find Henry distinguishable from the case at bar. Accordingly, we do not find that respondent is entitled to a credit toward his maintenance obligation for social security benefits received by petitioner by virtue of contributions made by respondent.
For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the circuit court of Madison County is affirmed.
Affirmed.
KUEHN, P.J., and HOPKINS, J., concur.

=== CASE 9742132 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:07:14.673827+00 ===

*906MILLER, Chief Justice.
Charles Vance Deserly (Deserly) appeals an order denying his application for habeas corpus relief. We affirm.
FACTS/PROCEDURAL HISTORY
Deserly was charged under SDCL 22-34-1 with felony intentional damage to property of more than two hundred dollars. The charges stem from an incident in which Deserly destroyed some parking gates at Sioux Valley Hospital. On December 1, 1988, Magistrate Judge Joe Neiles entered an order authorizing Deserly’s release pending trial on condition that he accept the terms of a “Personal Recognizance Bond and Appearance Bond.” The terms of the bond required Deserly to appear before a magistrate on December 12, 1988. The bond further informed Deserly that failure to appear at the December 12, 1988 hearing could result in a class five felony conviction. Deserly read the terms of that bond and signed it on December 2,1988.
Furthermore, on December 1, 1988, LaDo-na Vansco, a Deputy Clerk of Court signed an order “for, the court” setting Deserly’s dispositional conference for December 12, 1988. The dispositional conference is, in essence, a settlement conference at which the defendant and defense counsel meet with the prosecuting attorney to discuss the case. After they have discussed the case they appear before a magistrate to schedule further proceedings.
On December 5, 1988, Deserly’s defense attorney reminded him of his obligation to attend the December 12, 1988 dispositional conference. Nevertheless, Deserly failed to appear at the dispositional conference. On December 14, 1988, a magistrate issued a priority bench warrant and Deserly was charged under SDCL 23A-43-31 with failure to appear at a scheduled hearing.* He was arrested on January 2, 1989.
Ultimately, Deserly and the prosecutor reached a plea bargain in which Deserly agreed to plead guilty to the failure to appear charge and make restitution for the property damage. In return, the prosecutor agreed to drop the damage to property charge, agreed not to file habitual offender charges, and agreed to recommend a suspended sentence. While preparing a presen-tence investigation, a court services officer discovered that it cost only fifty dollars to repair the damage to the parking gates at Sioux Valley Hospital. Deserly learned this after he had pled guilty but before he was sentenced. Before Deserly was sentenced, Judge Robert Amundson asked Deserly if he wanted to stand by his guilty plea. Deserly said yes. Deserly was sentenced to five years in the penitentiary suspended on condition that he serve six months in jail (with work release), make restitution of fifty dollars for the damage to property, complete alcohol treatment and remain alcohol free, and, of course, obey all laws.
Deserly was arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol just two weeks after he was released from his six-month jail sentence. He pled guilty and admitted violating the terms of his suspended sentence. He was sentenced to an additional six months in county jail.
While in county jail, Deserly was charged with damage to property and simple assault after he punched numerous holes in the walls of the jail and hit another inmate. State also filed a habitual offender information. All charges were dismissed when Deserly admitted violating the terms of his suspended sentence. He was ordered to serve the five-year penitentiary sentence from the original conviction for failure to appear and was given credit for 266 days already served.
*907On August 26, 1990, Deserly escaped from the South Dakota State Penitentiary and fled to Montana. Shortly thereafter he was arrested in Montana and pled guilty to two counts of criminal mischief. The Montana court sentenced him to six years on each count, to be served concurrently with his South Dakota sentence. On September 10, 1990, South Dakota sent Montana a warrant of detention, but Deserly remained in prison in Montana. Through correspondence with officials at the South Dakota State Penitentiary, Deserly learned that he was not being credited in South Dakota for time he was serving in Montana. On August 1, 1991, Deserly formally requested that South Dakota make final disposition of his escape charge. On January 15, 1992, Deserly was arraigned in South Dakota and on January 29, 1992, he returned to the South Dakota State Penitentiary. He pled guilty to escape and was sentenced to thirty months in the penitentiary to be served consecutive to his original sentence.
Deserly filed no direct appeal. In May 1992 he filed an application for habeas corpus. After a full evidentiary hearing, the habeas court denied his application. Deserly appeals.
WHETHER DESERLY WAS DENIED EFFECTIVE ASSISTANCE OF COUNSEL.
Deserly contends he was denied effective assistance of counsel because his attorney did not investigate the amount of damage done to the gates at Sioux Valley Hospital. Deserly argues that a cursory investigation would have revealed the damage was only fifty dollars and therefore could not support a felony conviction for damage to personal property. Deserly correctly notes that “[a]n attorney must make reasonable investigations or make reasonable decisions to forego particular investigations.” Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 104 S.Ct. 2052, 80 L.Ed.2d 674 (1984).
In order to prevail, Deserly must show that his counsel was ineffective and there is a “reasonable probability that, but for counsel’s [ineffectiveness], the results of the proceeding would have been different.” Strickland, 466 U.S. at 694,104 S.Ct. at 2068. Aliberti v. Solem, 428 N.W.2d 638 (S.D.1988). Deserly claims the results would have been different because he would not have “entered the plea of guilty had he been aware that the felony criminal damage to property charge was groundless.” The record demonstrates that this contention is false. After Deserly pled guilty, the court services officer discovered that the damage was only fifty dollars. Des-erly learned that fact prior to sentencing. At that point he and his attorney knew the damage to the gates did not rise to the level of a felony. Yet, Deserly did not attempt to withdraw the guilty plea. In fact, at sentencing, Judge Amundson specifically asked Des-erly if he still intended to plead guilty. Des-erly stood by his guilty plea even when he was aware the damage to the gates was only fifty dollars. The habeas court is affirmed.
WHETHER DESERLY’S FAILURE TO APPEAR AT THE DISPOSITIONAL HEARING WAS A VIOLATION OF SDCL 23A-43-31.
Deserly acknowledges that he did not appear at the December 12,1988 disposi-tional conference. However, he asserts his failure to appear was not a violation of SDCL 23A-43-31 for two reasons. First, he argues that he was-not ordered to appear before a “court or judicial officer.” Second, he contends he did not receive notice that he was supposed to appear.
SDCL 23A-43-31 does not require an “order.” It only discusses failure to appear before any court or judicial officer “as required.” Nevertheless, Deserly was ordered to appear before the court by the terms of the magistrate’s order and the personal recognizance and appearance bond he read and signed. Moreover, Deserly was also ordered to appear in court by the Order Setting Dispositional Conference signed “for the court” on December 1, 1988 by the deputy clerk of court. Deserly’s counsel met with him on December 5, 1988 and reminded him of his obligation to appear on December 12, 1988. Yet, Deserly failed to appear in court on December 12, 1988. His failure to appear constituted a violation of SDCL 23A-43-31. The habeas court is affirmed.
*908WHETHER DESERLY SHOULD BE CREDITED WITH TIME SERVED IN MONTANA.
When the Montana court sentenced Deserly it specified that his Montana sentence was to be served concurrently with any sentence he was serving in South Dakota. Deserly had spent approximately one year in the Montana jail before he learned that South Dakota was not crediting him for time he was serving in Montana. This discovery prompted Deserly to request to be returned to South Dakota. This transfer process took six months. Deserly argues that South Dakota should credit him for the time he served in Montana, both before and after he made the request for transfer.
Deserly’s first argument is that when one state puts a “hold” on a prisoner in another state, the prisoner is effectively serving time for each state. See e.g., People v. Ranson, 153 Mich.App. 157, 395 N.W.2d 271 (1986). We are not persuaded by the analysis applied in Ranson because we agree with the Iowa Supreme Court’s observation that it constitutes a “novel rule which would allow a sentenced criminal, by the simple expedient of escape, to select the state in which he wishes to serve his incarceration.” Williams v. State, 280 N.W.2d 406, 408 (Iowa 1979).
Second, Deserly notes that the Montana court ordered his sentences were to be served concurrently. South Dakota was not a party to that action and did not assent to any determination that the South Dakota sentence should be served concurrently with the Montana sentence. Clearly, that was a proviso relevant only to the Montana courts. The Montana court did not and could not order South Dakota to give Deserly credit for time served in Montana. See Nelson v. George, 399 U.S. 224, 90 S.Ct. 1963, 26 L.Ed.2d 578 (1970). See also, Patino v. State, 331 N.W.2d 837 (S.D.1983).
Deserly had spent a year in Montana prison before he inquired of officials at the South Dakota State Penitentiary. He formally requested a transfer to South Dakota when he learned that he was not being credited for the time he was serving in Montana. The transfer process took six months. Des-erly contends that he should receive credit in South Dakota from the date of his application for transfer. As authority he cites Chalifoux v. Commissioner of Correction, 375 Mass. 424, 377 N.E.2d 923 (1978).
Chalifoux escaped from a Massachusetts prison where he was serving time for assault and battery with a dangerous weapon. Shortly thereafter, he was arrested and convicted in California for kidnapping. The California court sentenced him to one to twenty-five years in jail and specified that the sentence should be served concurrently with his Massachusetts sentence. Chalifoux requested to be returned to Massachusetts and asked Massachusetts to credit him for the time he had already served in the California prison. Massachusetts denied the request for transfer on grounds of prison overcrowding. Massachusetts also denied Chalifoux’s request for credit for the time he was serving in California, but did not inform him of its decision. Chalifoux remained incarcerated in California and assumed he was being credited in Massachusetts. He did not learn otherwise until he was taken into custody by Massachusetts officials upon his release from the California prison. The Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court held that fundamental fairness required that Chalifoux be given credit for the time he served in California. Because Massachusetts had not informed him that they were not giving him credit, Chalifoux remained in California prison, assumed he was being credited in Massachusetts, and did not request other possible forms of relief from the Massachusetts courts.
Deserly cannot claim any denial of fundamental fairness. He served approximately one year in Montana prison before he even inquired whether South Dakota was giving him credit for the time he was serving in Montana. South Dakota immediately informed him he was not. Deserly asked to be returned to South Dakota and the transfer process took six months. There is no evidence that the transfer was unnecessarily delayed. Deserly was not treated unfairly by South Dakota officials and must take responsibility for his own inaction on this issue. The habeas court is affirmed.
*909SABERS, J., concurs.
WUEST, J., concurs specially.
HENDERSON, J., concurs in part and dissents in part.
AMUNDSON, J., disqualified.
SDCL 23A-43-31 provides:
Any person who, having been released pursuant to this chapter, fails to appear before any court or judicial officer as required shall, subject to the provisions of this title, forfeit any security which was given or pledged for his release and, in addition, shall:
(1)If he was released in connection with a charge of a felony, or while awaiting sentence or pending appeal or certiorari after conviction of any offense, be guilty of a Class 5 felony;
(2) If he was released in connection with a charge of a misdemeanor, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor; or
(3) If he was released for appearance as a material witness, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.

=== CASE 9742133 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:07:14.677696+00 ===

WUEST, Justice
(concurring specially).
I agree -with Justice Henderson’s point on Issue II, that Deserly could not be convicted for failing to appear at the informal “disposi-tional conference.” However, an examination of the settled record shows that Deserly pled guilty to an information charging him with failing to appear before a magistrate who is a judicial officer. This plea was the result of a plea bargain which kept Deserly from being charged as an habitual criminal. In addition, the property damage charge was dismissed. Deserly benefitted from this bargain and should not now be permitted to repudiate it. As Justice Henderson notes in his writirig, there was damage in the amount of $500.00 to the automobile which Deserly was driving without permission. This would have provided evidence to convict Deserly of a felony or felonies, so this was not a case of an innocent person being coerced into a plea bargain. Perhaps the case could have been better handled by the prosecutor and defense counsel, but I do not find any injustice committed.
I vote to affirm the trial court.

=== CASE 9742134 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:07:14.681106+00 ===

HENDERSON, Justice
(concurring in part, dissenting in part).
ISSUE I — INEFFECTIVE ASSISTANCE OF COUNSEL
In my opinion, Deserly’s trial counsel was ineffective. His counsel did not investigate the facts to determine the amount of damages which Deserly wrought. It is axiomatic that this felony criminal damage conviction would be set aside if the facts did not support the amount of damage requisite to satisfy the statute. An investigation by the Court Services Officer revealed there was only $50.00 damage to the fence. However, the record discloses that Deserly was driving his mother-in-law’s automobile without permission and caused $500.00 damage to this automobile. Adding the fence damage to the automobile damage, brings the damage to a dollar amount in excess of the $200.00 statutory figure. SDCL 22-34-1.
Conceding there is the original ineffectiveness of counsel due to weak investigation, the State’s ease against Deserly on the felony charge is additionally saved because Deserly did not retract his guilty plea. When Deserly discovered the $50.00 damage revelation of the Court Services Officer, it was after he had pleaded guilty. But, importantly, it was before he was sentenced. Circuit Judge Amundson gave him an opportunity to retract his plea — before the sentencing process — but Deserly did not do so.
At the habeas corpus hearing, the habeas court judge emphasized the proposition that Deserly’s trial counsel’s ineffectiveness, with respect to the property damage was “irrelevant,” because Deserly’s guilty plea was for the “failure to appear” charge. Not so. The plea bargain involved both the failure to appear charge and the property damage charge. Perforce, the effectiveness of trial counsel’s investigation pertaining to either charge was impactual upon Deserly’s decision concerning the plea bargain as a whole. This standard of review is supported by the holding in State v. Loughery, 908 F.2d 1014 (10th Cir.1990). Therefore, the habeas court erred in this regard, which poses the query: Does it logically follow Deserly prevails on this issue? No. Why? Because Deserly stood by his plea even when he knew (at that time) that the damage was (supposedly) only $50.00. Having this knowledge, he persisted in a plea of guilty. In the final analysis, Deserly had to demonstrate or establish, and could not, that there was a “reasonable probability that, but for counsel’s [ineffectiveness], the results of the proceeding would have been different.” The second prong of the test in Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 694, 104 S.Ct. 2052, 2068, 80 L.Ed.2d 674 (1984), has not been met.
ISSUE II — FAILURE TO APPEAR AT CRIMINAL SETTLEMENT CONFERENCE IN SECOND JUDICIAL CIRCUIT
Apparently, in the Second Judicial Circuit, to expedite the flow of criminal cases, a *910creature was created termed a “dispositional conference;” this is a “settlement conference.” Thereat, a representative of the state’s attorney’s office and defense counsel (plus the defendant) meet to have an informal discussion. Nowhere in our state code is such a proceeding mentioned. This conference is simply not a creature of statute. Said another way, it is not law.
In the Second Judicial Circuit, there exists a “Rule Three,” which are court rules peculiar to that circuit. Under SDCL 23A-45-12 of our state code, local court rules may be adopted. In said circuit, this dispositional conference is an informal guideline. However, it was not adopted as a court rule.
Can un-adopted court rules (or guidelines — really—-just a local practice) be law? I think not. It simply has no force of law. To be a legitimate child of the law, it must have a birthright. So, this takes us to the question if a felony can be perpetrated, in law, based upon a violation of an informal get together between a state’s attorney (or his representative), defense counsel and defendant? I maintain that it cannot.
State strongly advocates that Deserly’s felony crime was failing to appear before a magistrate. Let us examine such advocacy in light of the record. A necessary element of failure to appear, under SDCL 23A-43-31 is the requirement that the defendant, who has been released, appear “before any court or judicial officer,” as emphasized below:
Any person who, having been released pursuant to this chapter, fails to appear before any court or judicial officer as required shall, subject to the provisions of this title, forfeit any security which was given or pledged for his release and, in addition, shall:
(1) If he was released in connection with a charge of a felony, or while awaiting sentence or pending appeal or certiorari after conviction of any offense, be guilty of a Class 5 felony; ...
Obviously, an informal setting, trying to work out a plea bargain, is not a court nor appearing before a judicial officer. It is the antithesis thereof; it is an attempt to work out something on the case to avoid appearing before a court or in a judicial setting so the aura of negotiations can take place. Thereby, perhaps, the Court or judicial officer is not stained or prejudiced in the give and take process. No judge wants to sit and hear advocacy, on possible plea bargaining, in an arena of wrangling. Involvement in such a hearing would compromise the judge’s objectivity.
Deserly was released on a “Personal Bond and Appearance Bond” by virtue of Magistrate Joe Neiles’ Order. I set it forth below:
That the Defendant, Charles Deserly, is to appear before Magistrate of the 2nd Judicial Circuit at Sioux Falls, South Dakota, at the Minnehaha County Courthouse on the 12 [sic] day of Dec, 1988, at 1030 A.m., [sic] and in such other places as Defendant may be required to appear in accordance with any and all orders or directions relating to the Defendant’s appearance in the above-entitled matter as may be given or issued by the Magistrate or the Circuit Court Judge of the 2nd Judicial Circuit or any other Court to which the Defendant may be removed, or the cause transferred; (Emphasis added.)
The bond further provided:
FAILURE TO APPEAR AT THE TIMES REQUESTED MAY RESULT IN THE CONVICTION OF A CLASS FIVE FELONY (5 years imprisonment in the State Penitentiary and/or a fine of $5,000 may be imposed) IF THE FAILURE TO APPEAR OCCURRED IN A FELONY CASE. FAILURE TO APPEAR IN A MISDEMEANOR CASE MAY RESULT IN A PENALTY OF ONE YEAR IN THE COUNTY JAIL OR $1,000 FINE OR BOTH.
Who signed the document for a “disposi-tional conference?” Not a judge. Not a magistrate. It was a “pre-signed” order, signed by a deputy clerk of courts, ordering (ostensibly) Deserly to appear at a disposi-tional conference on December 12, at 10:30 A.M.
Deserly did not appear. Remember, Des-erly posted a personal recognizance bond. State could have acted upon the bond by securing his immediate arrest with a Bench Warrant. But was his action — a failure to *911appear — a violation of a state statute? No. Though the bond addresses a failure to appear, it cannot alter a statutory requirement. Simply put, we have no order issued by a judicial officer (Magistrate or Circuit Judge) to appear before any court or judicial officer, as set forth in SDCL 23A-43-31. Furthermore, I note that a bailiff filled in the order, an order pre-signed by the deputy clerk.
Magistrate Neiles testified that a court appearance followed the dispositional conference.
The statute in question is plain. It requires Deserly to appear before a court or judicial officer. In arriving at the intention of the Legislature, it is presumed that the words of the statute have been used to convey their ordinary, popular meaning, unless the context or the apparent intention of the Legislature justifies any departure from the ordinary meaning. Oahe Conservancy Subdistrict v. Janklow, 308 N.W.2d 559 (S.D.1981); Wood v. Waggoner, 67 S.D. 365, 293 N.W. 188 (1940); SDCL 2-14-1.
ISSUE THREE — NON CREDITED TIME SERVED IN MONTANA
Without acceding to the holding of the majority opinion that Appellant was guilty of the crime of failure to appear, I generally agree to the discourse of Issue III.

=== CASE 2229975 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:33.272845+00 ===

687 N.E.2d 1080 (1997)
293 Ill. App. 3d 25
227 Ill. Dec. 598
In re MARRIAGE OF Stephen B. SINGLETEARY, Petitioner-Appellee, and
Chester L. Singleteary, Respondent-Appellant.
No. 1-95-3730.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, Third Division.
November 5, 1997.
*1082 Grund & Starkopf, Chicago (Richard S. Zachary and Susan L. McBrearty, of counsel), for Respondent-Appellant.
Leslie L. Veon, Chicago, for Petitioner-Appellee.
Presiding Justice COUSINS delivered the opinion of the court:
On April 7, 1992, the trial court entered a judgment for dissolution of marriage between the petitioner, Stephen Singleteary, and respondent, Chester Singleteary. The judgment incorporated a marital settlement agreement that included provisions for child support for their child, Stephen II (Stephen II). The agreement provided that respondent have physical custody of Stephen and petitioner agreed to pay $864 per month or 20% of his net income, whichever amount was greater. In February 1995, petitioner filed an amended petition for modification of child support due to a substantial change in circumstances. The amended petition stated that there had been a substantial increase in petitioner's income and the application of the percentage order of the judgment would result in a child support payment that exceeded the needs of the child and would create a windfall to respondent. His prayer for relief asked the trial court to modify the child support order and to enter a child support order in a stated sum in a reasonable amount for the support of Stephen II. The trial *1083 court found that the 20% support order would result in an amount in excess of the needs of Stephen II and ordered petitioner to pay $2,000 in child support per month. On appeal, respondent contends that: (1) the trial court erred in modifying child support, since the parties had agreed to a valid and enforceable settlement agreement; (2) petitioner failed to show a requisite change of circumstances to warrant a modification of the settlement agreement; and (3) she demonstrated sufficient support needs to warrant a $3,000-per-month award.
BACKGROUND
Petitioner and respondent were married on July 22, 1982. Their only child, Stephen B. Singleteary II, was born on February 22, 1985, and was six years old at the time petitioner filed a petition for dissolution of marriage. At the time of their divorce, respondent was employed as a banker by the First National Bank of Chicago, earning an annual gross salary of $55,000. Petitioner was a self-employed businessman with an annual income of $90,000.
A judgment for dissolution of marriage was entered on April 7, 1992, which required petitioner to pay to respondent for the support of seven-year-old Stephen II the sum of $432 twice a month or 20% of his net income, whichever amount was greater. Child support payments were to be determined by the following formula: total income (line 23 of the 1991 United States tax form No. 1040) minus line 18 (rents, partnership, estates, trusts, etc.) of schedule E, minus federal and state income taxes, social security (FICA) payments and any other medical insurance premiums paid for the benefit of the child, minus other distributions (year-end or otherwise), times 20% divided by 24. The child support obligation also required that petitioner pay 20% of any other distributions whenever received.
At the hearing on the motion for modification, petitioner testified that, in August 1994, he became president of Diversity Food Processing in Petersburg, Virginia. Diversity Food Processing is a joint venture between Burger King Corporation, Hudson Foods and SBS Processing. Diversity Food Processing is a start-up food processing company that supplies hamburger patties to Burger King. Petitioner owns 62% of the company.
Petitioner filed a petition to modify child support in November 1994. Thereafter, he filed an amended petition for modification of child support in which he alleged that there had been a substantial increase in his annual income and that the application of the percentage order of the judgment for dissolution of marriage would result in a child support payment that exceeded the needs of the child and that would create a windfall to respondent. His prayer for relief asked the trial court to modify the child support order and to enter a child support order in a stated sum in a reasonable amount for the support of Stephen II.
At the time of the parties' divorce, petitioner was employed as president of Rayburt Systems, Inc. (Rayburt), which was a subchapter S corporation that owned and operated Burger King restaurants in Chicago. He was a 50% shareholder of Rayburt. He also owned 50% of the shares of Rayburt Systems of Indiana (Rayburt Indiana), which was a subchapter S corporation that owned and operated Burger King restaurants in Indianapolis, Indiana. His partner in both companies was a man named Oliver Darton, who owned 50% of the shares of both Rayburt and Rayburt Indiana and was president of Rayburt Indiana. Petitioner drew a salary from Rayburt but not from Rayburt Indiana. His salary in 1992 and 1993 was $90,000.
Petitioner purchased his interest in Diversity Food Processing by selling his Rayburt and Rayburt Indiana interests. To purchase his interest in Diversity Food Processing, petitioner was required by his new partners to divest himself of his interest in his Burger King franchises and to borrow $1 million to invest in the joint venture. He repaid the $1 million upon the sale of his interest in the Burger King restaurants. The Burger King restaurants owned by Rayburt Indiana and one individually owned restaurant in Chicago were sold in 1994. The gross sale proceeds were $1.9 million. These sales resulted in a capital gain to petitioner in the amount of $714,654. The three Burger King restaurants owned by Rayburt were sold in June 1995, but the corporation had not yet been *1084 dissolved. The combined gross sale proceeds of the Rayburt and Rayburt Indiana restaurants were approximately $3 million. Petitioner did not know the amount of the corporate liabilities at the time of sale and, therefore, could not testify as to the amount of the net sales proceeds. The sale proceeds of the Rayburt assets were deposited in the corporation's account at South Shore Bank. Petitioner expects to receive little or none of the net sale proceeds of Rayburt and estimates the taxes due in September 1995, resulting from the sale, to be between $300,000 and $350,000.
Petitioner has an employment agreement with Diversity Food Processing that provides that his salary is $300,000 per year. The salary amount was set by petitioner, Burger King and Hudson Foods. The contract also provides for two potential bonuses, one of an unstated amount and one in the amount of $100,000, which is designated a "non-discretionary" bonus. Although the bonus is termed nondiscretionary, it will be paid only if certain objectives are met by the business. Petitioner's employment agreement states that in any fiscal year that the company achieves specific performance targets determined by the board and based on the company's annual budget and the two-year plan, the company shall pay to petitioner for such fiscal year, in addition to his salary, a bonus in the amount of $100,000. If the company does not reach a specific performance target, he will not get his bonus. The board makes the determination as to whether the objectives are being met and whether he will receive the bonus. The board of directors consists of petitioner, two representatives from Burger King, two representatives from Hudson Foods, plus five other members. Petitioner does not control the board in regard to issues of his compensation.
The company started production in the latter part of June 1995 and did not have revenue until July 1995. Based on the company's projections, various cash flow analysis and profit-and-loss statements, petitioner projects that the company will lose anywhere between $500,00 to over $1 million and that, given that loss, he did not believe that he would be receiving either bonus for 1995 from Diversity Food Processing.
Petitioner receives his salary from Diversity Food Processing on a bimonthly basis. The gross salary for the bimonthly period is $12,500. He has a 401(k) deduction from each paycheck of $385; a FICA deduction of $181.25; federal withholding of $3,905.54; and state withholding of $362.20. His total deductions are $4,833.99. Therefore, his net pay is $7,666.01 per pay period.
When petitioner resided in Chicago, Stephen II spent two days a week with his father. During 1995, Stephen II spent his spring break, the month of August, and a week in June with his father in Virginia.
In addition to child support payments, petitioner pays for his son's camp, lessons, and club dues. He purchases educational bonds and takes his son on annual vacations. Petitioner also maintains medical insurance for Stephen II and pays the mortgage on the condominium in which respondent and Stephen II reside. The monthly mortgage payment is $794. The condominium has various amenities, such as a 24-hour doorman, security, indoor parking, cleaners, dentist, bank, grocery store, swimming pool, tennis and racquetball courts, and a clubhouse. The parties and Stephen II resided in the condominium as a family prior to the divorce.
Since moving to Virginia, petitioner has purchased a $430,000 home. He paid between $90,000 and $100,000 as a down payment on the home and the mortgage is $340,000. Petitioner leases a Porsche and purchased a 1992 Mercedes automobile with a car allowance provided under his employment contract with Diversity Food Processing.
Respondent testified that she has an undergraduate degree from Indiana University and an MBA from the Kellogg School of Business at Northwestern University. She is also a certified public accountant. Respondent is vice president in the private banking department at LaSalle National Bank. In 1994, her salary was $70,000 and she earned a total income of $74,513. In 1995, respondent's base salary increased to $72,500 and she received a $3,000 bonus in February *1085 1995. Her total earned income in 1995 was $75,500.
Respondent has a savings account at First Chicago Bank into which petitioner deposits his child support. She deposits $1,000 per month into a savings account at LaSalle National Bank. Respondent has a 401(k) plan at First Chicago in which she defers 6% of her gross salary each month. Her 401(k) savings account has a total of $60,000. Respondent also owns 324 shares of First Chicago stock valued at $58 per share with a total value of $18,800.
Respondent has no mortgage or car payment for her Volvo 240 D automobile. She stated that monthly household expenses for Stephen II and herself are limited to the following: condominium monthly assessment, $377 per month, which includes cable and an indoor parking space; electricity, $170 per month; telephone, $120 per month; cellular phone, $60 per month; maid service, $130 per month; gas, $80 per month and car insurance, $100 per month. Respondent stated that her repair bills for her car are a couple of thousand dollars a year, which includes maintenance. She estimates that she spends $5,200 per year on groceries and she and Stephen II eat out twice a week at $20 to $25 per week. Vacation expenses for the two of them are $1,200 to $1,500 per year.
Respondent also stated that Stephen II's individual expenses are: dry cleaning, $20 per month; piano lessons, $100 per month, half of which petitioner pays; judo, $210 per year; basketball, $160 per year; football, $100 per year; Kumon math instructional program, $65 per month; public school fees, $100 per year; clothing expenses, $2,000 to $2,500 per year; hair cuts, $10 per cut; summer camp for one month, $100; out-of-pocket costs for medical and dental care, $100 per year; birthday party expenses, $500 per year; magazine subscriptions, $50 per year; books, $100 per year; birthday gifts for other people, $175 per year; entertainment expenses for videos, pizzas, etc. $20 per week; and Christmas presents for other people, $400 per year.
Respondent also testified that she believed that the condominium was getting too small for her and Stephen II, and she believed that Stephen II should be in a larger residence. She also stated that she was not pleased with the education that Stephen II was receiving at LaSalle Language Academy, a magnet school, and would like him to attend a private school.
Following the hearing, the trial court, on September 22, 1995, issued its memorandum opinion. The court found that petitioner's increase in income was a substantial change in circumstances and warranted modification of the child support agreement. The court further found that a 20% support order would result in payment in excess of the needs of Stephen II and, therefore, was not appropriate. The court balanced the needs of the child, petitioner's resources and needs, respondent's resources and needs, and the lifestyle the child would have had if the parents had not separated, and ordered petitioner to pay $2,000 per month for child support. Respondent appeals.
We affirm.
ANALYSIS
I
Respondent first contends that the support provisions in the agreement, calling for petitioner to pay 20% of his net income to respondent or a certain sum, are valid and enforceable. Petitioner argues that the child support order was void and unenforceable because it was based on a percentage.
Section 505 of the Illinois Marriage and Dissolution of Marriage Act (Act) regulates child support orders:
"§ 505. * * * (a) * * *
(1) The Court shall determine the minimum amount of support by using the following guidelines:
Percent of Supporting Party's
Number of Children           Net Income
1                               20%
2                               25%
3                               32%
4                               40%
5                               45%
6 or more                       50%
* * *
(5) If the net income cannot be determined because of default or any other reason, the court shall order support in an *1086 amount considered reasonable in the particular case. The final order in all cases shall state the support level in dollar amounts." (Emphasis added.) 750 ILCS 5/505(a)(1), (a)(5) (West 1992).
A first district, second division case, In re Marriage of Sheetz, 254 Ill.App.3d 695, 194 Ill. Dec. 38, 627 N.E.2d 154 (1993), interpreted section 505(a) as stating that orders that state child support as a percentage of income, rather than a dollar amount, violate the Act, exceed the court's jurisdiction, and are void. See also In re Marriage of Ingram, 259 Ill.App.3d 685, 197 Ill. Dec. 383, 631 N.E.2d 386 (1994) (where the second district followed the Sheetz interpretation).
Based on the above statutory provision and Sheetz, petitioner argued at the hearing that the child support order was void because it was based on a percentage of income. However, recent Illinois appellate courts have declined to follow the Sheetz interpretation. These cases have held that, although an order improperly designates child support as a percentage of the father's income rather than listing a dollar amount as required by statute, the order is not void for lack of jurisdiction. See In re Marriage of Baggett, 281 Ill.App.3d 34, 217 Ill. Dec. 181, 666 N.E.2d 850 (1996) (a fifth district case); In re Marriage of Florence, 260 Ill.App.3d 116, 198 Ill. Dec. 351, 632 N.E.2d 681 (1994) (a fourth district case). These courts reason that, although a judgment that provides a percentage rather than dollar amount may be erroneous, the legislature did not expressly direct that child support orders that do not set out the amount of support in dollar amounts are void. Florence, 260 Ill.App.3d at 121, 198 Ill. Dec. 351, 632 N.E.2d 681; In re Marriage of Scott, 286 Ill.App.3d 1056, 222 Ill. Dec. 594, 678 N.E.2d 1 (1996). Also, in the first district case of In re Marriage of Liss, 268 Ill.App.3d 919, 206 Ill. Dec. 336, 645 N.E.2d 341 (1994), the court examined the legislative history of the Act and concluded that the order requiring the father to pay $100 per week in child support or 20% of his net income, whichever was greater, carried out the statutory goals of the Act. Liss, 268 Ill.App.3d at 920-23, 206 Ill. Dec. 336, 645 N.E.2d 341.
We agree with the jurisdictional view adopted in Florence, Liss, and Baggett. The Act does not by its terms prohibit the use of a percentage rate in a child support order. In the instant case, the agreement stated that petitioner was to pay respondent $864 per month or 20% of his net income. Although it may have been improper to include the percentage in the agreement, we note that the agreement also included a specific dollar amount. Therefore, we affirm the trial court's finding that the agreement was not void.
Petitioner argues that, although the trial court found the provision to be valid, the agreement was, nevertheless modifiable. We agree. The parties to a dissolution settlement agreement may agree to make the maintenance provisions nonmodifiable. In re Marriage of Corkey, 269 Ill.App.3d 392, 397, 206 Ill. Dec. 862, 645 N.E.2d 1384 (1995). The intention to preclude modification must be expressly stated. Corkey, 269 Ill.App.3d at 397, 206 Ill. Dec. 862, 645 N.E.2d 1384. However, provisions pertaining to child support may not be made nonmodifiable. 750 ILCS 5/502(f) (West 1992); In re Marriage of Falat, 201 Ill.App.3d 320, 327, 147 Ill. Dec. 33, 559 N.E.2d 33 (1990). Thus, in marriage dissolution proceedings, a court is not bound by the agreements between the parties providing for the support of children. Falat, 201 Ill.App.3d at 327, 147 Ill. Dec. 33, 559 N.E.2d 33.
In the instant case, the parties' marital settlement agreement provided: "In the event of the failure of the Parties to agree on such calculation and determination of child support, either Party may petition the Court for such calculation." Also, the parties' joint parenting agreement stated: "This Agreement may only be modified upon a written modification signed by both parties or upon Order of Court." Thus, notwithstanding the fact that the law is clear that child support is modifiable, the parties' agreements also allowed for modification for child support.
II
Respondent contends that petitioner failed to show the requisite change of circumstances to warrant a modification of the *1087 agreement. Section 510(a) of the Act provides that a child support judgment can be modified only upon a showing of a "substantial change in circumstances." 750 ILCS 5/510(a) (West 1992). The burden of demonstrating such a substantial change in circumstances is on the party seeking the relief. Deardeuff v. Deardeuff, 149 Ill.App.3d 406, 409, 102 Ill. Dec. 891, 500 N.E.2d 992 (1986).
Petitioner argues that he met the burden necessary to warrant modification of the child support provision because his income increased substantially. However, at oral argument, respondent urged this court to hold that only an adverse change in the noncustodial parent's circumstances is a "substantial change of circumstances" that would warrant modification under the Act. We refuse to do so because we believe such a holding would go against public policy. The Act was intended to protect the rights of children to be supported by their parents in an amount commensurate with their income. In re Paternity of Perry, 260 Ill.App.3d 374, 382, 198 Ill. Dec. 227, 632 N.E.2d 286 (1994). This would necessarily include a modification due to an increase in income. If a support order could be modified only due to adverse circumstances, a custodial parent would not be allowed to seek an increase in child support based on the noncustodial parent's increased income. We do not believe that this is what the Act intended. The law is clear that only some change in circumstances of any nature that would justify equitable action by the court in the best interests of the child is required. In re Marriage of Heil, 233 Ill.App.3d 888, 891, 174 Ill. Dec. 622, 599 N.E.2d 168 (1992).
In the instant case, petitioner's income was $90,000 at the time of the divorce. At the time of the petition for modification, the trial court found that petitioner's income had increased to $300,000. Thus, petitioner's increase in income was a substantial change warranting modification of the child support agreement.
III
Respondent also contends that, even if petitioner met his burden of proving a substantial change in circumstances, the trial court abused its discretion in ordering petitioner to pay $2,000 per month instead of the $3,000-per-month obligation he would be required to pay under the agreement. Petitioner argues that the trial court properly awarded $2,000 per month for child support where Stephen II's expenses were substantially less than $2,000 per month. We note that respondent labels the $2,000-per-month child support a "diminishment" in the amount of the child support because the agreement provided that the petitioner would be obligated to pay a minimum of $3,000. However, the amount awarded by the trial court is clearly an increase from the $864 per month that petitioner was initially ordered to pay.
After the threshold question of whether a substantial change in circumstances has occurred is answered, then and only then may the court determine the amount of the increase in child support. Heil, 233 Ill.App.3d at 890, 174 Ill. Dec. 622, 599 N.E.2d 168. In determining the amount of increase in child support, the court considers the same factors used in formulating the original amount. In re Marriage of Lambdin, 245 Ill.App.3d 797, 806, 184 Ill. Dec. 789, 613 N.E.2d 1381 (1993). These factors include: (1) the financial resources of the child; (2) the financial resources of the custodial parent; (3) the standard of living the child would have enjoyed had the marriage not been dissolved; (4) the physical and emotional condition of the child and his educational needs; and (5) the financial resources and the needs of the noncustodial parent. 750 ILCS 5/505(a)(2)(West 1992); Lambdin, 245 Ill.App.3d at 806,184 Ill. Dec. 789, 613 N.E.2d 1381. A petition to modify child support must be decided on the facts of each case, and the decision rests within the sound discretion of the trial court. Lambdin, 245 Ill.App.3d at 807,184 Ill. Dec. 789,613 N.E.2d 1381. Such an abuse of discretion occurs only where no reasonable man would take the view adopted by the trial court. In re Marriage of Bush, 191 Ill.App.3d 249, 260, 138 Ill. Dec. 423, 547 N.E.2d 590 (1989).
As to the award of child support, section 505(a) of the Act (750 ILCS 5/505(a) (West 1992)) creates a rebuttable presumption *1088 that a specified percentage of a noncustodial parent's income represents an appropriate child support award. In re Marriage of Freesen, 275 Ill.App.3d 97, 105, 211 Ill. Dec. 761, 655 N.E.2d 1144 (1995). As we stated earlier, section 505(a)(1) of the Act provides that, in the case of one child, the minimum amount of child support that the trial court should order is 20% of the noncustodial parent's net income. 750 ILCS 5/505(a)(1)(West 1992). The trial court found that petitioner's net income was $15,332 per month. Thus, based on petitioner's monthly earnings, 20% of his net income is $3,066.40. Accordingly, the $2,000-per-month child support ordered by the trial court is actually below the statutory guidelines.
When determining whether to deviate from the statutory guidelines, a trial court's consideration of the factors set forth in section 505 of the Act is mandatory, not directory. In re Marriage of Charles, 284 Ill.App.3d 339, 347, 219 Ill. Dec. 742, 672 N.E.2d 57 (1996). In addition, the trial court must make express findings when it orders child support that is below the statutory minimum. Charles, 284 Ill.App.3d at 347, 219 Ill. Dec. 742, 672 N.E.2d 57.
When dealing with above-average incomes, the specific facts of each case become more critical in determining whether the guidelines should be adhered to. In re Marriage of Scafuri, 203 Ill.App.3d 385, 149 Ill. Dec. 124, 561 N.E.2d 402 (1990). Where the individual incomes of both parents are more than sufficient to provide for the reasonable needs of the parties' children, the court is justified in setting a figure below the guideline amount. In re Marriage of Lee, 246 Ill.App.3d 628, 643, 186 Ill. Dec. 257, 615 N.E.2d 1314 (1993). In determining the child support obligation of a high-income parent, the court must balance competing concerns. Lee, 246 Ill.App.3d at 643, 186 Ill. Dec. 257, 615 N.E.2d 1314. On the one hand, child support awards are not intended to be windfalls. Lee 246 Ill.App.3d at 644, 186 Ill. Dec. 257, 615 N.E.2d 1314. On the other hand, the court must consider the standard of living the children would have enjoyed absent parental separation and dissolution. Lee, 246 Ill.App.3d at 643-44, 186 Ill. Dec. 257, 615 N.E.2d 1314. Thus, child support is not to be based solely upon the shown needs of the child. Freesen, 275 Ill.App.3d at 105, 211 Ill. Dec. 761, 655 N.E.2d 1144.
For example, in Bush, both the custodial and noncustodial parents were physicians. The custodial parent earned $7,200 per month and the noncustodial parent earned almost $25,000 per month. Twenty percent of the noncustodial parent's income was approximately $30,000 per year. Therefore, the trial court ordered the noncustodial parent to pay into an irrevocable trust for the child an amount equal to 20% of his net monthly income less the cost of maintaining a life insurance policy to secure his child support obligation and $800 to be paid directly to the custodial spouse. The reviewing court found the use of the trust to be improper because it appeared to be an unlawful court-ordered inheritance. However, the court also held that, where the individual incomes of both parents are more than sufficient to provide for the reasonable needs of the parties' children, taking into account the lifestyle the children would have had absent the dissolution, the trial court is justified in setting a figure below the guideline amount. Thus, the court remanded the issue to the trial court for determination of a reasonable specific monthly support amount. Bush, 191 Ill.App.3d at 260-62, 138 Ill. Dec. 423, 547 N.E.2d 590.
Also, in Lee, the appellate court upheld the trial court's decision ordering the respondent to pay child support in an amount below the statutory guidelines. Respondent's yearly income ranged from $235,222 to $326,387. During the marriage, the child enjoyed an above-average standard of living, which included extensive travel and electronic equipment. The child also required medical treatment for a respiratory disorder. The petitioner earned less than $20,000 per year. The court held that, based on the child's standard of living as well as petitioner's inability to support the child at the same standard of living, the trial court did not abuse its discretion in ordering the respondent to pay $3,000 per month for his 10-year-old *1089 son. Lee, 246 Ill.App.3d at 644, 186 Ill. Dec. 257, 615 N.E.2d 1314.
In the case sub judice, the trial court found:
"[a] 20% support order would result in payment of a minimum of $36,000 yearly which is in excess of the needs of this child and therefore not appropriate. On the other hand, the current order for $864.00 monthly does not meet his needs or enable him to enjoy the standard of living he would have had the marriage not been dissolved. Balancing the needs of the child, Petitioner's resources and needs, Respondent's resources [sic] and needs, and the lifestyle the child would have had if the parents had not separated, the court finds that an order for $2,000.00 per month is appropriate."
We believe that the trial court properly weighed the relevant factors and did not abuse its discretion in awarding $2,000-per-month for child support.
However, respondent argues that she warranted a $3,000-per-month award because of Stephen II's increasing needs as he grows older, including the need to enroll him in a local private school and to relocate to a residence that is "less cramped than her 1,200-square-foot condominium." Respondent also refers to the fact that she earns no more than a middle-class income with limited savings, some bank stock, and an individual retirement account, while petitioner earns at least $300,000 per year, has a $2 million savings account, resides in a four-bedroom, $400,000 home and drives a Mercedes Benz and a Porsche.
We acknowledge the fact that petitioner earns a disproportionately greater income than respondent. Thus, it is only fair that he should bear the greater share of the costs of support. However, the responsibility for the support of a child is the joint obligation of the parents. In re Marriage of Rogliano, 198 Ill.App.3d 404,413,144 Ill.Dec. 595, 555 N.E.2d 1114 (1990). Unlike the custodial parent in Lee, we believe respondent's income is sufficient to contribute to Stephen II's needs in order for him to live in the lifestyle he would have enjoyed had the parties not separated.
Furthermore, the facts establish that, while Stephen II enjoys a very comfortable lifestyle, he is not accustomed to a lavish or extravagant lifestyle. Respondent testified regarding expenses that are reasonably related to "lifestyle." These expenses include, inter alia, restaurants, clothes, sports, lessons, vacations, gifts, and entertainment. The trial court awarded respondent over twice the amount of the original award. Respondent argues that the trial court failed to mention food, clothing, parking, entertainment, gift, vacation, personal expenses, and the need to enroll Stephen II in a private school, as well as the need to move to a larger residence. However, in the court's memorandum opinion, the court lists Stephen II's monthly living expenses and the court stated "[a]dditionally there are parking, entertainment, gift, vacation and food expenses and personal expenses for Respondent such as clothing." It is true that as children become older, it is presumed that the their needs escalate along with the cost of living. Lambdin, 245 Ill.App.3d at 807, 184 Ill. Dec. 789, 613 N.E.2d 1381. We agree with the trial court that Stephen II's shown needs and lifestyle to which he is accustomed can be adequately maintained on a total award of $2,000 per month.
Finally, a determination of the proper amount of child support, and modification thereof, lies within the sound discretion of the trial court and will not be set aside absent an abuse of discretion. In re Marriage of Partney, 212 Ill.App.3d 586, 590,156 Ill.Dec. 679, 571 N.E.2d 266 (1991). Based on the evidence presented at trial, we do not believe the court abused its discretion in modifying Stephen's support obligation to $2000 per month.
For the reasons cited herein, the judgment of the circuit court of Cook County is affirmed.
Affirmed.
LEAVITT and CAHILL, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2229976 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:33.308737+00 ===

507 N.W.2d 253 (1993)
244 Neb. 375
STATE of Nebraska, Appellee,
v.
Frances L. THOMPSON, Appellant.
No. S-92-891.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
October 22, 1993.
*259 Andrew Reid and Bruce Ellison, for appellant.
Don Stenberg, Atty. Gen., and Marilyn B. Hutchinson, for appellee.
HASTINGS, C.J., BOSLAUGH, WHITE, SHANAHAN, FAHRNBRUCH, and LANPHIER, JJ., and RONIN, District Judge, Retired.
FAHRNBRUCH, Justice.
Frances L. Thompson appeals her jury convictions for first degree murder and for use of a firearm to commit a felony in the August 18, 1991, killing of Dean Frank. Thompson admits she shot and killed Frank, but claims the killing was done in self-defense. We affirm the jury's verdicts.
STANDARD OF REVIEW
In reviewing a criminal conviction, it is not the province of an appellate court to resolve conflicts in the evidence, pass on the credibility of witnesses, determine the plausibility of explanations, or weigh the evidence. Such matters are for the trier of fact, and the verdict of the jury must be sustained if, taking the view most favorable to the State, there is sufficient evidence to support it. State v. Russell, 243 Neb. 106, 497 N.W.2d 393 (1993); State v. Bronson, 242 Neb. 931, 496 N.W.2d 882 (1993).
FACTS
Viewed most favorably to the State, the facts of this case are as follows:
At the time Frances L. Thompson killed Dean Frank on August 18, 1991, she was a 41-year-old widow. She had just completed her third year of full-time study at the University of Nebraska at Lincoln, where she had been almost a straight-A student. Thompson hoped eventually to attend law school and pursue a career in environmental law.
During her attendance at the university, Thompson maintained an apartment in Lincoln. When not at the university, she resided in rural Knox County on an 850-acre farm near Verdigre, Nebraska. The farm was owned by Thompson's mother, and Thompson hoped to inherit the farm someday. At the time Frank was killed, Thompson's 22-year-old son, Steven, was stationed in Great Lakes, Illinois, with the U.S. Navy.
Thompson met Frank shortly after moving onto the Knox County farm in 1985. Frank did odd jobs around the farm and was paid by Thompson's mother. Frank also helped Thompson with various tasks such as moving heavy objects and helping to care for her pet pig. In exchange, Thompson did mending and typing for Frank.
Frank lived in Atkinson, Nebraska, and early in their relationship, Thompson and Frank saw each other infrequently. Thompson described her relationship with Frank as one of friendship. She testified that Frank was a "perfect gentleman" to her during the 6 years preceding the killing. She had rebuffed his one "pass" at her soon after they became acquainted. Frank sometimes spent the night at Thompson's house when he did jobs for her that required more than 1 day to complete. He slept in a spare upstairs bedroom.
The nature of the relationship between Thompson and Frank changed dramatically during the summer of 1991. On June 16, 1991, Thompson spent the night at Frank's trailer. According to Thompson's testimony, Frank suggested that night in a "business like way" that the two marry and that he take over the running of Thompson's farm so they could pursue organic farming. Thompson was interested in working her mother's farm rather than leasing it out, but had no farming skills, and Frank was a farmer without a farm.
Thompson denied that she was interested in marriage or sex with Frank. Nonetheless, Thompson and Frank apparently contemplated *260 a sexual relationship of some sort. On Tuesday, June 25, Thompson wrote Frank, informing him that the cost of a Certificate of Sexual Health from the University Health Center would be about $103.28 and that "this project" could cost him over $200. In that letter, Thompson stated:
Whew! I was hopin' to do this all w/ blood outta my arm, but they INSIST they have to make ya take yer clothes off & spread yer legs. AAUUGGGHH!!!
Makes me SICK! I'm tellin' ya, if I do this YOU'RE gonna do it, TOO. Ick, ick, ICK!! (I know, that was the idea, to make you do it, too. But I mean YOU hafta take all the same tests I do!!)
(Emphasis supplied.)
Thompson questioned whether Frank might rather keep his freedom after having time to reconsider. Continuing the letter the following day, she stated:
I just reread what I wrote yesterday, and I bet I know how you're reacting to it.
Betcha you're thinking something paranoid like, "Gee, sounds like she wants to back out." Uh-uh, dammit. I am quite nicely giving you every opportunity to back out.
... [Y]ou don't have to look for double meanings in what I write.
(Second emphasis supplied.)
Nonetheless, Thompson explained at trial what she really was trying to tell Frank:
I was trying to give him a chance to back out, hoping he would take it, because I didn't want to get married. I didn't want to get involved in any sexual relationship.
....
... I didn't want him to think, and figure out what I was really thinking. I didn't want him to know, and I had never told him, that I just wasn't interested in him sexually. I did come out and tell him that I was giving him an opportunity to back out, but I didn't tell him why I wanted him to take it.
(Emphasis supplied.)
Thompson informed Frank in the letter that she had changed her mind about going to summer school all summer and had dropped two classes so that she would be at home from mid-July to late August. She invited him to join her in Lincoln for the Fourth of July.
On July 3 or 4, 1991, Frank went to Lincoln and stayed with Thompson at her duplex until July 9, when both Frank and Thompson left Lincoln and went to Verdigre. That same day, the two went to a physician in Verdigre and had blood tests done for acquired immune deficiency syndrome and syphilis. At trial, Thompson described this as a "first step" in considering a serious relationship with Frank. Thompson was concerned about sexually transmitted disease because she knew that Frank had engaged in sexual activity with other women.
Thompson called the physician's office for the results of the tests, which were negative, and drove to Atkinson to give Frank the results. Thompson testified that she was in Atkinson from July 12 through July 15 and that she stayed at Frank's trailer while she was there.
On Tuesday, July 16, Thompson started a letter to Frank inviting him to accompany her to Chicago for her son's graduation from basic training. She wrote, "I KNOW you don't particularly want to see Kid graduate. But, think about it! YES, you do! If he DOES graduate, he'll LEAVE ME ALONE for 4 WHOLE YEARS. You'll be so HAPPY FOR ME!!" She also wrote, "I put WAY too much energy into agonizing over letting sex back into my life. Guess it ain't for youbut for ME it was the biggest change in lifestyle imaginable."
Thompson told Frank she had "something a little more fun" to write about, but that it was "too personal to put in a letter." She informed Frank that she had learned about something that "could be called Selfish Sex" at a California sex clinic and that she thought it was "neat." She promised to tell Frank all about it on Saturday, presumably July 20. Thompson signed the letter "Huggs & ... stuff."
Thompson was in Atkinson again on July 22. Around this time, Thompson told Frank she wanted to meet his ex-wife and his children. *261 According to Thompson, Frank became "very angry and upset" at this request and said he did not want Thompson meeting them, which made her suspicious.
Thompson also testified that Frank began throwing out strange comments about other women. She believed he was trying to bait her into being jealous because she was not reacting to him sexually as he wanted her to. Thompson responded by writing two versions of a letter to Frank, apparently on July 22. She left one version of the letter at Frank's trailer, where it was found after Frank's death. The other version was found at Thompson's farmhouse. In the version left at Frank's trailer, Thompson accused Frank of "jacking w/ [her]," bringing up issues that raised questions in her mind, and refusing to answer her questions in regard to other women.
In the letter, Thompson referred several times to her "jealousy" and informed Frank that his behavior hurt her and "goad[ed her] into more jealousy." Nonetheless, Thompson testified that she was not at all jealous of Frank because she did not want him and did not care who did. She claimed that she was "guilty of playing a game" with Frank when she said she was jealous, in the hope that by "feeding his ego," "head-patting," and "suck[ing]-up," he would be "complimented" and would "straighten up and be more honest" with her. Thompson further testified that she "was using the word jealousy for the word disgust. But telling somebody you're disgusted with them really doesn't get you anywhere, and [she] was hoping the word jealousy would."
Thompson wrote Frank that he had "slapped [her] up side the head w/ another woman" and then refused to answer her questions about the other woman and that "nothing could be more viciously calculated" to make her worry. Later in the letter, Thompson alluded to yet another woman Frank had apparently mentioned:
And that remark last night about some woman's "stuff all over." That was doing it again, too. Why do you want to do that to me? Now I have to wonder, what woman? what stuff? where? here? He told me he had a live-in here. What did she look like? Was she prettier than I? Was she younger? What kind of competition is she?
When you make me wonder, I wonder. BIG-time.
....
I told asked you not to talk about other women to me. But there is something more cruel than that, even. It is bringing them up, & making me wonder. And worry.
....
... I love you. I want to keep you.
In the other version of the letter, Thompson also accused Frank of lying to her and of being sly and evasive.
Frank's telephone records show that on Tuesday, July 23, he made two long-distance calls to Thompson's number and talked for 38 minutes one time and 37 minutes the other time. Thompson testified that Frank had told her he did not think about the letter she had left in his trailer the previous day and that he had just thrown it in a drawer.
A letter which the defendant testified that she wrote on July 23 was found in Frank's trailer after his death. It contained four paragraphs which, according to the letter, were added after Thompson talked to Frank on that night:
So I tried to communicate with you & you "threw it in a drawer." That's what I'm worth to you. Guess I was ready for that; I had this written yesterday.
Like I said, minimum of hard feelings. I don't need you for an enemy.
Sure sorry I ... ruined our friendship....
You left shit here. I don't think you'll worry too much about it. Seems you told me you left stuff at bitch's [sic] places ALL OVER the country, I'm just another one now.
The following day, July 24, Thompson began a letter to her son, informing him that she had a "Fatal Fight" with Frank. Discussing this "Fatal Fight," Thompson stated:
What was our Fatal Fight, do you wonder? Oh, it's a LONG story, Kid, I mean things have been HAPPENING since you *262 left. Mommy was naughty, & Mommy is payin' now. Come to find out that not only VERY RICH OLD LADIES like Grandma ... need to worry about men romancing them for their money. Dean was trying to romance ME for the money & farm he THOUGHT I'd have soon.
(Emphasis supplied.)
In the letter, Thompson speculated at length that Frank was going to give her trouble and that he might harm her pet pig, break in, or suggest to others that Thompson should be robbed. She commented numerous times about how worried and scared she was, although she admitted that she often got "overexcited about everything & often overreact[ed]."
Thompson also referred in the letter to a previous relationship: "I remember Ron. I remember lots of violence & threats & evil behavior, and how ... STUPID I can be, & I DO expect real problems now from Dean, too."
Thompson stated that she was a fool and that her ego was crushed flat. However, she concluded by reassuring her son, "[D]on't worry about me, now.... Remember, I may whine & cry, but I is a TOUGH old lady, and a damn good shot, too." (Emphasis supplied.)
On July 25, Thompson was in Jedlicka's Hardware Hank store in Verdigre. At that time she purchased .357 shells and inquired about the type of hardware needed to hold a 2- by 4-inch board against a door to secure it. The owner of the hardware store testified that he did not have the type of brace requested by Thompson, and he referred her to a welder. Thompson testified that she had brackets made for an entry doorway sometime in July or August. Those brackets and a 2- by 4-inch board were found in place on one of Thompson's doors the day Frank was killed.
On Sunday, July 28, Thompson went with Frank to a state park. A state conservation officer visited briefly with them as they were leaving, and he testified that Thompson was sitting in the middle of the front seat of the car next to Frank.
That same day, Frank gave Thompson $300 for her upcoming trip to Chicago. Thompson testified that Frank was being pushy that day on the issue of marriage and that she told him she would not marry him. Thompson claimed that she could not remember Frank's words in response to her rejection of him, but that his statement reminded her of an old saying of her mother's to the effect that "if I can't have you, nobody else will. Meaning if you don't marry me, I will kill you."
On August 1, Thompson flew to Chicago to see her son graduate from Navy boot camp. Telephone records indicate that Thompson called Frank collect five times during her 4-day stay in the Chicago area, the conversations each lasting between 9 and 26 minutes.
Thompson returned from Chicago on August 4. On the way home, Thompson stopped and telephoned Frank's ex-wife, Betty Frank. Betty Frank testified that Thompson informed her that she and Frank were planning on getting married, and that Thompson said she wanted to get better acquainted and to discuss with her visitation rights with the children.
However, Thompson testified that she no longer wanted to discuss visitation rights at the time she called and that the real purpose of the call was to gather information to find out if Frank meant his threat to kill her made the previous week. Betty Frank refused to meet with Thompson and hung up.
When she returned to her farm, Thompson called Frank and talked to him for over one-half hour.
The following day, August 5, Thompson contacted Delores Fischer, a former girl friend of Frank's who lived in Atkinson, and arranged to meet her that day. Thompson testified that Fischer told her that once when he was drunk, Frank had threatened to slit Fischer's throat. Thompson testified that after her conversation with Fischer, she decided that Frank was dangerous and that there was no longer a possibility of a relationship with Frank. When Frank called Thompson that night, she called him a dirty name and hung up on him.
*263 The evening of August 5, Thompson wrote to her son explaining that she had not been "flirting" with Frank when she had called him from Chicago, but that she was merely "postponing," because if she could keep Frank hoping, he would not harm her home or her pet pig.
Thompson stated that she would not allow Frank to come over and fix her pig's irrigation pipe, even though he was willing to do so. She wrote to her son that she might have "blown [her] front" by refusing to see Frank that evening, but that she could not bear to have Frank drooling and weeping on her. Moreover, she wrote, Frank had "a face like a drowning rat ... who could stand it w/o vomiting?"
Thompson admitted to her son that she did "kiss [Frank] & stuff." She reiterated her belief that Frank was interested in the money she might inherit from her mother, rather than "want[ing her] body" as she had originally thought. Thompson was pleased that she, "the Honor Student," had figured this out before Frank "took" her for anything, even though it had taken her a month to do so. To the contrary, Thompson wrote in reference to Frank, "I took HIM! He's been spending a lot of money on me this last month. Serves him right. My single BIGGEST take was the $300 he gave me to fly to Chicago. Sucker!"
Thompson told her son that the reason she was afraid of Frank was because Frank would be "pissed" when he figured out that he was getting nothing from Thompson. She thought he might be able to figure things out "w/ his half a brain." However, Thompson concluded, "He's a liar, a user, AND a fool, and I ain't THAT scared of him. I'll just sleep w/ my .357 tonight.... (grin)."
On August 6, Thompson returned to Jedlicka's Hardware Hank store and exchanged a box of ".357 Max" shells suitable for a rifle for a box of .357 Magnum cartridges for use in a revolver.
Also on August 6, Thompson wrote a letter to a friend in Omaha discussing Fischer. Thompson wrote that she had concluded, after meeting and talking to Fischer, that Fischer still cared about Frank and still wanted "to do him." This made her "dislike" Fischer, Thompson wrote to her friend, but she could see Fischer's weakness and loneliness and have pity.
In the same letter, Thompson referred to Frank as "a classic sociopath." She wrote that "[Frank's] MISTAKE was in being a FALSE FRIEND to an INTELLIGENT & non-desperate lady."
On August 7, Frank wrote Thompson a letter which stated in part:
You went downtown got in a good argument with people and got Slaped arround [sic]! to [sic] Bad you got beat up!
....
I TOLD YOU MY PAST IS DEAD! NOW IT IS GONE TOO!
YOU ARE REALLY INTO THE WRONG WORLD IF YOU BELIEVE OTHERS!
I TOLD YOU THE TRUTH!
LOVE!
/s/ Dean
On August 8, Thompson wrote Fischer a letter in which she admitted spending the night with Frank on Sunday, June 16, but denied that she "took any of [her] clothes off." Thompson was aware that Fischer had spent the night with Frank in his trailer on a Saturday night in June, perhaps the night previous to Thompson's visit. She made the following comments about her relationship with Frank:
You see, what happened, Dean started telling me after that he loved me so much that he hadn't been screwing anyone else at all for months. And I was stupid enough to believe that!
So I didn't know he was seeing you then or I sure wouldn't have let him waste my time, and backstab you, by putting that snow job on me.
....
When I want a Houseboy I'll hire one, I won't have someone pretending to be my friend come sucking up to me and lying to me to get my money.
Frank's telephone bill indicates that on August 10 he called Thompson at 6:40 p.m. and talked for 213 minutes. Thompson testified *264 that she did not remember the conversation very well, but that she simply gave Frank the opportunity to talk.
On August 11, Frank was at Thompson's farm, where he fixed the pig's irrigation pipe and moved a refrigerator. Thompson testified that she told Frank on that day never to come back to her farm and that Frank wrote out a piece of paper giving Thompson all his property which he had stored on her farm, including a 1973 Ford pickup. That document and the title to the pickup were found in Thompson's kitchen after Frank was killed.
On Monday, August 12, Thompson wrote to her son that she "took a chance" by letting Frank come over to help her. She was willing to take such a chance because she "[knew] male psychology. Men are too STUPID to ever GIVE UP."
Having been rebuffed by Betty Frank when she attempted to talk to her on August 4, Thompson wrote her a letter dated August 13. In that letter, Thompson again said that her original purpose in contacting Betty Frank had been to meet her because Thompson and Frank had planned to be married. However, Thompson stated, "Amazing how quickly things can change! The engagement is off." Thompson informed Betty Frank that Frank had been lying to her a lot, and she questioned her about what might happen next.
How violent is he? He threatened to kill me if I wouldn't marry him, but I think that's a standard threat. Please tell me if I should, and how much, worry about retaliation from him? No-one would know about that better than you, I think. At least you are still alive, and that's encouraging.
On Saturday, August 17, the day before she shot Frank, Thompson wrote a final letter to her son, in which she stated that Frank had been calling her all week, but that she had not told him what she really thought of him. Thompson stated:
This girlfriend of his that I met in Atkinson told me that he got all drunk before and threatened to slit her throat, and Mrs. Boham told me a few days ago ... that he used to beat his wife all the time when they lived out here.
I don't want that psycho AROUND. I bought a new box of .357 shells & I'm gonna load up and PRACTICE some this afternoon! I bought a new box of .25 shells a while back, and if I can find it I'll give the little guy some exercise, too.
A resident of a farm about one-quarter mile from Thompson's testified that he heard shots which sounded like someone target practicing in the Thompson yard area on Saturday afternoon, August 17. It sounded to him as if two different calibers of guns were being used because one group of shots was louder than another group of shots.
That evening, Frank called Thompson at 7:06 p.m. and talked for 51 minutes. He called again at 10:12 p.m. and talked for 16 minutes. At 10:43 p.m., Thompson called the Knox County sheriff's office and reported to Don Henery, the chief investigator for the sheriff's office, a threatening phone call that she had received. Henery testified that Thompson reported that she and Frank had argued earlier in the week and that Frank had just called and threatened to send the "Gatz boys" out to her place.
Thompson also told Henery that Frank was angry because she refused to marry him and that Frank had previously threatened her. Henery testified that Thompson was very calm and matter-of-fact on the telephone, that she did not request that he come out, and that he advised her to tape-record future threatening conversations.
Frank's telephone records show that he called Thompson at 1:05 a.m. on August 18 and talked for 13 minutes. Thompson testified that Frank screamed things at her, threatening to slit her throat for checking up on him, shoot her truck full of holes with her in it, burn her house, and butcher her pig. However, Thompson testified that she did not believe Frank was an immediate threat, because he sounded "drunk out of his mind," and she believed he was in Atkinson, at least 2 hours away.
Frank called Thompson again at 7:08 a.m. Thompson claims he repeated his threats, this time in a calm and quiet voice. Frank's *265 telephone records indicate that this call lasted 2 minutes, although Thompson testified that it seemed like Frank had said nasty things to her for a long time. The Knox County sheriff's log shows that more than 5 hours later, at 12:26 p.m., Thompson called the sheriff's office and reported Frank's threatening phone calls to Deputy Lee Waterman.
Thompson kept notes about Frank and the events of August 17 and 18 on her computer. The computer disk containing those notes, as well as disks containing Thompson's correspondence with Steven and with other people, was seized by the sheriff, printed out, and entered into evidence at trial. The file name for Thompson's notes of August 17 and 18 was "Assault Report."
On August 18, Thompson wrote, "I called Deputy Waterman at 12:22 (noon).... I called Dean a `dangerous psycho' and told Deputy Waterman how scared of him I am." Deputy Waterman instructed Thompson on how to obtain a restraining order and advised her to do so on Monday, the following day.
At 3:12 p.m., Frank again called Thompson, and they talked for 32 minutes. Thompson testified that Frank did not threaten her at that time. She wrote in her computer notes that Frank "sounded calmer, but like he were going to burst into tears any second." She testified at trial that Frank "sounded like his normal self and he talked about normal stuff." Before he hung up, Frank told Thompson he was going to put clothes into the dryer and go grocery shopping. Thompson testified that she did not invite Frank to her house, nor did he give her any indication that he was coming over.
A few minutes later, Delores Fischer called and told Thompson that Frank had been at her place from 12:30 to 2 p.m. and had seemed all right. Fischer testified that Frank had watched TV, napped, and had two cans of beer during that time. Fischer also informed Thompson that she had talked to Bea Gatz, the mother of the Gatz boys, and that Bea had reassured her that the boys were harmless.
Thompson testified that, later, as she was sitting in the dining room at her computer writing about Frank's threats to her, she heard a car door slam. Thompson claims she went into the adjacent storage room, saw Frank's car from the window, and became frightened because she had not thought he would actually come to her house and attack her. She testified that she thought she should get back to where her gun was, on a chair next to where she had been sitting working on the computer, and quickly went back to the computer. As she returned to her chair, she saw Frank in the doorway between the kitchen and the dining room.
Frank told Thompson he had brought groceries, and she instructed him to put them in the refrigerator. Thompson testified that Frank walked toward the refrigerator, then suddenly whirled toward her, screaming, "`I'm [unintelligible two-syllable word] kill you.'" Although she did not actually hear the words, Thompson was sure that Frank had said, "I'm going to kill you," because it fit the situation. Knox County Sheriff Wes Eisenbeiss testified that in his conversations with Thompson after the shooting, she did not mention anything Frank had said to her before she shot him. She only told him that Frank had "made a noise."
Thompson testified that Frank then "lunged" toward her and that she grabbed her .357 Magnum from the chair, pointed it at Frank with both hands, and said, "[H]uh-uh." She said that when Frank did not stop moving toward her, she rapid-fired all six rounds in her handgun. She testified that although the shots stopped Frank, she "couldn't stop pulling the trigger," so she aimed the last shots down and away from him.
The sheriff's log indicates that Thompson called at 5:35 p.m. to report the shooting. Deputies arrived at Thompson's farm at 6:25 p.m. and were admitted to the house by Thompson.
The deputies found Frank lying on the floor of the computer room and a pool of blood on the floor. To the left of Frank's head were words written in blood on the floor which appeared to say "self defense," although the second word was difficult to make out. There was testimony at trial that Frank was right handed. No blood was *266 found on Frank's right hand, but there was blood noted on his left hand. Deputies also found a note in an open suitcase nearby with the words "I love Fran," "self defense," and "Dean" each written twice and the words "Fran I love you" written once.
When a deputy asked Thompson what Frank had been shot with, she handed him a loaded Colt Python .357 Magnum gun. She testified that she had reloaded the weapon while calling the sheriff's office to report the shooting.
After determining that Frank was still alive, the deputies requested assistance from the rescue squad. When squad members entered the house, Thompson was sitting on the arm of a chair beside Frank, smoking a cigarette. In response to questioning, Thompson stated that she did not know where she had shot Frank, or how many times.
Rescue squad members testified that Frank was lying on the floor on his left side in a fetal position, his knees drawn up to his chest. He was biting on a pillow and moaning. A bag containing a package of lunchmeat was found underneath his side. In response to questioning, Frank replied, "Just leave me alone and let me die." Frank's condition then deteriorated rapidly, and he was unable to respond verbally thereafter. A preliminary examination by squad members revealed two abdominal wounds and a back wound. One of the abdominal wounds was bleeding profusely.
By 6:30 p.m., Frank had no discernible blood pressure, pulse, or respirations and was totally unresponsive. Efforts at cardiopulmonary resuscitation proved unsuccessful, and Frank was pronounced dead by a local physician at 7 p.m., 4 minutes after the rescue squad arrived in Verdigre.
Thompson was taken into custody that evening as a material witness. She commented several times to a deputy that "it did not turn out like TV." Sheriff Eisenbeiss testified that when he inquired how Thompson was standing up under the events of the day, she responded that it was self-defense, that Frank was going to kill her, that Frank had made threats to her, and that he was going to get the Gatz boys after her. Thompson also told Sheriff Eisenbeiss, "Maybe he wouldn't have done anything to me, but I have read where women waited too long to defend or protect themselves."
Thompson expressed hope that the sheriff could test her hands for the presence of blood "so they don't think I wrote the note in blood." She informed the sheriff that Frank had written the note in blood. Sheriff Eisenbeiss testified that he did not observe blood on Thompson's hands at the time.
An autopsy performed on Frank's body revealed a wound from a bullet which entered his left abdomen and exited his back. Two other bullets entered from the back. One entered Frank's right hip, shattering his hip bone and lodging in the bone. The other entered his right back, passed through his liver and right lung, and exited through his lower chest, striking his right elbow area.
During the course of their investigation, deputies found three bullet holes in Thompson's dining room floor next to where Frank had been lying. The path of the bullets was reconstructed by placing rods through the dining room floor in order to determine the angle from which the bullets were fired. Those three bullets appeared to have been fired from an area in the dining room in front of the doors to Thompson's storage room. Thompson claimed that she was standing next to her computer when she shot Frank.
No blood was found anywhere in the house except in the immediate area where Frank was lying when law enforcement officials arrived, even though Thompson testified that Frank moved around quite a bit after being shot.
Thompson admitted that there was an ashtray full of cigarette butts which could have been hers on top of a refrigerator in the storage room. That room was one from which Thompson could see to the front of the house.
Sheriff Eisenbeiss testified that Thompson told him she heard Frank open the kitchen refrigerator door, and she thought he took off his boots in the kitchen. Photographs taken from the area of the computer demonstrate clearly that the kitchen area, including *267 the refrigerator, could easily be seen by a person at the computer.
Deputies found two cans of Mace in Thompson's bedroom. A loaded .25-caliber semiautomatic handgun was found under her pillow.
On September 12, 1991, Thompson was charged by information with first degree murder and use of a firearm to commit a felony in the killing of Frank. She was subsequently convicted by a jury of both charges. Thompson was sentenced to life imprisonment for first degree murder and to 10 years' imprisonment for the firearm charge, the sentences to run consecutively. She now appeals her convictions to this court.
ASSIGNMENTS OF ERROR
The defendant claims that the trial court erred in (1) refusing to admit evidence of the physical abuse which she allegedly suffered at the hands of a former boyfriend as evidence in support of her claim of self-defense, and because the State introduced a letter written by Thompson alluding to that abuse during its case in chief; (2) failing to grant her motion for new trial due to insufficiency of the evidence to support the verdict; and (3) failing to permit limited, sequestered, and individual voir dire of the jury.
ADMISSIBILITY OF PRIOR ABUSE
The defendant contends that the district court erred in refusing to admit evidence of the physical abuse she allegedly had suffered in 1983 at the hands of a former boyfriend, Ron Thompson. Although the defendant was never married to Ron Thompson, she apparently lived with him from 1980 to 1983 and had her and her son's last names legally changed to Thompson during that time period.
Thompson sought to testify on the witness stand about the alleged abusive and threatening relationship she had with Ron Thompson, but was prevented from doing so upon a relevance objection by the State. The court sustained the objection on the basis that what had happened 8 years previously with another man was not relevant to Thompson's response to threats made by Frank. Without making an immediate offer of proof following the trial court's ruling, the defendant continued to answer questions on her direct examination.
Later that day, the defense submitted as an offer of proof an 11-page report Thompson herself had written and filed with the Washington County sheriff's office on March 20, 1983. That report detailed a bizarre 2-day episode on March 16 and 17, 1983, in which Ron Thompson allegedly raped the defendant, held her captive, and repeatedly threatened her with surgical mutilation and death.
Based on the offer of proof, the trial court again found the proffered testimony to be irrelevant because it involved a third party rather than the victim and because the abuse had occurred over 8 years prior to the time the defendant killed Frank. The court also found that the evidence should be excluded under Neb.Evid.R. 403, Neb.Rev.Stat. § 27-403 (Reissue 1989), because of the danger that the acts of Ron Thompson might be imputed by the jury to Frank, thus creating unfair prejudice, confusing the issues, or misleading the jury. The court stated that the issue in the case was Thompson's state of mind toward the victim, not her state of mind toward Ron Thompson.
The defendant argues that the evidence should have been admitted to show that she acted in a reasonable fashion in defending herself against Frank. She further maintains that such evidence was necessary to explain her reference to Ron Thompson in the letter to her son dated July 24, which was introduced by the State as part of its case in chief.
"[I]n all proceedings where the Nebraska Evidence Rules apply, admissibility of evidence is controlled by the Nebraska Evidence Rules, not judicial discretion, except in those instances under the Nebraska Evidence Rules when judicial discretion is a factor involved in admissibility of evidence...." State v. Messersmith, 238 Neb. 924, 936, 473 N.W.2d 83, 92 (1991). Accord, State v. Toney, 243 Neb. 237, 498 N.W.2d 544 (1993); State v. Peterson, 242 Neb. 286, 494 N.W.2d 551 (1993).
*268 Initially, we address Thompson's claim that the evidence of her abuse by "a person," Ron Thompson, was admissible under Neb.Evid.R. 404(2), Neb.Rev.Stat. § 27-404(2) (Reissue 1989), to show that Frank's actions made Thompson angry, frustrated, and frightened, because the actions of the two men were directly related in Thompson's mind. This is a misapplication of rule 404(2), which states:
Evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove the character of a person in order to show that he or she acted in conformity therewith. It may, however, be admissible for other purposes, such as proof of motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, knowledge, identity, or absence of mistake or accident.
(Emphasis supplied.)
Although the statute does not expressly state that the "other crimes, wrongs, or acts" must be those of the accused and not of a third party, it is obviously implied, and we have previously held that to be the case. In State v. Timmerman, 240 Neb. 74, 87, 480 N.W.2d 411, 419 (1992), we stated that "[u]nder rule 404(2), evidence of other crimes is not admissible unless there is sufficient evidence that the crimes were actually committed and that the defendant committed them...." (Emphasis supplied.)
We based our holding on Huddleston v. United States, 485 U.S. 681, 689, 108 S. Ct. 1496, 1501, 99 L. Ed. 2d 771 (1988), in which the U.S. Supreme Court held that "[e]vidence is admissible under Rule 404(b) only if it is relevant .... In the Rule 404(b) context, similar act evidence is relevant only if the jury can reasonably conclude that the act occurred and that the defendant was the actor." (Emphasis supplied.)
Because Thompson was attempting to introduce evidence of the acts of a third party to show that she acted reasonably in defending herself against Frank, that evidence is irrelevant and therefore inadmissible in the context of rule 404(2).
Even though evidence of Ron Thompson's abuse of the defendant is not admissible as an other act, that does not mean it is inadmissible for any purpose. All relevant evidence normally is admissible. Evidence which is not relevant is not admissible. See Neb.Evid.R. 402, Neb.Rev.Stat. § 27-402 (Reissue 1989). Relevant evidence means "evidence having any tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to the determination of the action more probable or less probable than it would be without the evidence." Neb. Evid.R. 401, Neb.Rev.Stat. § 27-401 (Reissue 1989).
Our research has found no cases, nor have we been cited to any, in which a defendant has been permitted to introduce evidence of one episode of abuse by one individual to support the defendant's claim of self-defense in killing a second individual many years later. Moreover, we have found no cases in which a defendant has been permitted to introduce evidence of prior abuse to support the killing in self-defense of a victim who has always behaved as a "perfect gentleman" and who has concededly never laid a hand on the defendant. Finally, we have found no cases in which evidence of prior abuse has been used to support the self-defense killing of a victim whose alleged "abuse" of a defendant consisted of three or four threats, all but one of which was by telephone from many miles away.
We therefore conclude that the evidence of Ron Thompson's alleged abuse of the defendant is irrelevant, because it fails to make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to the determination of the defendant's claim of self-defense more or less probable than it would otherwise be, without such evidence. The trial court did not commit error in excluding the evidence for lack of relevance. Because we have determined that the evidence was not relevant, we need not consider whether it was properly excluded under rule 403.
The defendant also appears to argue that evidence of the defendant's prior abuse is admissible under Neb.Evid.R. 106, Neb. Rev.Stat. § 27-106 (Reissue 1989), although she does not cite that statute. The State had introduced into evidence in its case in chief a letter to the defendant's son in which she referred to Ron Thompson. However, admission *269 of evidence under rule 106, the rule of completeness, is not automatic. Even under rule 106, the evidence sought to be admitted must be relevant to the issues in the case. See State v. Schrein, 244 Neb. 136, 504 N.W.2d 827 (1993).
Having determined that evidence of Ron Thompson's prior abuse of the defendant is not relevant for any purpose, we find that this assignment of error is without merit.
MOTION FOR NEW TRIAL
Next, we turn to Thompson's claim that the district court erred in overruling her motion for new trial due to insufficiency of the evidence to support the verdict, pursuant to Neb.Rev.Stat. § 29-2101 (Reissue 1989). Although the district court apparently overruled the motion on its merits, the State argues that this assignment of error is not properly before this court because the motion for new trial was not timely filed.
Neb.Rev.Stat. § 29-2103 (Reissue 1989) provides in relevant part that "[an application for new trial] shall, except for the cause of newly discovered evidence material for the party applying, which he [or she] could not with reasonable diligence have discovered and produced at the trial, be filed within ten days after the verdict was rendered unless unavoidably prevented." (Emphasis supplied.)
On August 19, 1992, jury verdicts were rendered against Thompson for first degree murder and for the use of a firearm in the commission of a felony. Her motion for new trial was filed on September 2. Because August 29, the 10th day after August 19, fell on a Saturday, the latest date the motion could have been filed in compliance with the statute was Monday, August 31. See Neb. Rev.Stat. § 25-2221 (Reissue 1989). Therefore, the filing of Thompson's motion on Wednesday, September 2, was 2 days late unless it fell within one of the two statutory exceptions to the 10-day requirement.
Section 29-2103 makes exceptions to that requirement for newly discovered evidence material for the party applying, which he or she could not with reasonable diligence have discovered and produced at trial, and in situations where a party is "unavoidably prevented" from filing on time. The defendant's motion for new trial alleges neither. Rather, it alleges that there was irregularity in the proceedings of the trial court, that the verdict was not sustained by sufficient evidence, and that errors of law occurred at trial.
The defendant's attorney did file in this court on April 22, 1993, an "Application for Leave to Supplement Record" and an "Affidavit of Counsel." In his affidavit, defense counsel gives a variety of reasons he was unavoidably prevented from filing Thompson's motion for new trial on time. He further alleges that the Knox County Attorney waived the timely filing of the motion.
However, our holding in Taylor Dairy Products Co. v. Owen, 139 Neb. 603, 298 N.W. 332 (1941), prevents us from considering defense counsel's affidavit. In that case, a party attempted to file an appeal bond on the last day permitted by statute, but found the county judge gone and the courthouse closed for Lincoln's Birthday, although it was not a legal court holiday. The appeal bond was filed on the following day. On appeal to this court, the party urged, apparently by means of affidavit, that he had attempted a timely filing. We held:
Even if this situation warranted the filing of the bond on the eleventh day, it is of no avail here because it is not shown by the record .... The record is barren of evidence or findings of any default on the part of the county judge which prevented a timely appeal. The record imports absolute verity, and when a party attempts to escape the effect of a plain provision of statute by proof of special circumstances, bringing the matter within a recognized exception, it must appear from the record that such an issue was before the district court. The filing of affidavits in this court is not a proper way to present such an issue here.
(Emphasis supplied.) Taylor Dairy Products Co. v. Owen, 139 Neb. at 605, 298 N.W. at 333.
It does not appear from the record in this case that the issue of the timeliness of the defendant's motion for new trial was ever *270 before the district court. Therefore, she has not brought herself within either of the recognized exceptions to the requirement that a motion for new trial be filed within 10 days. Nor does defense counsel's affidavit in this court properly raise the issue.
Moreover, this court has long held that § 29-2103 by its terms is mandatory. See, Parker v. State, 164 Neb. 614, 83 N.W.2d 347 (1957); McCoy v. State, 110 Neb. 360, 193 N.W. 716 (1923). A motion for new trial not filed in conformity with the statutory requirements as to time may not be considered by an appellate court on review. See Parker v. State, supra.
Although the State is correct that the defendant's motion for new trial is not properly before this court, we note that a motion for new trial is not a prerequisite to obtaining appellate review for insufficiency of evidence to support a judgment. See Neb. Rev.Stat. § 25-1912.01(2) (Reissue 1989). Because of the seriousness of the offenses of which the defendant has been convicted, we exercise our option to review the record for plain error as to whether the evidence is sufficient to support the defendant's conviction for first degree murder. See Neb.Rev. Stat. § 25-1919 (Cum.Supp.1992).
A verdict in a criminal case must be sustained if the evidence, viewed and construed most favorably to the State, is sufficient to support that verdict. Moreover, on such a claim, an appellate court will not set aside a guilty verdict in a criminal case where such verdict is supported by relevant evidence. Only where evidence lacks sufficient probative force as a matter of law may an appellate court set aside a guilty verdict as unsupported by evidence beyond a reasonable doubt.
State v. Connely, 243 Neb. 319, 333, 499 N.W.2d 65, 75 (1993).
In finding a defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt, a jury may rely upon circumstantial evidence and the inferences that may be drawn therefrom. State v. Batiste, 231 Neb. 481, 437 N.W.2d 125 (1989), disapproved on other grounds, State v. Pettit, 233 Neb. 436, 445 N.W.2d 890 (1989). Circumstantial evidence is evidence which, without going directly to prove the existence of a fact, gives rise to a logical inference that such fact exists. State v. Tucker, 242 Neb. 336, 494 N.W.2d 572 (1993). Circumstantial evidence is evidence of one or more facts from which another fact can logically be inferred. Id.
A person commits murder in the first degree if he or she kills another person purposely and with deliberate and premeditated malice. Neb.Rev.Stat. § 28-303(1) (Reissue 1989). "Purposely," as an element of first degree murder, means intentionally. State v. Reynolds, 235 Neb. 662, 457 N.W.2d 405 (1990). The intent involved in an actor's conduct is a mental process and may be inferred from the conduct itself; the actor's language, if any, in reference to the conduct; and the circumstances surrounding the conduct. State v. Russell, 243 Neb. 106, 497 N.W.2d 393 (1993).
"Malice," like intent, concerns the state of mind of the slayer and may be inferred from the words and acts of the defendant, the circumstances surrounding his or her conduct, and the evidence relating to the circumstances of the criminal act. See State v. Illig, 237 Neb. 598, 467 N.W.2d 375 (1991). Malice is that condition of the mind which is manifested by the intentional doing of a wrongful act without just cause or excuse. State v. Nielsen, 243 Neb. 202, 498 N.W.2d 527 (1993).
"Deliberate malice" and "premeditated malice" are separate and distinct elements of the crime of murder in the first degree....
"Deliberate" means not suddenly, not rashly; but deliberation requires that the defendant considered the probable consequences of his or her act before doing the act.... A person kills with "deliberate malice" when he or she, without just cause or excuse, kills another not suddenly or rashly, but after considering the probable consequences of doing the act.
"Premeditated" means to have formed a design to commit an act before it is done.... A person kills with "premeditated malice" if before the act causing the death occurs, he or she has formed the *271 intent or determined to kill the victim without legal justification.
(Citations omitted.) State v. Batiste, 231 Neb. at 491, 437 N.W.2d at 132.
One way in which a jury could infer the malice the defendant felt toward Frank is from the defendant's words in her correspondence with others. The tone of her letters in discussing Frank was contemptuous. Among other things, she referred to him as a fool, a sucker, and a houseboy. On several occasions, she ridiculed his physical appearance. The defendant belittled Frank's intellect, while referring frequently to her own superior intelligence and status as a Mensa member and an honor student.
A jury could also infer from the defendant's acts in the days preceding the killing, as well as on the day of the killing, that the defendant killed Frank intentionally and with malice. The day after she had written to her son about a "Fatal Fight" with Frank, the defendant purchased ammunition for her .357 Magnum handgun. Later, she wrote to her son that she was not that scared of Frank and that she would just sleep with her .357 Magnum. The following day, the defendant exchanged the ammunition she had erroneously purchased for the kind that would fit her .357 Magnum handgun.
The day before she shot and killed Frank, the defendant wrote to her son that she did not want "that psycho" around, that she had purchased new ammunition, and that she was going to "load up and PRACTICE" that afternoon with her two handguns. A neighbor of the defendant's heard what appeared to be target practicing in the direction of the defendant's farm that afternoon.
When Frank arrived at the defendant's farmhouse the following afternoon, she had her loaded .357 Magnum handgun at her side. Although the defendant had two cans of Mace available, she had armed herself with a lethal weapon. She also chose to use her .357 Magnum rather than her smaller,.25-caliber semiautomatic handgun. The.357 Magnum was loaded with hollow point bullets, a type of ammunition designed to mushroom upon impact and thereby increase the wounding power of the bullet.
A jury could conclude from the evidence of an ashtray full of cigarette butts on top of a refrigerator in the defendant's storage room that she may have expected Frank and was in fact watching for him in that room. It was a room from which the defendant could see to the front of the house. A jury could also find that the trajectory of the three bullets which were fired into the floor was consistent with those shots being fired from an area in front of the door to the storage room, and not from behind the computer table as the defendant claimed.
The length of time it takes to kill another is evidence from which the intent of the killer may be inferred. See State v. Batiste, supra. The forensic pathologist who performed the autopsy on Frank, Dr. Brad Randall, testified that the gunshot to Frank's right back shattered the right lobe of his liver and that such an injury would cause an individual to lose a large amount of blood very quickly. In his opinion, an individual would only live 10 to 15 minutes after suffering a gunshot such as Frank received to his right lung and liver and would probably lose consciousness within 5 to 10 minutes after sustaining such a wound. Frank was still breathing when sheriff's deputies and rescue personnel arrived 50 minutes after the defendant reported the shooting. However, only 5 minutes later, Frank had become unresponsive to any type of stimulus and had no discernible blood pressure, pulse, or respirations.
There was evidence from the appearance of the wound to Frank's upper left abdomen that Frank had survived for some period of time after that wound was sustained. The two wounds to Frank's back did not have this characteristic appearance. Additionally, Dr. Randall concluded from the nature of the exit wound in Frank's right chest and the injury to his right elbow that Frank's right arm was against or near to his body as that bullet passed through and that this could have occurred if Frank had been lying on the floor with his arm under him when that shot was fired.
These findings led Dr. Randall to believe that the three gunshot wounds were not all inflicted at the same time in "rapid fire" *272 sequence as the defendant claimed and that the shot to Frank's right back was possibly fired shortly before law enforcement and rescue squad personnel arrived.
Two high school boys hitting golf balls at a neighboring farm testified that they heard two to three shots. One of the boys placed the time of the shots at about 5:20 to 5:30 p.m. This was a few minutes after the other boy had seen a car turn into Thompson's driveway. The boys continued hitting golf balls until 6 p.m., but neither heard any other shots.
From these facts, as well as from the fact that Frank was apparently able to write a note in blood on the floor as well as a note on a piece of paper sometime during the course of events, a jury could properly find that the defendant inflicted the three gunshots upon Frank over a period of time, and not in rapid succession as she claimed.
Malice may be inferred from the shooting of another person with a deadly weapon. State v. Nielsen, 243 Neb. 202, 498 N.W.2d 527 (1993). The defendant was trained in the use of firearms as a security guard, owned several weapons of various types, and target-practiced with regularity. She considered herself a good shot, and her son testified that this was true. Although she had chemical Mace and a small-caliber handgun readily available to her, she chose a large-caliber handgun loaded with a very damaging type of bullet as a weapon of first resort.
Mark Bohaty, a Nebraska State Patrol firearms examiner, testified that the defendant's weapon was a double-action revolver which required 12 pounds of force on the trigger to fire. It was not a semiautomatic or automatic weapon and therefore required that much force to fire each bullet. The weapon could also be operated single-action by cocking the hammer back and applying 3 to 3¼ pounds of pressure to the trigger each time the weapon was fired.
The location, nature, and number of wounds inflicted are circumstances from which a jury may draw the inference that a killing was done with deliberate and premeditated malice. State v. Nielsen, supra. The defendant fired all six rounds in her revolver, striking Frank in the torso once in the front and twice in his back and striking the floor three times.
Based upon all the direct and circumstantial evidence in this case, the jury could have found beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant's words and conduct in the days and hours before the shooting, as well as the circumstances surrounding the shooting itself, were sufficient to prove that the defendant intended to kill Frank and that she did so with deliberate and premeditated malice after incapacitating Frank and exacting two exculpatory notes from him, one written in his own blood.
The evidence was also sufficient to reject the defendant's claim of self-defense. Because the defendant claims that she shot Frank in self-defense, the State was required to prove beyond a reasonable doubt not only that the defendant committed murder in the first degree, but that she killed Frank without justification.
Neb.Rev.Stat. § 28-1409 (Reissue 1989) provides:
(1) ... [T]he use of force upon or toward another person is justifiable when the actor believes that such force is immediately necessary for the purpose of protecting himself [or herself] against the use of unlawful force by such other person on the present occasion.
....
(4) The use of deadly force shall not be justifiable under this section unless the actor believes that such force is necessary to protect himself [or herself] against death....
....
(5) ... [A] person employing protective force may estimate the necessity thereof under the circumstances as he [or she] believes them to be when the force is used....
This court has long held that a defendant asserting self-defense as justification for the use of force must have a reasonable and good faith belief in the necessity of such force. See, State v. Stueben, 240 *273 Neb. 170, 481 N.W.2d 178 (1992); Housh v. State, 43 Neb. 163, 61 N.W. 571 (1895). The principle which underlies the rule is that human life should not be made to depend upon conditions so unreliable and hazardous as the bare belief of any person that he or she is in danger of death or bodily harm. State v. Stueben, supra; State v. Archbold, 178 Neb. 433, 133 N.W.2d 601 (1965); Housh v. State, supra. A defendant's claim of self-defense is a question of fact for the jury. See State v. Stewart, 205 Neb. 626, 288 N.W.2d 751 (1980).
The facts of this case are more than sufficient for a jury to conclude beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant did not have a reasonable and good faith belief in the necessity to use deadly force against Frank and that the defendant was in fact the aggressor. She appeared to be making plans for some type of hostile encounter with Frank for several weeks prior to the shooting. The defendant had even started a computer file on August 17 titled "Assault Report," even though she had been assaulted by no one.
Thompson admitted that Frank had been a "perfect gentleman" for 6 years and had never abused her. Thompson claimed that Sharon Boham had told her of multiple incidents of Frank beating his ex-wife. However, Boham testified that she had told Thompson that she had heard of one incident, which she referred to as "hearsay," in which Frank had shoved his ex-wife.
Frank's ex-wife denied at trial that Frank had ever physically abused her, as did Delores Fischer, Frank's former girl friend. Both testified that Frank became verbally abusive and threatening only when he had been drinking. Frank's blood alcohol content upon autopsy was .000. The pathologist testified that there would have been very little decrease in blood alcohol content from the time Frank died until the time of autopsy.
Thompson could not even remember the words of the one threat which she claimed Frank made to her in person, and she admitted at trial that she did not understand what he said to her just before she shot him. She wrote to her son that she was not that scared of Frank. No one else testified to being aware of any threats made by Frank against the defendant.
Although the defendant claimed she was frightened of Frank and what he might do to her, she was in an unlocked house when Frank arrived at her farm. She admitted at trial that although one of her doors could not be locked from the inside, it could be secured from the outside, and one could then enter the house and secure the second door from the inside. However, she claimed that this never occurred to her.
The defendant had available nonlethal means to repel Frank's alleged attack, but declined to use them. She shot a man a total of three times, twice in the back, while he was carrying "something," which later proved to be a sack of lunchmeat.
Although Frank lay bleeding on her floor for almost an hour before help arrived, Thompson did not know where or how many times she had shot him. The only assistance she had rendered was to put a pillow under Frank's head and to give him a glass of water.
Finally, the defendant herself stated to the sheriff, "Maybe he wouldn't have done anything to me, but I have read where women waited too long to defend or protect themselves." (Emphasis supplied.) Such a statement does not reflect even a bare belief by the defendant that she was in danger of death or bodily harm. At most, it indicates that the defendant did not know whether Frank would hurt her or not, and it falls far short of the requirement that one must have a reasonable and good faith belief in the necessity to use deadly force for self-defense.
It is obvious that in this case the jury found that Thompson's claim of self-defense in the killing of Frank was not credible or reasonable.
The evidence is more than sufficient to support the jury's verdicts on both the first degree murder charge and the firearm charge. We find no plain error in this regard.
SEQUESTERED, INDIVIDUAL VOIR DIRE
Finally, Thompson claims that the district court erred in failing to permit limited, sequestered *274 voir dire of the venire. Prior to trial, Thompson moved for limited, sequestered, and individual voir dire of prospective jurors on the issues of knowledge of the case, knowledge of the defendant, knowledge of the decedent, and opinions about guilt or innocence, necessitated by inflammatory and highly prejudicial pretrial publicity and the widespread community discussion of the killing.
In support of her motion, Thompson presented copies of numerous newspaper articles from towns in Knox County and the surrounding area. These articles were factual in nature. One article, in listing Frank's survivors, made reference to his "dear mother, Mrs. Mamie Frank." Another article consisted of a letter to the editor commenting on two recent killings in the community, and the editor's response, neither of which mentioned Thompson or Frank by name. The letter commended the editor for covering the story about "a man ... killed by a woman near Verdigre" in an impersonal and appropriate way. The editor responded in part:
We report what we know are facts. The emotions in that case are: We are very sorry for the mother of the deceased. She is a true gema very, very outstanding, sincere, and honest person who doesn't deserve to be a part of this tragedy, either. That's our emotions. The facts will come out during the trial which has been postponed until June.
These sympathetic references to an elderly woman in the community do not strike us as being inflammatory or prejudicial to the defendant.
Thompson also submitted affidavits from local residents that there were strong opinions held in the case and opining that the selection of a fair and impartial jury would be difficult. A jury selection expert hired by Thompson submitted an affidavit, based on an attitudinal survey of 36 randomly selected potential jurors in Knox County, that there was a significant subset of potential jurors who could not fairly decide the case because they had knowledge of the case through community discussion and had already formed opinions about the case. She conceded, however, that a fair and impartial jury could be found in Knox County.
Thompson argues that the lack of sequestered, individual voir dire prevented her from ascertaining the true extent of pertinent knowledge and opinions of potential jurors and that she was prejudiced thereby. The record reflects that the trial court conducted a thorough examination of prospective jurors as to their knowledge of the case, whether they had formed an opinion about Thompson's guilt or innocence, and whether they could set aside any preconceived opinions and decide the case solely on the evidence. Only 3 individuals from a venire of 42 indicated that they did not feel they could set aside their previously formed opinions and render a verdict based solely upon the facts of the case, and those 3 individuals were excused for cause. This is inconsistent with the notion that a biased jury was seated. See State v. Tucker, 242 Neb. 336, 494 N.W.2d 572 (1993).
Except when there is a showing that without sequestration a party's rights would be prejudiced, a party has no right to examine a venireperson out of the presence of all other venirepersons. State v. Bradley, 236 Neb. 371, 461 N.W.2d 524 (1990), cert. denied ___ U.S. ___, 112 S. Ct. 143, 116 L. Ed. 2d 109 (1991).
The defendant has failed to show that a biased jury was seated or that she was prejudiced in any way by the district court's refusal to grant her motion for sequestered, individual voir dire. Her own jury selection expert conceded that it was possible to select a fair and impartial jury in Knox County. No error has been demonstrated by the trial court's refusal to grant sequestered, individual voir dire of each person called to sit as a juror in this case.
CONCLUSION
This court having found no merit to any of the defendant's assignments of error, her convictions and sentences are affirmed.
AFFIRMED.
CAPORALE, J., not participating.

=== CASE 2229977 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:33.318304+00 ===

687 N.E.2d 214 (1997)
Alice Jean SMITH and Richard Smith, Appellants-Plaintiffs,
v.
STANDARD LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY OF INDIANA, P.K. of Zionsville, Inc., Glenn W. Foster & Associates, Gary Keller d/b/a Grass Eaters Lawn Care, and Grass Eaters Lawn Care, Appellees-Defendants.
No. 06A01-9609-CV-293.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
October 31, 1997.
*215 Paul S. Kruse, Anthony W. Patterson, Parr Richey Obremskey & Morton, Lebanon, for Appellants-Plaintiffs.
Todd J. Kaiser, Nicholas C. Pappas, Sandra Boyd Williams, Locke Reynolds Boyd & Weisell, Indianapolis, for Appellees-Defendants.
OPINION
NAJAM, Judge.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
Alice Jean Smith ("Smith") slipped and fell on an icy sidewalk outside of Hook Drugs, Inc. ("Hook's"). Smith was an employee of Hook's at the time of her fall. She and her husband, Richard Smith, filed a complaint against Standard Life Insurance Company of *216 Indiana ("Standard Life"), the owner and lessor of the premises. The trial court entered summary judgment in favor of Standard Life, and Smith now appeals. The dispositive issue presented for our review is whether Smith, as an employee of the tenant, qualifies as a "third person" under the public use exception to the general rule of non-liability for landlords.
We affirm.
FACTS
In 1979, Standard Life purchased a building from Hook's in Zionsville and immediately leased it back to Hook's. Under a twenty-year written lease, Standard Life surrendered complete possession and control of the entire premises to Hook's. Standard Life did not participate in the design or construction of the building, which was erected in 1975. Hook's sublet an area to Pizza King Village Station ("Pizza King"). Pizza King is located in a part of the building adjacent to and set back from that part occupied by Hook's.
Hook's hired Smith in 1979, and she worked as a cashier in the Zionsville location continuously except for one four-month period. Smith would frequent Pizza King for lunch and always walked the same route. During Smith's employment, the manager of Hook's had consistently removed snow and ice from the sidewalk. Smith had also performed that task on occasion. However, Smith and her co-workers removed snow and ice only from the area directly in front of the Hook's store.
On February 23, 1993, Smith was injured when she slipped and fell on an icy area of the sidewalk between Hook's and Pizza King. Subsequently, Smith filed a complaint against several defendants, including Standard Life. Smith alleged that Standard Life had breached its duty of reasonable care when it knew or should have known at the time of the lease that a dangerous condition existed on the premises and was negligent because it had failed to remove accumulations of snow and ice from the sidewalk. Specifically, Smith alleged that a drain spout had directed water onto the sidewalk in a concentrated area, which caused ice to form, and that Standard Life either knew about or should have discovered the condition.
Standard Life filed a Motion for Summary Judgment, which the trial court granted. Smith now appeals.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
Standard of Review
The purpose of summary judgment is to terminate litigation about which there can be no factual dispute and which may be determined as a matter of law. Monon Corp. v. Townsend, 678 N.E.2d 807, 809 (Ind. Ct.App.1997), trans. denied. Summary judgment is appropriate only when there is no genuine issue of material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Ind. Trial Rule 56(C). At the time of filing the motion or response, a party shall designate to the court all parts of pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, admissions, matters of judicial notice, and any other matters on which it relies for purposes of the motion. Id. The movant bears the burden of establishing the propriety of summary judgment, and all facts and inferences to be drawn therefrom are viewed in the light most favorable to the non-movant. Ramon v. Glenroy Constr. Co., 609 N.E.2d 1123, 1127 (Ind.Ct.App.1993), trans. denied.
When reviewing a decision upon a motion for summary judgment, this court applies the same standard as the trial court. Miller Brewing Co. v. Bartholemew Co. Beverage Co., Inc., 674 N.E.2d 193, 198 (Ind.Ct. App.1996), trans. denied. We stand in the shoes of the trial court and liberally construe all designated evidentiary material in favor of the nonmoving party. Rotec, Div. of Orbitron, Inc. v. Murray Equip., Inc., 626 N.E.2d 533, 535 (Ind.Ct.App.1993). In order to prevail on appeal when a summary judgment motion has been granted in favor of an opposing party, the appealing party must establish the existence of a genuine issue of material fact from materials designated to the trial court. Thompson v. Murat Shrine Club, Inc., 639 N.E.2d 1039, 1040 (Ind.Ct. App.1994), trans. denied. Where the facts are not in dispute, summary judgment is *217 inappropriate only when the fact-finder may reasonably draw conflicting inferences from the undisputed facts. Nobles v. Cartwright, 659 N.E.2d 1064, 1071 (Ind.Ct.App.1995).
Premises Liability: General Rule of Non-Liability for Landlords
Smith's complaint alleges that Standard Life breached its duty of reasonable care when it knew or should have known of the dangerous condition at the time of the lease. Smith further asserts that Standard Life was negligent for failing to remove accumulations of snow and ice and for permitting the dangerous condition to continue. The tort of negligence is comprised of three elements: (1) a duty owed to the plaintiff, (2) a breach of that duty by the defendant, (3) which proximately causes the plaintiff's damage. Pitcock v. Worldwide Recycling, Inc., 582 N.E.2d 412, 414 (Ind.Ct.App.1991). Whether a duty exists is a question of law for the court to decide. Id. The duty that a landlord owes to tenants or third parties lawfully upon the leased premises was discussed in Rogers v. Grunden, 589 N.E.2d 248 (Ind.Ct.App.1992), trans. denied, in which we stated:
The law of this jurisdiction is clear; as a general rule, in the absence of statute, covenant, fraud or concealment, a landlord who gives a tenant full control and possession of the leased property will not be liable for personal injuries sustained by the tenant or other persons lawfully upon the leased property. Generally, once possession and control of property have been surrendered, a landlord does not owe a duty to protect tenants from defective conditions.
Id. at 254 (citations omitted).
The parties do not dispute that Standard Life had relinquished complete possession and control of the premises to Hook's. Specifically, pursuant to the lease, Hook's accepted "the premises in their [sic] present condition" and agreed to "keep [it] in good condition and repair." Hook's also retained the right to alter the premises. Consequently, Hook's was responsible for the maintenance and repair of the building and typically dispatched its own maintenance workers to make improvements or repairs. Further, Hook's employees removed the snow and ice from the sidewalk, and the store manager made certain that the sidewalk in front of Hook's was clear of snow and ice prior to opening for business each day. Given these undisputed facts, under the general rule of non-liability for landlords, Standard Life did not owe Smith a duty.
The Public Use Exception
Still, Smith asserts that summary judgment is precluded in that the "public use" exception to the general rule of landlord non-liability applies and creates a duty owed by Standard Life to Smith. Specifically, Smith maintains that Standard Life leased the property to Hook's for a public purpose and that a material issue of fact exists as to whether, at the time of the lease, a dangerous condition existed which rendered the premises unsafe for public use. Smith further alleges that Standard Life knew about or should have discovered the condition by the exercise of reasonable care. Finally, Smith contends that she qualifies as a "third person" protected by the public use exception.
The public use exception, which we first recognized in Walker v. Ellis, 126 Ind. App. 353, 129 N.E.2d 65 (1955), trans. denied, provides:
Where premises are leased for public or semi-public purposes, and at [the] time of lease[,] conditions exist which render premises unsafe for purposes intended, or constitute a nuisance, and landlord knows or by exercise of reasonable care ought to know of conditions, and a third person suffers injury on account thereof, landlord is liable, because [the] third person is there at invitation of landlord, as well as of tenant.
Id. at 73 (citations omitted). In order for the public use exception to apply, Smith must designate evidence of the following facts in the record: (1) the property was leased for a public purpose, (2) a condition existed at the time of the lease which rendered the premises unsafe and the landlord knew or should have known of the condition by the exercise *218 of reasonable care, and (3) a third person was injured because of the existing condition. Id. The parties dispute whether the premises were leased for a public purpose and whether Standard Life knew or should have known of the alleged dangerous condition. We need not consider whether these are disputed issues of material fact because the dispositive issue in this case is whether Smith qualifies as a "third person" under the public use exception.
"Third Person" Requirement
In order to invoke the public use exception, Smith must demonstrate that as an employee of Hook's she qualifies as a "third person." Smith argues that she is a third person because she was injured on the sidewalk outside of the area occupied by Hook's. Standard Life counters that Smith was injured during the course of her employment and does not qualify as a third person under the exception. We agree with Standard Life.
In Walker, the leading Indiana case that discusses the public use exception, we recognized that a landlord may be liable to a "third person" when premises are leased for public use because the third person is there at the invitation of both the landlord and the tenant. Walker, 129 N.E.2d at 73. The plaintiff in Walker was a customer of the tenant. Here, in contrast, Smith was on the premises as an employee of Hook's and not at the invitation of Standard Life.
The parties dispute whether in Place v. Sagamore, 604 N.E.2d 671 (Ind.Ct.App.1992), trans. denied, we decided that an employee of the tenant did not qualify as a "third person" under the public use exception. Although we expressed our doubts that the exception applied, our decision in Place was based primarily on other grounds, namely, that Place had failed to allege any facts indicating that the landlord had leased the premises to Place's employer for a public purpose. Id. at 675. Thus, we consider this a case of first impression.
The definition of a third person on business premises that are open to the public is found in the Restatement (Second) of Torts:
b. "Third persons" include all persons other than the possessor of the land, or his servants acting within the scope of their employment. It includes such servants when they are acting outside of the scope of their employment, as well as other invitees or licensees upon the premises, and also trespassers on the land, and even persons outside of the land whose acts endanger the safety of the visitor.
RESTATEMENT (SECOND) OF TORTS § 344 cmt.b (1965). Both our supreme court and this court have previously relied on the Restatement (Second) of Torts in resolving premises liability questions. See Burrell v. Meads, 569 N.E.2d 637, 642 (Ind.1991) (incorporating Restatement (Second) of Torts § 332 in adopting the "invitation test" for use in determining who qualifies as an invitee in premises liability actions); see also Frye v. Rumbletown Free Methodist Church, 657 N.E.2d 745, 750 (Ind.Ct.App.1995) (adopting Restatement (Second) of Torts § 330 in determining that Indiana recognizes the privilege to enter another's land implied by custom). We agree with the Restatement (Second) of Torts § 344, comment b, and adopt the Restatement definition of who qualifies as a "third person" under the public use exception.
Smith argues that she is a "third person" because her injury occurred outside the area occupied by Hook's rather than inside the store. We are not persuaded by her argument. While Standard Life owns the premises, the lease gave Hook's complete possession and control. Regardless of the exact location where her injury occurred, Smith was on the premises controlled by Hook's when she was injured, and there is no dispute that she was acting within the scope of her employment at the time she sustained her injury. Thus, Smith is not a stranger to the lease and does not qualify as a third person under the Restatement (Second) of Torts § 344 definition.
We conclude that Smith has failed to meet the "third person" requirement of the public use exception, and, therefore, that the exception does not apply. Standard Life owes no duty to Smith under the exception. The trial *219 court did not err in granting summary judgment in favor of Standard Life.
Affirmed.
BAKER and KIRSCH, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2229978 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:33.347555+00 ===

687 N.E.2d 1188 (1997)
293 Ill. App. 3d 329
227 Ill. Dec. 706
The PEOPLE of the State of Illinois, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Kenneth E. DAUER, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 4-96-0779.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Fourth District.
December 8, 1997.
Charles M. Schiedel, Deputy Defender, Office of State Appellate Defender, Sup. Court Unit, Springfield, for Kenneth E. Dauer.
Thomas J. Brown, State's Attorney, Pontiac, Norbert J. Goetten, Director, Robert J. Biderman, Deputy Director, Jeffrey K. Davison, Staff Attorney, State's Attorneys Appellate Prosecutor, Springfield, for the People.
Justice GREEN delivered the opinion of the court:
Section 122-2.1(a) of the Post-Conviction Hearing Act (Act) requires a court to which such a petition is directed "[w]ithin 90 days after the filing and docketing of each petition" to "examine such petition and enter an order thereon pursuant to [that] Section." 725 ILCS 5/122-2.1(a) (West 1994). Section 122-2.1(a)(2) of the Act directs that if the court finds the petition is "frivolous or * * * patently without merit," the court is to "dismiss the petition in a written order." 725 ILCS 5/122-2.1(a)(2) (West 1994). If the court does not dismiss the petition, the court is to order the petition "docketed for further consideration in accordance with Sections 122-4 through 122-6 [of the Act]." 725 ILCS 5/122-2.1(b) (West 1994).
Here, the circuit court did not examine the instant postconviction petition for more than 90 days after its filing and docketing because the conviction was then on appeal. Before the court examined the petition, it permitted the State to file a motion to dismiss the petition and held a hearing without following the requirements of sections 122-4 through 122-6 (725 ILCS 5/122-4 through 122-6 (West 1994)). We hold that, under the circumstances, the Act was violated when the court failed to examine the petition within the 90-day period and this, of itself, is enough to require us to reverse the order of dismissal and remand to the circuit court with directions to proceed pursuant to sections 122-4, 122-5, and 122-6 of the Act.
On October 2, 1995, defendant, Kenneth E. Dauer, was sentenced by the circuit court of Livingston County to seven years' imprisonment upon a conviction of forgery. On February 22, 1996, defendant filed in that court a petition for postconviction relief under the Act. As defendant had previously filed a notice of appeal to this court, the circuit court entered an order on February 26, 1996, directing *1189 that the postconviction petition be held in abeyance pending appeal. On August 8, 1996, this court affirmed defendant's conviction and sentence. People v. Dauer, No. 4-95-0785 (August 8, 1996) (unpublished order under Supreme Court Rule 23). On August 20, 1996, the State filed a motion to dismiss the petition. On September 9, 1996, this court issued its mandate of affirmance of the conviction and sentence.
On September 12, 1996, the circuit court granted defendant an extension of time to respond to the State's motion to dismiss. On September 19, 1996, defendant responded by filing an amended pro se postconviction petition, contending he was denied effective assistance of counsel at trial and a violation of due process and equal protection occurred in his sentence. On September 30, 1996, arguments were heard on the State's motion to dismiss. At the hearing, defendant requested the appointment of counsel, but the court denied his request as being "untimely" and "not necessary." The court then dismissed defendant's petition.
Defendant has appealed, contending (1) the circuit court's failure to rule on his postconviction petition within 90 days of its filing rendered the dismissal void and (2) the procedure used by the court in ruling on his petition was improper. As we have indicated, we deem the ruling within the 90-day requirement of section 122-2.1(a) of the Act absolute and reverse for that reason. We find errors in the hearing that was held but do not consider them serious enough to require reversal, as no argument was made that the petition was not "frivolous or patently without merit."
In regard to the late action of the circuit court in examining the petition, we recognize that putting the petition in abeyance until the appeal was decided was not an unreasonable thing to do. However, we are aware of no case that has permitted a delay in the 90-day rule of section 122-2.1(a) of the Act, however reasonable such an action might be. In People v. Porter, 122 Ill. 2d 64, 85, 118 Ill. Dec. 465, 473, 521 N.E.2d 1158, 1166 (1988), the court held that the then 30-day provision of section 122-2.1(a) was "mandatory" rather than directory and failure of compliance required that the petition be docketed for proceedings under sections 122-4 through 122-6 of the Act. In People v. Tarnow, 249 Ill.App. 3d 797, 800, 189 Ill. Dec. 159, 161, 619 N.E.2d 860, 862 (1993), under that theory, a one-day delay past the end of the then 30-day period by the circuit court in examining a postconviction petition and issuing an order of summary dismissal vitiated that order. See People v. Jett, 211 Ill.App.3d 92, 96, 155 Ill. Dec. 541, 543, 569 N.E.2d 1152, 1154 (1991); People v. Phillips, 183 Ill.App.3d 417, 421, 132 Ill. Dec. 241, 243, 539 N.E.2d 804, 806 (1989).
As a response to defendant's reliance upon Porter and its progeny in holding the 90-day limit mandatory, the State contends that strict rule was negated by the decision in People v. Gaultney, 174 Ill. 2d 410, 221 Ill. Dec. 195, 675 N.E.2d 102 (1996). We discuss that case in more detail later. That decision held that where, as here, a motion to dismiss a postconviction petition was filed before the court had made its examination of the petition required by section 122-2.1(a) of the Act, the rights of the defendant are not necessarily violated if, in making its ruling, the court places little or no reliance on the motion to dismiss. Gaultney, 174 Ill.2d at 422, 221 Ill. Dec. at 201, 675 N.E.2d at 108. Here, the State reasons, by analogy, that if the Gaultney court requires only substantial compliance with the provisions of the Act involved there so that the defendant is not substantially prejudiced, a similar rule is applicable to the 90-day provision. We do not agree with the analogy drawn by the State.
The Gaultney opinion cites Porter favorably in several places. If Gaultney was intended to present a broad rule that would counter Porter, the court would likely have so stated. Moreover, a ruling that reasonable compliance with the 90-day rule is all that is required would be unworkable. The idea of not deciding anything about the postconviction petition until the appeal was decided was not an unreasonable idea; however, if the court could properly do that, when would the 90-day period begin to start? Would it begin when the appellate court decided the case or when the mandate was issued?
Section 122-5 of the Act provides that when the circuit court makes an order pursuant *1190 to section 122-2.1(b) of the Act, within 30 days of the order or "within such further time as the court may set, the State shall answer or move to dismiss." 725 ILCS 5/122-5 (West 1994). Thus, when the drafters of the Act wished for the time schedule to be flexible, the drafters so stated. The Act sets forth a scheme whereby summary action must be taken shortly if it is to be done and, once that deadline is past, the matter can proceed at a pace set by the court. We conclude that the 90-day period is still mandatory and the order of dismissal after the end of that period must be set aside.
In regard to defendant's contention that reversible error resulted from the circuit court's proceeding to rule after the State had filed a motion to dismiss, the Gaultney court stated:
"The mere early filing of a motion or responsive pleading by the State, however, does not per se contaminate the circuit court's determination pursuant to section 122-2.1. See, e.g., [People v.] Mitchell, 218 Ill.App.3d [401,] 402-03 [161 Ill. Dec. 170, 171-72, 578 N.E.2d 297, 298-99 (1991)]. The premature filing of a motion to dismiss does not prevent the circuit court from independently evaluating whether a post-conviction petition is frivolous or patently without merit, as required by the Act. Rather, reversal is required where the record shows that the circuit court sought or relied on input from the State when determining whether the petition is frivolous. Compare People v. Barker, 258 Ill.App.3d 323 [196 Ill. Dec. 549, 630 N.E.2d 484] (1994) (reversal required where the trial judge requested argument from both parties); [People v.] Merritte, 225 Ill.App.3d 986 [168 Ill. Dec. 76, 589 N.E.2d 190 (1992)] (reversal required where the State orally argued its motion to dismiss at length to the trial judge and where the judge stated that dismissal was based, in part, on the reasons given by the State at oral argument); People v. Clark, 239 Ill. App. 3d 546 [179 Ill. Dec. 95, 605 N.E.2d 1109] (1992) (reversal required where the State presented oral argument, the State used case law to support its oral argument, and the trial judge said that he had relied on the State's arguments); People v. Rutkowski, 225 Ill.App.3d 1065 [168 Ill. Dec. 49, 589 N.E.2d 163] (1992) (reversal required where the trial judge heard argument from the State on its oral motion to strike); People v. Novak, 200 Ill.App.3d 189 [146 Ill. Dec. 681, 558 N.E.2d 644] (1990) (reversal required where the trial judge conducted a hearing on the motion to dismiss and expressly indicated that he was granting the State's motion); People v. Magdaleno, 188 Ill.App.3d 384 [135 Ill. Dec. 536, 543 N.E.2d 1104] (1989) (reversal required where the trial judge addressed the merits of the State's motion to strike); with People v. Woods, 239 Ill.App.3d 559 [179 Ill. Dec. 93, 605 N.E.2d 1107] (1992) (no reversal where the motion was short and cited only one case, the trial judge did not hear any argument on the motion, and the order showed an independent analysis); Mitchell, 218 Ill.App.3d 401 [161 Ill. Dec. 170, 578 N.E.2d 297] (no reversal where the motion was terse, the trial judge did not hear any argument from the State, and the dismissal order showed a detailed analysis).
We agree with the approach of these appellate decisions. Section 122-2.1 of the Act authorizes the trial judge to make an initial independent evaluation of a post-conviction petition. 725 ILCS 5/122-2.1 (West 1992). We ordinarily presume that the trial judge knows and follows the law unless the record indicates otherwise. See People v. Terrell, 132 Ill. 2d 178, 219 [138 Ill. Dec. 176, 547 N.E.2d 145] (1989). Where the record gives no indication that the trial judge sought input from the State or relied on the motion to dismiss, we presume that the judge acted properly." Gaultney, 174 Ill.2d at 419-20, 221 Ill. Dec. at 200, 675 N.E.2d at 107.
Here, (1) the motion to dismiss the petition was called up for hearing with a prosecutor and the defendant present; (2) the court did permit both the prosecutor and defendant to be heard; (3) the prosecutor did not argue at length; and (4) the court did remark that the State had correctly pointed out defendant had not raised any issues in his petition that would support his argument that his right to due process was violated. We conclude that *1191 the input by the State here and the court's reliance on that input was sufficiently minimal in that, under Gaultney, the proceedings were not "contaminated" in that respect.
Our holding in regard to the hearing on the motion to dismiss should not be taken as an approval of the procedure. The Act envisions an initial determination of whether the petition is frivolous or without merit by the court alone. If the State has input, the defendant should have a right to counsel and counsel should be furnished if defendant is indigent. Here, defendant alleged in his petition that he was indigent and asked for appointed counsel. Section 122-4 of the Act provides that if the petition is not dismissed the defendant is entitled to counsel if the court finds him indigent. 725 ILCS 5/122-4 (West 1994). The obvious scheme of the Act is that the initial determination as to the petition will be made by the court without either side or counsel for either side present.
Then, if the petition survives the court's original scrutiny, a right to counseland appointed counsel if indigentexists for the rest of the proceedings. Here, when before the court at the hearing where the petition was dismissed, defendant renewed his request for appointed counsel and was refused as being tardy. Section 122-4 of the Act provides for appointment of counsel if the petition is not dismissed. Thus, defendant was not tardy in his request for counsel; he was premature and was, nevertheless, put in a proceeding where the State had counsel and he did not. This is an example of how procedures can get out of kilter when the statutory procedures are not followed.
As we have indicated, because of the failure of the court to pass on the petition within the 90-day period, the order of dismissal is reversed and the cause remanded to the circuit court of Livingston County for proceedings pursuant to sections 122-4, 122-5, and 122-6 of the Act.
Reversed and remanded with directions.
GARMAN and COOK, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2229981 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:33.385182+00 ===

202 Mich. App. 51 (1993)
507 N.W.2d 786
PEOPLE
v.
GAVAL
Docket No. 146430.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Submitted July 7, 1993, at Lansing.
Decided October 5, 1993, at 9:35 A.M.
Frank J. Kelley, Attorney General, Thomas L. Casey, Solicitor General, Richard Thompson, Prosecuting Attorney, Michael J. Modelski, Chief, Appellate Division, and Thomas S. Richards, Assistant Prosecuting Attorney, for the people.
Richard P. Zipser, for the defendant on appeal.
Before: MacKENZIE, P.J., and GRIFFIN and W.L. CAHALAN,[*] JJ.
PER CURIAM.
The people appeal as of right from an order of the Oakland Circuit Court dismissing the instant criminal case against defendant on the basis that a second trial was barred on double jeopardy grounds. We reverse.
Defendant was charged with single counts of conspiracy, MCL 750.157a; MSA 28.354(1), and possession with intent to deliver 650 grams or more of cocaine, MCL 333.7401(2)(a)(i); MSA 14.15(7401)(2)(a)(i). Originally, defendant was tried jointly with two codefendants, Robert Grivna and Michael Stanley. Before the first trial, the circuit court ruled that a confession defendant had given to Police Officer Brian Sanders was involuntarily obtained and, thus, had to be excluded. During the joint trial, however, counsel for defendant Stanley, in an effort to exculpate his client, introduced evidence that defendant had confessed:
Q. [By counsel for Stanley]: Officer, isn't it true that there was a statement made to you that indicated that Mr. Stanley had absolutely nothing to do with this, and; [sic] in fact, somebody else named Mr. Gaval had everything to do with this; [sic] is that not true?
*53 A. [Officer Sanders]: Yes, sir.
Q. Thank you.
Following this exchange, defendant's counsel moved for a mistrial. The motion was granted, although with the express understanding that defendant would be retried. Nevertheless, defendant later moved to dismiss the second trial on double jeopardy grounds. The circuit court granted the motion, ruling that the conduct of both Officer Sanders and counsel for defendant Stanley was so "abhorrent to the sense of justice" that a retrial of defendant Gaval was precluded.
In People v Dawson, 431 Mich. 234, 253, 257; 427 NW2d 886 (1988), our Supreme Court set forth the parameters for determining when a retrial is barred following a defendant's successful motion for a mistrial:
Where the motion for mistrial was made by defense counsel, or with his consent, and the mistrial was caused by innocent conduct of the prosecutor or judge, or by factors beyond their control, or by defense counsel himself, retrial is also generally allowed, on the premise that by making or consenting to the motion the defendant waives a double jeopardy claim.
Where a defendant's motion for mistrial is prompted by intentional prosecutorial conduct, however, the defendant may not, by moving for a mistrial, have waived double jeopardy protection. The United States Supreme Court has held that the Double Jeopardy Clause bars retrial where prosecutorial conduct was intended to provoke the defendant into moving for a mistrial. Oregon v Kennedy, 456 U.S. 667; 102 S. Ct. 2083; 72 L. Ed. 2d 416 (1982).
* * *
Retrials are an exception to the general double jeopardy bar. Where a mistrial results from apparently *54 innocent or even negligent prosecutorial error, or from factors beyond his control, the public interest in allowing a retrial outweighs the double jeopardy bar. The balance tilts, however, where the judge finds, on the basis of the "objective facts and circumstances of the particular case," that the prosecutor intended to goad the defendant into moving for a mistrial.
These principles compel the conclusion that the trial court erred in granting the motion to dismiss. The mistrial in this case was not the result of intentional misconduct on the part of either the prosecutor or the trial court. Rather, it was the result of the questioning of a police officer by counsel for defendant Stanley, questioning which we note failed to prompt a timely objection. Accordingly, consistent with Dawson, supra, we reverse the decision of the circuit court.
Reversed and remanded for further proceedings. We do not retain jurisdiction.
NOTES
[*]  Circuit judge, sitting on the Court of Appeals by assignment.

=== CASE 9742135 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:07:18.580862+00 ===

MILLER, Chief Justice.
ACTION
A jury convicted Justin Lloyd Bult (Bult) of kidnapping, SDCL 22-19-1, and sexual contact with a child under fifteen, SDCL 22-22-7. He was sentenced to life imprisonment on the kidnapping conviction and to a concurrent ten year sentence on the sexual contact conviction by Circuit Court Judge Eugene L. Martin. This Court unanimously affirmed Bult’s convictions; no issues regarding the sentence were raised on direct appeal. State v. Bult, 351 N.W.2d 731 (S.D.1984). Bult filed an application for a writ of habeas corpus contending that his life sentence -without the possibility of parole was constitutionally offensive under state and federal constitutional provisions prohibiting the imposition of cruel and unusual punishment. Circuit Court Judge Jon R. Erickson entered findings of fact, conclusions of law, and judgment denying the application for a writ of habeas corpus. Because we conclude that the sentence shocks the conscience, we reverse and remand for resentencing proceedings.
FACTS OF THE OFFENSE
Bult does not dispute the factual allegations and evidence which supported them and led to his conviction. We summarize the facts of the offense from our statement of facts in State v. Bult, supra.
Over eleven years ago at 5:10 p.m. on September 15, 1982, Bult, an eighteen year old high school senior, forced a screaming and crying five-year-old girl off of her tricycle and into his automobile. He drove away at a high rate of speed. According to the victim, they drove to a corn field in the *326country where he held her down, removed her clothes, and “tried to put his wienie” in her while she was -laying on the seat. At 5:35 p.m. that afternoon the victim’s mother heard her daughter screaming in the yard and questioned her about what had happened.
Bult initially denied being implicated but later admitted to investigators that he abducted the victim and attempted to have sex with her. He refused to sign a written confession. At trial, Bult testified, denied all charges, and presented alibi witnesses. The jury reached guilty verdicts.
SENTENCING
At sentencing the trial court had the benefit of a presentence report. According to the report, Bult was born on January 19, 1964. He was raised by his natural parents and felt that he had á good childhood except for the times that his parents were drunk.
Bult’s criminal record involved an incident of alleged arson in 1975. He was adjudicated delinquent on October 16, 1975, and placed on indefinite probation which terminated on December 3, 1975. On September 14, 1981, Bult was placed on a ninety day diversion program because of a referral as a child in need of supervision alleging that he was a runaway and beyond parental control. This terminated on November 30, 1981.
Educationally, Bult was in the twelfth grade. Academically he was a poor student, a problem exacerbated by his short temper. Despite his low academic ability, he never missed a day and was never tardy for three years. With individualized educational instruction he showed considerable improvement in the area of self-concept although his social skills had not developed as dramatically-
At sentencing the state urged the trial court to impose a substantial sentence but did not ask that Bult be sentenced to life imprisonment due to his age and lack of previous felony convictions.1 The state told the trial court, in part:
And the State is not going to ask that Mr. Bult be imprisoned for life. I think because of his age and his lack of previous felony convictions, in good conscience and fair [sic] to the Defendant, I don’t believe we can ask for it and we do not ask for it.
Bult’s attorney believed that a long penitentiary sentence would serve little purpose and urged remedial treatment.
The trial court addressed Bult and said, in part, that it was sentencing him to life imprisonment because:
The crimes that the Jury has found you guilty of are very serious and ones which generate very little if any compassion by anybody. I think that one must make an effort to balance your particular interests against the interests of the public and that is not an easy thing to do. And this is not an easy thing for me to do. But I have done some reading about the type of crimes that are of the nature that the Jury says you committed and the ability of some people to treat the individual who has committed those crimes. The problem that you keep running into is the chance of those crimes repeating themselves by virtue of the personality or whatever of the person who committed the crimes. And I thought about this matter a great deal and the things [sic] that concerns me most is the chance of repeating and the fact that I don’t feel that society should have to suffer the risk of this offense repeating itself again.,
HABEAS CORPUS
In his application for a writ of habeas corpus Bult contended that the life sentence without the possibility of parole infringed upon his constitutional right to be free from cruel and unusual punishment. In addition, Bult presented the court with information regarding the sentences of inmates imprisoned in the South Dakota penitentiary for kidnapping.
The habeas court concluded that while Bult’s sentence was severe, it was not, in light of all the facts, so excessive or cruel as to meet the disapproval and condemnation of the conscience and reason of men generally or of the court. It concluded that the sen*327tencing court’s concern for the risk of Bult repeating the offense was confirmed by the 1990 South Dakota Governor’s Task Force on Children’s Justice Report which said that while youthful sex offenders may be treated to the point that they no longer pose a threat to society, the state penal facilities have inadequate evaluation and treatment programs resulting in the unsupervised release of perpetrators who are at risk to reoffend. The court also concluded that the Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution and Article VI § 23 of South Dakota’s Constitution encompass a narrow proportionality principle.
ISSUE ■
WHETHER BULT’S SENTENCE OF LIFE WITHOUT THE POSSIBILITY OF PAROLE VIOLATES STATE AND FEDERAL PROHIBITIONS AGAINST CRUEL AND UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT?
“On appeal, we first determine whether the sentence ‘shocks the conscience’ or is so disproportionate to the crime that it activates the Eighth Amendment ‘within and without jurisdiction’ proportionality tests.” State v. Lykken, 484 N.W.2d 869, 879 (S.D.1992); State v. Basker, 468 N.W.2d 413, 418 (S.D.1991). Accord State v. Andrews, 393 N.W.2d 76, 82-83 (S.D.1986); [State v. Weiker] Weiker II, 366 N.W.2d [823] at 827 (S.D.1985). “Absent a sentence which is so excessive in duration that it shocks the conscience of the court, it is well settled in South Dakota that a sentence within statutory limits is not reviewable on appeal.” Lykken, 484 N.W.2d at 879; State v. Janssen, 371 N.W.2d 353, 356 (S.D.1985) (citing cases). Stated alternatively, we will only engage in extensive review of a sentence where we have first determined the sentence was manifestly disproportionate to the crime. State v. Holloway, 482 N.W.2d 306, 310-311 (S.D.1992); Weiker II, 366 N.W.2d at 827. “If a sentence is manifestly disproportionate to the crime, [in light of the gravity of the offense and harshness of the penalty] ... then the other two factors listed in Helm [sentence imposed on others in the same jurisdiction and in other jurisdictions] become more focused and require extensive review.” Weiker II, 366 N.W.2d at 827. See also Helm, 463 U.S. at 292, 103 S.Ct. at 3011, 77 L.Ed.2d at 650.
State v. Castaneira, 502 N.W.2d 112, 114-115 (S.D.1993) quoting, State v. Gehrke, 491 N.W.2d 421, 423 (S.D.1992).
The test to determine whether a sentence is so constitutionally offensive as to shock the conscience is two-fold. State v. Shilvock-Havird, 472 N.W.2d 773 (S.D.1991).
First, is the punishment so excessive or so cruel “as to meet the disapproval and condemnation of the conscience and reason of men generally.” And second, whether the punishment is so excessive or so cruel as to shock the collective conscience of this court.
Id., 472 N.W.2d at 779.
The commonly accepted goals of punishment are 1) retribution, 2) deterrence, both individual and general, and 3) rehabilitation. Gregg v. Georgia, 428 U.S. 153, 96 S.Ct. 2909, 49 L.Ed.2d 859 (1976). We have recognized that while a life sentence without parole extracts retribution, deters the convict from committing crime, removes him from the street, and puts would-be felons on notice of the high penalty of recidivism, it completely eschews the goal of rehabilitation. State v. Weiker, 342 N.W.2d 7 (S.D.1983).
In Weiker, supra, we noted that a life sentence is exceeded in severity only by capital punishment. While we acknowledged that there are cases where the imposition of a life sentence without parole is meritorious, we cautioned:
[T]hey are rare and should involve a history of much more serious offenses that by reason of their brutality or calculated destructiveness render irrelevant the goal of rehabilitation and require in vindication of public safety and the moral underpinnings of the criminal law that the offender forfeit his right to ever again be set free.
⅜ ⅜ ⅜ ⅜ * ⅜
But even more strongly, we recommend to the trial court that the maximum of life sentence be imposed only in such cases where it can determine from the facts of the principal offense and the previous con*328victions that rehabilitation is so unlikely as to be removed from consideration in sentencing; that the interests of society demand that the convict be kept off the streets for the rest of his life; and that society, speaking through the legislature, has clearly mandated that the offense or offenses involved are so malignant that a lifetime of incarceration is the only adequate retribution.
Weiker, supra, 342 N.W.2d at 12.
Bult was convicted of kidnapping, a Class 1 felony, and sexual contact with a child under fifteen, a Class 4 felony. The South Dakota Legislature gave trial courts broad discretion in determining the severity of the sentence that a defendant convicted of each crime receives. Neither crime carries a statutory minimum penitentiary sentence. The maximum penitentiary sentence for Class 1 kidnapping was life imprisonment without the possibility of parole while the maximum sentence for Class 4 sexual contact was ten years imprisonment. SDCL 22-22-7, 22-19-1, 22-6-1. The trial court sentenced Bult to the maximum penitentiary sentence for each conviction. It is apparent from its remarks at Bult’s sentencing that the trial court believed that any person committing the crimes Bult was convicted of was beyond rehabilitation.
We do not minimize or trivialize the seriousness of Bult’s abduction and attempted rape of a five-year-old girl. However, this crime, although brutal and destructive, does not rise to a level rendering rehabilitation irrelevant. Bult did return the child to her home shortly after the abduction. Fortunately, the victim was not raped, nor did she sustain substantial physical injury.
In addition, the record reveals that at the time of the offense the eighteen year old Bult’s criminal history consisted of two brushes with the law while he was a juvenile and resulted in a brief period of probation and a ninety day diversion program. While he had learning disabilities and self-image problems one-on-one counseling resulted in positive changes, a fact reflecting amenability to rehabilitation. In addition, there was no evidence of any prior sexual offenses or sexual disfunctionality which would lead to the conclusion that Bult was an incorrigible criminal incapable of rehabilitation.
In sentencing Bult to life imprisonment without the possibility of parole for kidnapping the trial court went beyond the facts of the case, the information contained in the presentence report, and the prosecutor’s recommendation. Based upon this record, a life sentence without the possibility of parole for this eighteen year old defendant shocks the conscience of men generally and of this Court.
Finally Bult presented the habeas corpus court with all available information concerning individuals serving time in the penitentiary for a conviction of kidnapping. Because of our conclusion that Bult’s sentence shocks the conscience, the need to determine whether the sentence is so disproportionate to the crime as to activate Eighth Amendment proportionality review is obviated.2 We only observe that this data validates our judgment that a life sentence in Bult’s case shocks the conscience. Bult’s case is distinguished from the cases presented where life terms for kidnapping were imposed by Bult’s youth, his lack of significant prior convictions, and the fact that he did not inflict substantial bodily injury or use a deadly weapon.
Reversed and remanded for resentencing proceedings.
WUEST, SABERS, and AMUNDSON, JJ., concur.
HENDERSON, J., concurs specially.
. We note the state offered a twenty year plea bargain which Bult declined.
. Whether the Eighth Amendment even encompasses a proportionality principle in non-capital cases has been called into question by the United States Supreme Court. Harmelin v. Michigan, 501 U.S.-, 111 S.Ct. 2680, 115 L.Ed.2d 836 (1991).

=== CASE 9742136 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:07:18.586015+00 ===

HENDERSON, Justice
(specially concurring).
Based upon this Court’s decision, a hearing before the appropriate trial court, which would amount to a resentencing hearing, should now be held. Due process must attend with the petitioner being given a full opportunity to prove his rehabilitative worth. This hearing must be granted in a meaning*329ful manner. Daugaard v. Baltic Co-op. Bldg. Supply Ass’n, 349 N.W.2d 419, 424 (S.D.1984) (quoting Boddie v. Connecticut, 401 U.S. 371, 378, 91 S.Ct. 780, 786, 28 L.Ed.2d 113, 119 (1971)).
These offenses took place in Huron, South Dakota, which is the county seat of Beadle County. Both Judge Martin, the sentencing judge, and Judge Erickson, the habeas judge who denied habeas corpus relief, chamber in the Beadle County Courthouse. It is beyond cavil to note that this was a sensational episode in the community of Huron, spawning strong feelings and high emotion. Truly, this is understandable. For, indeed, a 5 year-old girl was abducted from her tricycle and taken to a cornfield where an 18 year-old high school senior had sexual contact upon her little body. Thirty minutes later she was returned to her neighborhood. Although no evidence of penetration was found, the testifying physician noted scratches and marks on her neck, thigh, and chest. Additionally, the little girl’s genitalia area was red and somewhat swollen. By any norm within civilized society, it was a dastardly act.
This criminal scenario took place on September 15, 1982; on June 3, 1983, petitioner was sentenced to life imprisonment without parole on a kidnapping conviction and to a concurrent ten-year sentence on a sexual contact conviction. As of the time I write, petitioner has been in the State Penitentiary for a period of ten years. So far as the court system is concerned, until this Habeas Corpus action was filed, heard, and appealed, petitioner has been under the sole jurisdiction of the executive branch of government, and, most particularly, the rules and regulation of the State Penitentiary and the executive branch of government.
So — ten years have gone by and troubling questions pervade my spirit. What has he learned? What has he been taught in the state penitentiary? His spirit — is it now contrite? What kind of value system does he have? And during these ten years, what of the little girl? She is now in her teens. What of her memories? And her fears? Has she required psychological treatment? And the petitioner — has he undergone psychiatric treatment? These questions must be probed for answers so that the resentencing court is knowledgeable about petitioner’s mind and conduct. Judge Erickson is a former Assistant Attorney General. He served for years on the Board of Pardons and Paroles. These were years of dedication and able effort. As a circuit court judge, and the habeas court herein, he found in Finding of Fact # 14 that South Dakota’s “state penal facilities have inadequate evaluation and treatment programs, which results in perpetrators who are still at risk to re-offend being released, often without supervision.” Obviously, inter alia, this weighed heavily in-his decision in concluding that petitioner should be denied relief. In so finding, Judge Erickson took judicial note of the Governor’s Task Force on the Children’s Justice Report.
The preceding dissertation leads me to SDCL 22-22-1.3 which calls for extra information on a sex offender. This new law, enacted by our State Legislature in 1992, took effect on July 1, 1992. Said law provides as follows:
Any person convicted of a violation listed in § 22-22-1.2 * shall have included in his presentence investigation report an assessment which shall include the following information: the offender’s sexual history; intellectual, adaptive and academic functioning; social and emotional functioning; previous legal history; previous treatment history; victim selection; risk to the community; and treatment options recommended.
In my opinion, it is evident that the resen-tencing judge, whomsoever he or she may be, must consider the above criteria. Implicit in the consideration would be the penitentiary record of petitioner. If there are mitigating circumstances that should now be considered, pursuant to SDCL 22-22-1.4, with respect to the sexual offense, the trial court should enter its factual basis in -writing. A new sentence will now be entered pursuant to the majority opinion; a sentence to life imprisonment, without parole, the majority holds, “shocks the conscience of men generally and of this Court.”
*330I would further venture that a new sentencing trial judge should now hear this case. See United States v. Robin, 553 F.2d 8, 11 (2nd Cir.1977) wherein it advised that “... reassignment to another judge may be advisable in order to avoid ‘an exercise in futility [in which] the Court is merely marching up the hill only to march right down again’, United States v. Tucker, 404 U.S. 443, 452, 92 S.Ct. 589, 594, 30 L.Ed.2d 592, 599 (1972) (Blackmun, J., dissenting).” A fresh approach to the resentencing process could well produce a desirable objectivity. Note the final words in SDCL 22-22-1.3: “... and treatment options recommended.”
As I write, I wonder — who determines what those “treatment options” are? A Court Services Officer? A psychologist? A psychiatrist? After ten years of incarceration, one would believe that a mental profile of the petitioner is indispensable to a sound sentence. And that, I believe, would be an expert, appointed by the trial court, to look into this 28 year-old man’s mind. He is no longer a teenager. In this connection, I refer to 1 Corinthians 13:11: “When I was a child, I talked like a child, I thought like a child, I reasoned like a child. When I became a man, I put childish ways behind me.” It is unknown, at least to the judiciary, the effect ten years of imprisonment has had upon the petitioner.
Underlying the resentencing process should be, as reflected upon in State v. Weiker, 342 N.W.2d 7, 11 (S.D.1983) (Weiker I): (1) Retribution (2) Deterrence and (3) Rehabilitation. These criteria were adopted by this Court from Gregg v. Georgia, 428 U.S. 153, 96 S.Ct. 2909, 49 L.Ed.2d 859 (1976). A considered judgment (sentence) should consider the victim and determination should be made if restitution is applicable for counseling; at first blush, with years (possibly) to serve in prison, such a judgment could ring hollow for, indeed, where would petitioner obtain money to pay for counseling? An evidentiary hearing would, as an example of enlightenment, reveal if there has been counseling and expense for treatment of the victim to the date of sentencing. The State of South Dakota should have an opportunity, also, to bring out a rebuttal, if it so sees fit, to any mitigation produced by petitioner. A state victim’s assistance office and court services officer would be a great aid to the sentencing judge to arrive at a plausible legal conclusion. Under the dictate of State v. Wolff, 438 N.W.2d 199 (S.D.1989), a restitu-tional hearing must be held with due process requirements fulfilled. In State v. Reed, 451 N.W.2d 409, 411 (S.D.1990), this Court upheld a sentence ordering mental health treatment. In Reed at 411 we expressed:
While the sentence serves the valid goals of retribution and deterrence the trial court also provided for the goal of rehabilitation by ordering mental health treatment.
In Reed, the record revealed that he had a history of being sexually abused as a child and later sexually abused small children.
Vindictiveness has no place in resentencing. See Alabama v. Smith, 490 U.S. 794, 109 S.Ct. 2201, 104 L.Ed.2d 865 (1988). When a ease, such as this one, ends up with a reversal, a trial judge should reassess the original sentence, using objective criteria to arrive at a just sentence. Earlier this year, this Court affirmed a 40-year probation sentence for a 17 year-old lad who held his classmates in terror in one of the biggest high schools in South Dakota, Stevens High School in Rapid City. See State v. Harris, 494 N.W.2d 619 (S.D.1993). Harris was found guilty of one count of kidnapping, one count of intentional damage to property (shooting up a classroom with classmates therein), and three counts of aggravated assault. I point this ease out to illustrate the disparity of sentencing. In Harris, I concurred on affirming on the merits of the case but dissented to the 40-year probation, believing that it was an illegal sentence, citing State v. Oban, 372 N.W.2d 125 (S.D.1985) and State v. Tibbets, 333 N.W.2d 440 (S.D.1983). In Matter of A.S., 496 N.W.2d 589, 590 (S.D.1993), in concurring, I expressed that appellate courts exist for a reason and thereupon, cited to Parker, Improving Appellate Methods, 25 N.Y.U.L.Rev. 1 (1950), which set forth three basic functions of appellate courts. The second basic function being “to see that justice is administered uniformly throughout the state.”
*331In SDCL 24-1-1, it is specified that the State Penitentiary exists for the punishment of offenders and their reformation. As I pointed out in State v. Holloway, 482 N.W.2d 306, 314 (S.D.1992) in my special writing, the penitentiary’s name is taken from the word “penitent.” To be penitent is having a feeling or expressing pain for sins or offenses. It is to be sincerely affected by a sense of guilt and to be resolved on the worthy concept of amending one’s life. Petitioner is a first offender.
In the reports to the sentencing judge, there was some denial on the part of the petitioner of his guilt, with certain expressions by him that there was not enough evidence offered to the jury to prove him guilty. He also told H.T. Hermann, M.D., psychiatrist, that he agreed to the accusations against him to law enforcement only “to get them off my back” and that in truth, and in fact, he had absolutely no contact with the little girl at all. This interview took place some 10 years ago. Is he now penitent? Has he abandoned denial? Has he reformed himself? All of these haunting questions must be determined by the resentencing judge. I recently came across this case, United States v. Jones, 965 F.2d 1507, 1521 (8th Cir.1992), cert. denied, — U.S. -, 113 S.Ct. 346, 121 L.Ed.2d 261 (1992):
However, punishing first offenders with twenty-five year sentences does not deter crime as much as it ruins lives ... Discouraging recidivism by people who have already been in prison and been released serves a far more valuable purpose than deterring offenders who have yet to be arrested and have no knowledge of the law’s penalties.
Ten years behind prison walls — what kind of man is Justin Bult?
“A person sentenced to life imprisonment is not eligible for parole by the board of pardons and paroles.” SDCL 24-15-4. To prison authorities and fellow inmates, they are known as “lifers.” If the resentencing judge follows the instructions of this Court, considers Bult’s behavior over the last ten years, and conscientiously adheres to sentencing due process, petitioner could be eligible for parole, in the future, under SDCL 24-15-1.1 which provides in pertinent part:
Parole is the discretionary conditional release of an inmate from actual penitentiary custody before the expiration of his term of imprisonment. The prisoner remains an inmate under the legal custody of the department of corrections until the expiration of his term of imprisonment. A prisoner is not required to accept a conditional parole. A prisoner is never entitled to parole. However, parole may be granted if in the judgment of the board of pardons and paroles granting a parole would be in the best interests of society and the prisoner.
It is obvious that a new sentence will be less than a life imprisonment, thus the above statute will eventually be considered. Bult was a first offender; Judge Martin, as exemplified by his remarks, determined, based upon outside reading, that Bult was an unrehabilitative individual and should be “written off’ as incorrigible. There were no medical reports, criminal records, expert testimony, or evidence of any kind to substantiate that the decisional law of this state was followed and I particularly refer to Weiker I, supra. Weiker I cautioned against imposing a life sentence except in those type of cases where the defendant is without hope or a possibility of rehabilitation.
Both the Eighth Amendment of the United States Constitution and its comparable counterpart, Article VI, § 23 of this state’s constitution, prohibit the infliction of cruel and unusual punishment. Was the sentence cruel considering the age of Bult, his background, the fact that he was a first offender, and the limited duration he held this little girl captive? In my opinion, it was. Though it becomes difficult to say, knowing he did a dastardly deed, one must consider that he did deliver the little girl back into the neighborhood and in approximately one-half hour. He did not kill her nor maim her nor use a weapon upon her, but he did traumatize her.
His actions have now cost him ten years of imprisonment. Does his sentence shock the “conscience and reason of men generally?” See State v. Becker, 3 S.D. 29, 40, 51 N.W. 1018, 1022 (1892) and State v. Bad Heart Bull, 257 N.W.2d 715, 720 (S.D.1977). As I *332set forth in State v. Holloway, 482 N.W.2d 306, 319 (S.D.1992), wherein I dissented, this Court added this phrase “shock the conscience of the Court,” as depicted in State v. Antelope, 304 N.W.2d 115, 117 (S.D.1981). See also State v. Curtis, 298 N.W.2d 807, 811 (S.D.1980). Therefore, we now appear to have two tests on conscience: Shock the conscience and reason of men generally and shock the conscience of the Court. The majority opinion holds it satisfies both scopes of review; with said holding, I agree. Thereafter, I part company with my Brothers that the proportionality review is “obviated” under Harmelin, cited in the majority opinion. It is not apposite to such a holding. Rather, because we have determined the sentencing to be shocking, the Eighth Amendment proportionality test is activated. Take heed of our recent pronouncement in State v. Gehrke, 491 N.W.2d 421, 423 (S.D.1992), and recognizing that the “conscience and reason of men generally,” as well as the “conscience of this Court” is shocked.
If a sentence is manifestly disproportionate to the crime, [in light of the gravity of the offense and harshness of the penalty] ... then the other two factors listed in Helm [sentence imposed on others in the same jurisdiction and in other jurisdictions] become more focused and require extensive review. Weiker II, 366 N.W.2d at 827. See also Helm, 463 U.S. at 292, 103 S.Ct. at 3011, 77 L.Ed.2d at 650.
In my opinion, this Court has reviewed the sentence of life imprisonment and has considered the punishment to be manifestly disproportionate to the crime. Therefore, at a new sentencing, so that a trial judge may focus on a fair sentence, a trial judge must consider sentences imposed on others who were given sentences for kidnapping and in other jurisdictions. It is termed, by writers, as “the within and without the jurisdiction proportionality test.” State v. Basker, 468 N.W.2d 413, 418 (S.D.1991).
Petitioner’s habeas counsel, challenging the constitutionality of his client’s sentence, presented facts, statistics, data, records, and case sentencings in South Dakota. We have condemned a failure to present an adequate record so as the trial court could conduct a meaningful proportionality review. State v. Castaneira, 502 N.W.2d 112 (S.D.1993); Holloway at 311; State v. Sheridan, 383 N.W.2d 865 (S.D.1986); and State v. Christians, 381 N.W.2d 214 (S.D.1986). The habeas corpus court refused to consider other kidnapping sentences deeming all of the aforesaid data as “useless.” In Shilvock-Havird, 472 N.W.2d 773, 779 (S.D.1991), cited in the majority opinion, Judge Erickson, writing for this Court (and who is the habeas court here) cited this writer’s concurrence in result in State v. Janssen, 371 N.W.2d 353, 357 (S.D.1985). Therein, he recognized that a proportionality test cannot be considered at appellate level unless it is raised at the trial court level. Certainly it can be said that a disproportional sentence can never be established unless counsel is permitted to establish his client’s case by facts, statistics, data, records and ease sentencings. Here, petitioner was totally denied a consideration which had a direct hearing on proportionality. Excessive or disproportionate sentences have been constitutionally offensive since 1892 in South Dakota. Becker, 51 N.W. 1018, 1022. A little word, “or,” seems to be overlooked by many in this state; notice it cited below:
On appeal, we first determine whether the sentence “shocks the conscience” or is so disproportionate to the crime that it actú vates the Eighth Amendment “within and without jurisdiction” proportionality tests. (Emphasis supplied mine.)
State v. Lykken, 484 N.W.2d 869, 879 (S.D.1992). Accord State v. Andrews, 393 N.W.2d 76, 82 (S.D.1986); State v. Weiker, 366 N.W.2d 823, 827 (S.D.1985) (Weiker II). Obviate? No. Activate? Yes.
We need not follow literally all that is expressed in Harmelin. Need we adhere to the strict proportionality principles as held by the habeas court? No. A seminal case in this nation was State v. Opperman, 89 S.D. 25, 247 N.W.2d 673 (1976). Said decision, shining as a beacon for our sister states to follow a state’s rights star, held that this very institution has the power to provide individuals with greater protection under the State Constitution than does the United States Su*333preme Court under the United States Constitution. Accord: State v. Jones, 406 N.W.2d 366, 369 (S.D.1987); State v. McDowell, 391 N.W.2d 661, 665 (S.D.1986); and Daugaard v. Baltic Co-op Bldg. Supply Ass’n, 349 N.W.2d 419 (S.D.1984).
If this Court failed to follow a strict proportionality rule under Harmelin, nevertheless a proportionality analysis would survive in this non-capital sentence case. Harmelin was a plurality decision. Justice Scalia, joined by Chief Justice Rehnquist, held that there was no proportionality guarantee attending the Eighth Amendment. Justices Kennedy, O’Connor and Souter joined forces holding that the Eighth Amendment encompasses a narrow proportionality principle in non-capital sentences. But Justices White, Blackmun, Stevens, and Marshall adhered to the broader proportionality principle in the Solem v. Helm, 463 U.S. 277, 103 S.Ct. 3001, 77 L.Ed.2d 637 (1983) holding. Therefore, seven Justices of the Supreme Court of the United States adhere to the proportionality standard which may be raised under the Eighth Amendment. Justice Kennedy wrote: “The Eighth Amendment does not require strict proportionality between crime and sentence. Rather, it forbids only extreme sentences that are ‘grossly disproportionate’ to the crime.” Harmelin, — U.S. at -, 111 S.Ct. at 2705, 115 L.Ed.2d at 866-874 (citing Solem, 463 U.S. at 288, 303, 103 S.Ct. at 3008, 3016). Instanter, the majority opinion holds the Bult sentence is shocking to the conscience of men generally and to the conscience of this Court. We are thus decreeing that the sentence is grossly disproportionate to the crime and the Harmelin decision supports a decision to implement the Solem test.
Replete is the record below with exhibits, case history, statistics, and data setting forth twenty defendants who were sentenced to the State Penitentiary in South Dakota for kidnapping. It is abundantly clear that Bult has been treated far more harshly than these prisoners. Twelve are serving a specific term of years, from 25 years to 51 years. Every one of these sentences stemmed from far more aggravated facts than the one under consideration, including a history of serious crime, which cannot be demonstrated against Bult. Of eight individuals serving life sentences for kidnapping, only one involves a mandatory sentence of life imprisonment. In the latter case, the prisoner was found guilty of murder as well as kidnapping.
In Solem v. Helm, a case arising in South Dakota, Justice Brennan expressed: “The principle that a punishment should be proportionate to the crime is deeply rooted and frequently repeated in common-law jurisprudence.” 463 U.S. at 284, 103 S.Ct. at 3006. Later, we were reminded by the writer that the constitutional principle of proportionality has been explicitly recognized for almost a century.
I despise the acts of Bult; however, he is entitled to a meaningful hearing. I remind you of Chief Justice Burger’s written words which I referenced in Gehrke at 427:
In part the terrible price we are paying in crime is because we have tended — once the drama of the trial is over — to regard all criminals as human rubbish. It would make more sense, from a coldly logical viewpoint, to put all “rubbish” into a vast incinerator than simply store it in warehouses for a period of time, only to have most of the subjects come out of prison and to return to their old ways. Some of this must be due to our failure to try — in a really significant way — to change these men while they are confined. We lawyers and judges sometimes tend to fall in love with procedures and techniques and formalism. The imbalance in our system of criminal justice must be corrected so that we give at least as much attention to the defendant after he is found guilty as before. We must examine into the causes and consequences of the protracted warfare our system of justice fosters. Whether we find it palatable or not, we must proceed, even in the face of bitter contrary experiences, in the belief that every human being has a spark somewhere hidden in him that will make it possible for redemp*334tion and rehabilitation. If we accept the idea that each human, however “bad,” is a child of God, we must look for that spark.
Life is a burning candle. It is a dear light — a light — so precious — prison walls should not extinguish lest it ebb away into a state of total darkness. Bult. Does he sess the spark?
This refers to minimum sentences for sexual contact with children under ten years of age.

=== CASE 9742148 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:07:29.336984+00 ===

JUSTICE MILLER, dissenting: Unlike the majority, I believe that the brief detention effected by authorities of the package in this case did not contravene the defendants’ constitutional rights, and therefore I dissent. The majority makes much of the decision by postal authorities to reroute the package from Chicago to St. Louis for purposes of investigation. The majority insists that the detour contributed significantly to the delay in the delivery of the package. I do not agree. The package was initially pulled from the stream of mail on Thursday, January 19, 1995. The postal inspector assigned to the case, Stephen Atterbury, received the package the next day, January 20, in St. Louis. Atterbury then learned from his counterparts in Oregon that the return address on the package was fictitious, and Atterbury also obtained the services of a specially trained dog, who detected narcotics in the package. That same day, Atterbury presented a request for a search warrant to a federal magistrate in St. Louis, and a warrant was issued at 2:38 that afternoon. Atterbury then opened the package and found inside 31/2 pounds of a material containing psilocybin, a controlled substance. The relevant period here begins with the initial seizure of the package on January 19 and ends with the issuance of the search warrant the next day. It is not clear from the record how much delay, if any, was caused by the decision to transfer the package to St. Louis on its southward journey from Chicago to Champaign. The extra time could not have exceeded part of a day, however, and Atterbury acted expeditiously in conducting his investigation and obtaining the warrant. It should be noted that most of the five-day delay in the delivery of the package, mentioned by the majority, occurred after the warrant was obtained and the package was opened. Indeed, the record shows that, prior to the delivery of the package on Tuesday, January 24, Atterbury made several attempts to deliver the package on Monday, January 23, after the weekend, but no one at the residence answered the door that day. Because I believe that the initial period of detention was reasonable, I respectfully dissent from today’s decision.

=== CASE 9742149 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:07:30.099163+00 ===

OPINION OF THE COURT
Levine, J.
Appellant commenced this wrongful death action seeking damages related to the injuries sustained by his late wife, Alison S. Ingraham, allegedly as a result of the negligence and medical malpractice of respondent Dr. Frederick Loy and two other physicians, Dr. James Carroll and Dr. Jon Porter. The uncontroverted facts, as set forth in the parties’ papers, are as follows.
Respondent Loy is a vascular surgeon who practices and resides in Vermont. Although respondent also is licensed to practice medicine in New York, he does not maintain an office in New York or solicit business in this State. His private medi*595cal practice is limited to Vermont, where he treats patients in Bennington and performs surgery at South Western Vermont Medical Center, also located in Bennington.
Appellant’s decedent was a patient of Community Health Plan (hereinafter CHP), a New York HMO with a clinic located in Hoosick Falls, New York, where decedent was under the care of CHP physicians Carroll and Porter. On several occasions, decedent’s CHP physicians referred her to respondent for a consultation in Bennington, which is close to the New York State border. Respondent is not under contract with CHP for consultation services. However, respondent frequently sees CHP patients on an ad hoc /fee-for-service basis, on referral from both the CHP Hoosick Falls facility and a CHP facility located in Bennington.
Pursuant to a written referral by her New York physicians, decedent first traveled to Vermont to see respondent on March 7, 1994, for consultation regarding decedent’s complaint of a nodule in her right breast. Decedent was again referred to respondent and, on August 17,1994, was seen by him in response to her CHP physicians’ concern about a nodule in her left armpit. After each examination, respondent sent instructions to decedent’s CHP physicians to withhold any invasive procedure to ascertain the nature of the nodule, but merely to observe it periodically. The third time that respondent saw decedent, on March 14, 1995, it was again with regard to the lump in decedent’s left armpit. At this point, respondent made arrangements to remove the nodule. He subsequently performed that surgery at South Western Vermont Medical Center and discovered that the nodule contained metastatic malignant melanoma cells.
The gravamen of appellant’s complaint against respondent is that he negligently failed to recognize the serious nature of his wife’s condition at an earlier stage and, as a result, made recommendations to her primary physicians against procedures that would have led to an earlier diagnosis of the cancer while it was still in a treatable stage. Because of this allegedly tortious diagnosis and recommendation, appellant asserts that decedent was injured in New York when her untreated cancer spread there and eventually caused her death.
At Supreme Court, appellant moved to strike respondent’s affirmative defense of lack of personal jurisdiction, relying exclusively on the long-arm jurisdiction provisions of CPLR *596302 (a) (3).1 Supreme Court granted respondent’s motion for dismissal for lack of personal jurisdiction on the ground that decedent’s injury occurred in Vermont, rather than in New York, as required under CPLR 302 (a) (3). The Appellate Division affirmed (235 AD2d 778), agreeing with Supreme Court that appellant had failed to establish that respondent’s allegedly tortious act outside of the State resulted in injury within the State. We granted appellant leave to appeal, and now affirm for reasons other than those relied upon below.
CPLR 302 (a) (3), the provision of New York’s long-arm statute at issue here, permits a court to exercise personal jurisdiction over a nondomiciliary who:
"3. commits a tortious act without the state causing injury to person or property within the state * * * if he
"(i) regularly does or solicits business, or engages in any other persistent course of conduct, or derives substantial revenue from goods used or consumed or services rendered, in the state, or
"(ii) expects or should reasonably expect the act to have consequences in the state and derives substantial revenue from interstate or international commerce” (CPLR 302 [a] [3] [emphasis supplied]).
Under this provision, the appellant must show both that an injury occurred "within the state,” and that the elements of either clause (i) or (ii) have been satisfied. It is appropriate to point out that establishment of long-arm jurisdiction in con*597nection with a New York injury under either clause does not implicate constitutional due process concerns. "[T]he subdivision [302 (a) (3)] was not designed to go to the full limits of permissible jurisdiction. The limitations contained in subparagraphs (i) and (ii) were deliberately inserted to keep the provision 'well within constitutional bounds’ ” (1 Weinstein-Korn-Miller, NY Civ Prac ¶ 302.14, quoting 12th Ann Report of NY Jud Conf, at 341; see also, McGowan v Smith, 52 NY2d 268, 274). Thus, in this case, we are bound by a limitation more stringent than any constitutional requirement — the specific requirements of CPLR 302 (a) (3).
Assuming, without deciding, that the alleged tortious conduct in Vermont caused injury within New York, the issue before us is whether appellant has successfully demonstrated that either the first or second jurisdictional subset of CPLR 302 (a) (3) has been met. Because we conclude that appellant has failed to satisfy the requirements of either clause (i) or (ii) of CPLR 302 (a) (3), we hold that the complaint against respondent was properly dismissed.
Subdivision (a) (3) (i) requires the party seeking to obtain jurisdiction to demonstrate that the tortfeasor "regularly does or solicits business, or engages in any other persistent course of conduct, or derives substantial revenue from goods used or consumed or services rendered, in the state” (CPLR 302 [a] [3] [i] [emphasis supplied]). By this provision, the Legislature limited CPLR 302 (a) (3) (i) jurisdiction to extend only to those "who have sufficient contacts with this state so that it is not unfair to require them to answer in this state for injuries they cause here by acts done elsewhere” (12th Ann Report of NY Jud Conf, at 343). Thus, CPLR 302 (a) (3) (i) necessitates some ongoing activity within New York State (see, id. [stating that "a regular course of conduct in the state is required” (emphasis supplied)]; see also, Allen v Canadian Gen. Elec. Co., 65 AD2d 39, 40 [analyzing CPLR 302 (a) (3) (i) in terms of activity conducted within New York State], affd for reasons stated 50 NY2d 935). Although clause (i) does not require the quantity of New York contacts that is necessary to obtain general jurisdiction under the "doing business” test of CPLR 301 (see, id., at 343, n; see also, Siegel, NY Prac § 88, at 136 [2d ed]), it does require something more than the "one shot” single business transaction described in CPLR 302 (a) (1) (12th Ann Report of NY Jud Conf, at 343).
Here, appellant has made no showing that respondent "regularly does or solicits business * * * in the state” or "en*598gages in any other persistent course of conduct * * * in the state” or "derives substantial revenue from goods used or consumed or services rendered[ ] in the state” (CPLR 302 [a] [3] [i] [emphasis supplied]). Indeed, it is undisputed that respondent practices only in Vermont. He neither treated decedent in New York, nor contracted to provide services in New York or solicited business in New York. Thus, the requirements of clause (i) have not been met.
A much closer question is presented under clause (ii) of CPLR 302 (a) (3). This provision requires the satisfaction of two prongs. To establish jurisdiction, á plaintiff must demonstrate that the nonresident tortfeasor: (1) "expects or should reasonably expect the act to have consequences in the state”; and (2) "derives substantial revenue from interstate or international commerce” (CPLR 302 [a] [3] [ii]). The first prong is intended to ensure some link between a defendant and New York State to make it reasonable to require a defendant to come to New York to answer for tortious conduct committed elsewhere. The nonresident tortfeasor must expect, or have reason to expect, that his or her tortious activity in another State will have direct consequences in New York (see, Fantis Foods v Standard Importing Co., 49 NY2d 317, 326; Sybron Corp. v Wetzel, 46 NY2d 197, 206; cf., Martinez v American Std., 91 AD2d 652, 653, affd for reasons stated 60 NY2d 873).
The first prong of CPLR 302 (a) (3) (ii) has been satisfied. Respondent concededly was aware that decedent, a New York resident, was receiving treatment from New York State primary physicians based, at least in part, on his recommendations. He contacted decedent’s physicians directly, by mail and via telephone, concerning the treatment she was to receive in New York. Significantly, respondent acknowledged that his expectation, when making recommendations, is that the CHP doctor in New York would follow his advice. Hence, respondent, in essence, has admitted that his allegedly tortious action (a misdiagnosis and improper recommendation) would have consequences within New York, satisfying the first prong of CPLR 302 (a) (3) (ii).
Thus, personal jurisdiction over respondent ultimately turns on whether he "derives substantial revenue from interstate or international commerce,” the indispensable second prong of subdivision (a) (3) (ii). Unlike clause (i), the "interstate commerce” prong of clause (ii) requires no direct contact with New York State (see, Siegel, op. cit., at 136). It is the first prong of clause (ii) (the expectation of New York consequences) that *599ensures that the defendant has some direct contact with New York State. The substantial interstate commerce revenue component, on the other hand, narrows the long-arm reach to preclude the exercise of jurisdiction over nondomiciliaries who might cause direct, foreseeable injury within the State but "whose business operations are of a local character” (12th Ann Report of NY Jud Conf, at 342-343 [describing the interstate commerce prong of CPLR 302 (a) (3) (ii) as requiring a showing that defendant "was engaged in extensive business activities on an interstate or international level” (emphasis supplied)]; see also, Siegel, op. cit., at 136 [describing CPLR 302 (a) (3) (ii) as a "bigness requirement” designed to assure that the defendant is "economically big enough” to defend suit in New York]).
There is some support for the notion that the provision of medical services may never meet the definition of "commerce” for jurisdictional purposes (see, Markham v Gray, 393 F Supp 163, 166 [suggesting that the profession of medicine is not commerce under CPLR 302 (a) (3) (ii)], affd on other grounds sub nom. Markham v Anderson, 531 F2d 634, 637; see also, People v Roth, 52 NY2d 440, 448 [holding that the provision of medical services is not "commerce” for the purposes of applying the Donnelly Act]). We need not, however, decide so broad an issue today. Here, because respondent renders medical services wholly within his own State, he cannot be said to be engaging in interstate commerce (see, Etra v Matta, 94 AD2d 581, 585, affd 61 NY2d 455; see also, Markham v Gray, supra, at 166).
The situation where a local physician treats a nonresident patient is by no means uncommon. For example, local physicians may treat nonresident patients traveling on vacation, or, as in this case, because the physician’s office is located close to a State border*. Perhaps the most common example is where a physician is so outstanding a specialist in a particular field as to attract numerous referrals from other physicians. Such a physician may treat patients from many different States on a daily basis.
The diversity of a physician’s pool of patients, without more, cannot convert an otherwise local practice to an interstate business activity. A physician does not sell his or her services in interstate commerce by treating unsolicited patients that travel into the physician’s home State seeking health care. Indeed, to the physician, the patient’s residence is largely irrelevant to the provision of medical services. Unlike a manufacturer who introduces a product into the stream of commerce expecting it to be sold in other States, a physician treating *600patients in his or her home State is providing a service that is inherently personal, and local, in nature. Undisputably, all of respondent’s revenue is derived from such local medical services, provided in Vermont. In this respect, respondent’s revenue is even less interstate in character than that of a renowned medical specialist, the bulk of whose income may be earned from treating out-of-State patients (see, Etra v Matta, 94 AD2d, at 585, supra). Thus, in terms of the substantial revenue from interstate commerce requirement of subdivision (a) (3) (ii), the existence of nothing more than an informal, even if frequent, referral practice from a New York HMO is insufficient, as is the fact that respondent holds an apparently completely unexercised privilege to practice medicine in New York.2
Accordingly, the order of the Appellate Division should be affirmed, with costs.
. In a reply affidavit on the motion before Supreme Court, appellant cited to McLenithan v Bennington Community Health Plan (223 AD2d 777, Iv dismissed 88 NY2d 1017) without articulating in any way that he was invoking CPLR 302 (a) (1), the "transaction of business” long-arm provision relied upon in that case. Thus, it is highly questionable whether appellant raised jurisdiction under CPLR 302 (a) (1) before Supreme Court, thereby preserving the issue for our review. In any event, this argument is not helpful to appellant. This provision of the long-arm statute extends jurisdiction to one who "transacts any business within the state or contracts anywhere to supply goods or services in the state” (CPLR 302 [a] [1]). As hereinafter discussed, there is no showing that respondent transacted any business within New York or that he had a contract to provide services within New York. Even if we were to agree with the apparent holding of McLenithan that the entry into a contract with a New York HMO, wherein mutual obligations were undertaken for the referral to and treatment by an out-of-State physician, constituted the transaction of business in New York State, there is no evidence whatsoever of any such contract in this case.
. Not before us is the question whether a referral/fee arrangement creating mutual obligations would constitute an interstate business activity or give rise to jurisdiction under a different long-arm provision (cf., McLenithan v Bennington Community Health Plan, 223 AD2d 777, supra) because there is absolutely no evidence of such an arrangement here. Indeed, the complete absence of record evidence of any such relationship between respondent and the New York HMO undermines the dissent’s characterization of the referral practice as a "managed care commercial enterprise” (dissenting opn, at 601).

=== CASE 9742150 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:07:30.104629+00 ===

Bellacosa, J.
(dissenting). We would reverse and deny the defendant’s motion to dismiss the plaintiffs complaint containing causes of action for his deceased wife’s pain and suffering and for her wrongful death. New York’s long-arm jurisdictional nexus under CPLR 302 (a) (3) (ii) provides enough liberality to withstand dismissal of the lawsuit against the Vermont-based defendant, Dr. Frederick Loy, for his alleged fatal malpractice against plaintiffs spouse.
Under the factual circumstances as the parties have developed this pretrial, pleadings-type motion record, this case may proceed to resolution of the long-arm jurisdiction question on the assumption that some tortious injury to the plaintiffs deceased spouse merely is deemed to have occurred in New York. Thus, we accept the majority’s prudential avoidance of the place-of-injury issue. Nevertheless, we respectfully dissent from a pivotal part of the ultimate analysis that also leads us to differ and vote for reversal.
The Vermont doctor "expects or should reasonably expect [his examinations in Vermont from which he dispatches written diagnostic findings and recommended treatment modalities *601back to the New York referring HMO primary care doctor] to have consequences in [New York]” (CPLR 302 [a] [3] [ii]). New York is where the patient resided and returned for her medical care. Indeed, the Vermont doctor expressly acknowledged facts in satisfaction of that prong of the statute’s criteria in his deposition before trial.
The interstate commerce element of clause (ii) of CPLR 302 (a) (3) presents a closer and more nuanced issue (this is our key divergence). Several factors, however, convince us of the greater cogency of plaintiffs legal position in this regard.
First, the defendant examined the plaintiffs spouse, Alison Ingraham, eight times, albeit in Vermont, over the course of a year on a manifestly regularized referral basis directly from New York primary care physicians, through their employer New York health maintenance organization (HMO), the Community Health Plan (CHP).
Second, the professional services rendered by defendant to plaintiffs spouse included a surgical specialty that ordinarily generates relatively higher professional medical revenues. This is demonstrated by the treatment and surgical regimen rendered to Mrs. Ingraham by defendant during her last visits to him in early 1995. Her first visit to him was in March 1994, and she died in November 1995.
Third, the defendant doctor, who holds a New York State medical license, was regularly engaged in a more extensive patient referral practice through the New York HMO, as his deposition testimony confirms. He thus derived the financial rewards from that opportunity to provide higher revenue-generating specialized services on a "fee for service provider” basis, according to his description. The nisi prius motion court could ordinarily make appropriate findings and inferences as to the fee and service arrangements, but it never reached that statutory criterion, nor its predicate fact development in this case.
HMO and primary-to-specialist medical referrals and methodologies today quintessentially reflect a managed care commercial enterprise that cannot be conventionally characterized on this record, or generally, as "inherently personal” or genuinely "local” (majority opn, at 600; see, e.g., Markham v Anderson, 531 F2d 634, 637; Etra v Matta, 94 AD2d 581, affd 61 NY2d 455; Battista v American Inst. for Mental Studies, 183 AD2d 416). Medical services are becoming increasingly business-driven and managed. Functionally, interrelated levels *602of professional services with their impersonal referral formalities, bear readily identifiable indicia and price tags of both an interstate professional transaction and an intertwined commercial "arrangement,” the word used by Dr. Loy to describe the professional relationship at issue and under which he took New York referrals through the HMO.
We distinguish here any separate referral "formal contract” by anyone with the Vermont physician and are puzzled in this connection by the majority’s seeming insistence and implication that the absence of the formalism of an express contract exempts this case from long-arm jurisdiction. Here, a course of conduct and regular dealing are present and sufficient to satisfy the statutory fulcrum of this case that the Court makes dispositive (contrast, majority opn, at 600; compare, McLenithan v Bennington Community Health Plan, 223 AD2d 777, Iv dismissed 88 NY2d 1017; see also, CPLR 302 [a] [3] [i]). Notably, it also appears that no other statutory channels for acquiring jurisdiction over Dr. Loy in New York are properly before us.
In any event, based on the combination and relatedness of the factors of this case (not on any single one of them) and based on realistic inferences that could be properly drawn from the record material, we thus disagree with the majority’s bottom line, reached evidently as a matter of law, that this Vermont doctor "cannot be said to be engaging in interstate commerce” (majority opn, at 599). Plaintiffs complaint and record, though thin, are deprived of their rightful and usual procedural and inferential preferences. If given their due, plaintiff would meet the prima facie level of jurisdictional satisfaction for going forward with this case in the New York Supreme Court, Rensselaer County, where Dr. Loy was sued.
In sum, this record documents that defendant practiced and profited from an interstate, cross-borders medical services "arrangement,” particularly as to this case and generally as to other patients in a concededly regular pattern. By encouraging the continuous stream of New York patient referrals and by returning his findings and recommendations for residential on-site treatment (or nontreatment equal to failure to treat) to the New York physician, all tied together through the New York HMO with the New York patient, defendant voluntarily subjected himself to the privileges and protections of New York in the constitutional jurisdictional sense. While that overriding feature is not in question here, it is pertinent to show that the physician impliedly injected himself into and drew upon *603the increasingly commercial professional service economy of New York and, thus, readily subjected himself to the interstate component of CPLR 302 (a) (3) (ii) (see generally, International Shoe Co. v Washington, 326 US 310; see also, McGowan v Smith, 52 NY2d 268, 272). The New York HMO played an arranged role in and towards the Vermont physician’s services and ultimate economic benefit. Few aspects could be more commercial and interstate.
In addition, it is no answer to say that a lawsuit could have been brought in Vermont and, thus, no harm is done by dismissal of the New York action. The surviving spouse, or even the 38-year-old patient had she lived, should not be forced to travel the short distance from Hoosick Falls, New York, to Bennington, Vermont, to sue this doctor under these circumstances. After all, they were repeatedly shuttled across the border while she was alive so she could receive specialized medical care, only to be left to suffer the physical and psychological harm for the rest of her days in New York because of the doctor’s missed and delayed diagnosis. He allegedly (deemed proven for purposes of this motion) failed to detect her breast cancer when early intervention by a simple biopsy might have helped her or even saved her life. In these circumstances, New York has its own rightful interest and legitimate power to protect and to provide judicial access here for the redress of wrongs to its residents and citizens. Plaintiff, as the estate representative for his wife’s survivors (himself and their three young children), is entitled to pursue "their” day in a New York court for the pain and suffering and wrongful death she experienced in New York.
We return, then, to the procedural starting point of this case — the respective motions to dismiss and to strike the jurisdictional defense. The minimal inferences necessary to support long-arm jurisdiction could thus be found to satisfy the "derives substantial revenue” criterion of the statute (see, Siegel, NY Prac § 88, at 136 [2d ed] ["whether the sums involved are 'substantial’ requires a factual inquiry in each case in which the issue is raised”]). At the very least, there should be a denial of both motions and a remittal for further proceedings.
Although this record lacks the precise sums and allocations of income from defendant’s practice in relation to the New York referrals, Dr. Loy’s deposition testimony that he saw CHP patients on "almost a daily basis” should suffice, at this beginning litigation phase, to defeat this motion to dismiss (see, Gillmore v J. S. Inskip, Inc., 54 Misc 2d 218, 222 [defendant has *604burden on motion to dismiss for lack of jurisdiction under CPLR 302 (a) (3) (ii) to show absence of substantial revenue]; Ronar, Inc. v Wallace, 649 F Supp 310, 316 ["(w)hether revenue is 'substantial’ under New York law is determined on both relative and absolute scales”]; Path Instruments Intl. Corp. v Asahi Opt. Co., 312 F Supp 805, 810 [even in a "marginal case” the nature of the business conducted may be of such a character to satisfy CPLR 302 (a) (3) (ii)]; see also, McLaughlin, Practice Commentaries, McKinney’s Cons Laws of NY, Book 7B, CPLR C302:23, at 111 ["if the defendant’s New York income is substantial in either an absolute sense (i.e., a large sum of money) or in a relative sense (i.e., a large proportion of its revenues), it should be sufficient to support long-arm jurisdiction”]).
Substantiality in this regard is not narrowly penned in by the statute; thus, the range of what qualifies as "substantial revenue” — or relative "bigness” — should be approached with some latitude and liberality for jurisdictional inferences purposes (see, e.g., Allen v Auto Specialties Mfg. Co., 45 AD2d 331; Gonzales v Harris Calorific Co., 64 Misc 2d 287, 290 [1% of $2,000,000 is "substantial”], affd 35 AD2d 720; compare, New England Laminates Co. v Murphy, 79 Misc 2d 1025, 1028 [4% of $400,000 not "substantial” as a matter of law]; see also, Siegel, NY Prac § 88, at 136 [2d ed]).
The Court’s avoidance of ruling on the conclusion of both lower courts that no injury occurred in New York is prudentially useful here because, in effect, we at least neutralize that negative finding by those courts. To be sure, the Court does not substitute the affirmative finding that some injury did occur in New York. Instead, a detour is taken around that question to await a more propitious and better assembled case, that may be otherwise determinative of outcome and contributive to the dispositional analysis and developing jurisprudence.
In our view, it is'useful to note in passing, nonetheless, that the locus of injury for tort and long-arm jurisdictional purposes is more of an open question than the rigid response in law up to now has indicated, to wit, that injury is only at the situs of the originating and precipitating tortious wrong (see, e.g., McGowan v Smith, 52 NY2d 268, supra; Carte v Parkoff, 152 AD2d 615; Hermann v Sharon Hosp., 135 AD2d 682; Kramer v Hotel Los Monteros, 57 AD2d 756). That standpat answer would not reflect a progressive reassessment as to where the law is or ought to be, based on this flexible springboard of long-arm jurisdiction, no less where differing, continuing or final injuries *605may ultimately be determined to be sited for purposes of pain and suffering and wrongful death causes of action.
Lastly, we do not share the majority’s policy expressions concerning the legal consequences potentially flowing from other kinds of medical service referrals (majority opn, at 599, 600). While these hypotheses are real concerns, they are very significantly distinguishable from the instant case. Moreover, they are not precedentially implicated by the case-specific rationale we propose under our dissenting analysis of the law and governing procedural protocols, as applied to this record. Indeed, it would seem preferable to eschew entirely any consideration of these nettlesome permutations, as the whole Court does in regard to the place-of-injury feature.
Our vote in this case is to reverse and deny the motion to dismiss the action.
Chief Judge Kaye and Judges Titone, Smith and Wesley concur with Judge Levine; Judge Bellacosa dissents and votes to reverse in a separate opinion in which Judge Ciparick concurs.
Order affirmed, with costs.

=== CASE 2230024 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:34.376363+00 ===

687 N.E.2d 235 (1997)
UNR-ROHN, INC., a DIVISION OF UNR INDUSTRIES, INC., Appellant-Plaintiff,
v.
SUMMIT BANK OF CLINTON COUNTY (now NBD Bank, N.A.), Appellee-Defendant (Third-Party Plaintiff),
Robert M. Pearson, Appellee (Third-Party Defendant).
No. 12A02-9512-CV-723.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
November 5, 1997.
*236 Peter L. Obremskey, Anthony W. Patterson, Parr Richey Obremskey & Morton, Lebanon, for Appellant-Plaintiff.
Lester N. Bergum, Jr., Robison Robison Bergum & Johnson, Frankfort, for Appellee-Defendant.
OPINION
DARDEN, Judge.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
UNR-Rohn, Inc., a Division of UNR Industries, Inc., ("UNR-Rohn") filed a complaint against Summit Bank of Clinton County (now NBD Bank, N.A.) ("NBD") alleging that NBD breached its contractual and statutory duties by cashing and/or depositing third-party checks payable to UNR-Rohn into the personal account of third-party defendant Robert Pearson, a UNR-Rohn employee. UNR-Rohn appeals the trial court's order granting summary judgment in favor of NBD based on the Uniform Fiduciary Act. NBD cross-appeals the trial court's denial of its summary judgment motion on basis of the applicable statute of limitations.
We reverse in part and affirm in part.
ISSUES
I. Whether a genuine issue of material fact exists precluding summary judgment.
II. Whether UNR-Rohn's claim is barred by the statute of limitations.
FACTS
UNR-Rohn maintained a transfer account, a payroll account, and a special account at NBD Bank. Robert Pearson was employed by UNR-Rohn as an administrative manager at UNR-Rohn's plant and office in Frankfort, Indiana. Pearson's duties also included making certain banking transactions at NBD consisting of the following: (1) making deposits into UNR-Rohn's transfer account; (2) signing payroll checks; and (3) signing checks on a special (petty cash) account. In addition, Pearson was authorized by UNR-Rohn to endorse checks made payable to UNR-Rohn, and such authorization included access to and utilization of a rubber endorsement stamp containing an imprint which reads "FOR DEPOSIT ONLY." (S.R. 19, 32). The record is silent as to whether UNR-Rohn required Pearson to use this rubber endorsement stamp at all times for purposes of depositing its checks into the NBD transfer account.
In 1984, Pearson first began to embezzle UNR-Rohn funds by cashing third-party checks made payable to UNR-Rohn and appropriating the proceeds to his personal benefit. Pearson continued this practice of cashing checks until he resigned from UNR-Rohn in 1991 after his misappropriation of funds was discovered.
UNR-Rohn became suspicious of misappropriation on April 9, 1991, when a UNR-Rohn customer went to the company to purchase *237 accessories for a product purchased a week earlier and no record could be found of the sales transaction. Subsequently, after meeting with both NBD and Pearson, UNR-Rohn discovered that Pearson had misappropriated hundreds of checks. Only two embezzled checks were designated to the trial court. Pearson had endorsed one check by writing the name "UNR-Rohn" on the back side of the check. (R. 135). Pearson had endorsed the other check by using a rubber stamp simply bearing the name "UNR-ROHN, INC." (R. 136).
On September 5, 1991, the State filed an information against Pearson alleging that Pearson knowingly exerted unauthorized control over the property of UNR-Rohn from October 9, 1984, to April 9, 1991. Pearson pleaded guilty to the charges as filed. The criminal court sentenced Pearson and ordered him to make restitution to UNR-Rohn in the amount of $182,261.57.
On February 11, 1993, UNR-Rohn filed a complaint against NBD, generally alleging that
[NBD] owed contractual and statutory duties to UNR-Rohn to deposit the checks to UNR's account rather than to cash them, as requested by Mr. Pearson. As a result of [NBD]'s breach of its duties, UNR has suffered monetary damages.
(R. 12). NBD moved for a more definite statement, seeking, in part, a description of any oral or written contracts and statutes referred to in UNR-Rohn's complaint. The trial court denied NBD's motion. In its answers to interrogatories, UNR-Rohn stated that it was relying on a contract that "is oral and in writing and is represented by a banking agreement signed between Plaintiff and [NBD]." (S.R. 18). Also, UNR-Rohn stated that it was relying on Ind.Code § 26-1-3-419[1] for its claim of breach of statutory duties. On August 12, 1994, NBD moved for summary judgment based upon the Uniform Fiduciary Act and the applicable statute of limitations. After conducting a hearing, the trial court granted NBD's summary judgment motion, finding that the Uniform Fiduciary Act insulated NBD from liability but rejecting NBD's statute of limitations defense.
DECISION
Summary judgment is appropriate only when there is no genuine issue of material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Ind.Trial Rule 56(C). The burden is on the moving party to prove there are no genuine issues of material fact and he is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Once the movant has sustained this burden, the opponent must respond by setting forth specific facts showing a genuine issue for trial; he may not simply rest on the allegations of his pleadings. Stephenson v. Ledbetter, 596 N.E.2d 1369, 1371 (Ind.1992). In ruling on a summary judgment motion, all evidence must be construed in favor of the non-moving party, and all doubts as to the existence of a material issue must be resolved against the moving party. Bailey v. Manors Group, 642 N.E.2d 249, 252 (Ind.Ct.App.1994), reh'g denied, trans. denied.
When reviewing an entry of summary judgment, we are bound by the same standard as the trial court. Webb v. Jarvis, 575 N.E.2d 992, 994 (Ind.1991), reh'g denied. We do not weigh the evidence but will consider the facts in a light most favorable to the nonmoving party. Reed v. Luzny, 627 N.E.2d 1362, 1363 (Ind.Ct.App.1994), reh'g denied, trans. denied. Finally, we may sustain a summary judgment upon any theory *238 supported by the designated materials. T.R. 56(C).
Background of the Uniform Fiduciary Act
In this case, we are faced with an issue of first impression which requires us to construe the Uniform Fiduciary Act (UFA), as enacted in Indiana. The UFA, approved by the National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws and the American Bar Association in 1922, was enacted in Indiana in 1927 and is codified at Ind.Code 30-2-4, et al. Courts in jurisdictions adopting similar versions of the UFA have stated that "`[t]he purpose of the Act is to facilitate the fiduciary's performance of his responsibilities by limiting the liability of those who deal with him,' and `to cover situations which arise when one person honestly deals with another knowing him to be a fiduciary.'" Appley v. West, 832 F.2d 1021, 1031 (7th Cir.1987) (citations omitted). The UFA relieves a depository bank of the duty of seeing that funds are properly applied and places the burden upon the principal to employ honest fiduciaries. Hosselton v. First American Bank N.A., 240 Ill.App.3d 903, 181 Ill. Dec. 557, 561, 608 N.E.2d 630, 634 (1993), appeal denied 151 Ill. 2d 564, 186 Ill. Dec. 381, 616 N.E.2d 334. By relaxing some of the harsher rules which require banks and individuals to exercise the highest degree of vigilance in the detection of a fiduciary's wrongdoing, the UFA provides protection for banks who deal with authorized fiduciaries except where they know the fiduciary is breaching his or her duty to the principal involved, or where they have knowledge of such facts that their action in dealing with the fiduciary amounts to bad faith. Zions First National Bank v. Clark Clinic Corp., 762 P.2d 1090, 1100 (Utah 1988).
I. Bad Faith or Good Faith
UNR-Rohn contends that the trial court erred in granting summary judgment because there remains an issue of material fact regarding whether the bank acted in bad faith, thereby precluding summary judgment. We agree.
Both parties agree that the UFA contains two pertinent sections, Ind.Code §§ 30-2-4-4 and 9, which are controlling in the present case. I.C. § 30-2-4-4 provides, in part, as follows:
Transfer of negotiable instrument by fiduciary. If any negotiable instrument payable or indorsed ... to his principal is indorsed by a fiduciary empowered to indorse such instrument on behalf of his principal, the indorsee is not bound to inquire whether the fiduciary is committing a breach of his obligation as fiduciary in indorsing or delivering the instrument, and is not chargeable with notice that the fiduciary is committing a breach of his obligation as fiduciary unless he takes the instrument with actual knowledge of such breach or with knowledge of such facts that his action in taking the instrument amounts to bad faith. If, however, such instrument ... is transferred in any transaction known by the transferee to be for the personal benefit of the fiduciary, the creditor or other transferee is liable to the principal if the fiduciary, in fact commits a breach of his obligation as fiduciary in transferring the instrument. (Emphasis added.).
I.C. § 30-2-4-9 provides, in part, as follows:
If a fiduciary makes a deposit in a bank to his personal credit ... of checks payable to his principal and indorsed by him, if he is empowered to indorse such checks, ... the bank receiving such deposit is not bound to inquire whether the fiduciary is committing thereby a breach of his obligation as fiduciary; and the bank is authorized to pay the amount of the deposit or any part thereof upon the personal check of the fiduciary without being liable to the principal, unless the bank receives the deposit or pays the check with actual knowledge that the fiduciary is committing a breach of his obligation as fiduciary in making such deposit or in drawing such check, or with knowledge of such facts that its action in receiving the deposit or paying the check amounts to bad faith. (Emphasis added.).
If a fiduciary is empowered to endorse under Sections 4 and 9, the UFA provides endorsees and banks protection from liability except where they have (1) actual knowledge *239 the fiduciary is breaching his or her duty to the principal, or (2) knowledge of sufficient facts that their action in dealing with the fiduciary amounts to bad faith. I.C. § 30-2-4-4; I.C. § 30-2-4-9.
The UFA does not define the term "bad faith" and we have been unable to find any Indiana cases defining the term as it is used in the UFA. However, the UFA does define something as being done "in good faith" when "it is in fact done honestly, whether it be done negligently or not." I.C. § 30-2-4-1(4). "Bad faith" is the antithesis of good faith and is not simply bad judgment or negligence; rather, "it implies the conscious doing of a wrong because of dishonest purpose or moral obliquity" and "contemplates a state of mind affirmatively operating with furtive design or ill will." Black's Law Dictionary (6th ed.1990) at 139 (citing Stath v. Williams, 174 Ind.App. 369, 367 N.E.2d 1120, 1124 (1977)).
In Edwards v. Northwestern Bank, 39 N.C.App. 261, 250 S.E.2d 651, 657 (1979), the North Carolina Court stated that the term "bad faith" requires a showing of some indicia of dishonest conduct or a showing of facts and circumstances so cogent and obvious that to remain passive would amount to a deliberate desire to evade knowledge because of a belief or fear that inquiry would disclose a defect in the transaction. 250 S.E.2d at 656-57. In determining whether a bank has acted with bad faith under the UFA, courts have asked "whether it was `commercially' unjustifiable for the payee to disregard and refuse to learn facts readily available." Appley, 832 F.2d at 1031 ("At some point, obvious circumstances become so cogent that it is `bad faith' to remain passive.") (citations omitted); see also General Ins. Co. of America v. Commerce Bank of St. Charles, 505 S.W.2d 454, 457-58 (Mo.App.1974) ("Evil motive is not the gauge; it is whether it is `commercially unjustifiable for the [bank] to disregard or refuse to learn facts readily available'").
Here, NBD, as the moving party, had the initial burden to establish that there was no genuine issue of material fact by the evidence it produced in support of its motion for summary judgment. It is on this initial burden borne by NBD that we focus our analysis. UNR-Rohn's complaint alleges that from 1984 through 1991 NBD breached its contractual and statutory duties to UNR-Rohn by permitting Pearson to embezzle proceeds from cashed checks made payable to UNR-Rohn. The designated materials reveal that UNR-Rohn had a banking relationship with NBD, maintaining three corporate accounts at the bank. NBD permitted Pearson to cash or to deposit several hundred corporate checks into his personal accounts at NBD totaling approximately $182,000. In support of its motion for summary judgment, NBD merely relied upon general assertions in its pleadings that it acted in good faith and that it lacked knowledge of any breach of Pearson's fiduciary duty. There was no designated material indicating that NBD employees investigated Pearson's fiduciary capacity or determined the scope of Pearson's authority to negotiate third-party checks payable to UNR-Rohn. We believe NBD's mere assertion of good faith, particularly in a case in which state of mind is an element to be proven, fails to meet its initial burden of establishing the lack of a genuine issue of material fact. In light of our standard of review, and the foregoing circumstances, we find that a trier of fact could conclude that it was commercially unjustifiable for NBD to disregard and refuse to learn facts readily available under the circumstances of this case.[2]
II. Statute of Limitations
On cross-appeal, NBD contends that UNR-Rohn's claim for conversion of negotiable instruments based on all checks allegedly cashed or negotiated by NBD before February 11, 1991, is barred by the two-year statute of limitations for personal property. We disagree.
*240 UNR-Rohn and NBD both agree that the two-year statute of limitations for injury to personal property under Ind.Code § 34-1-2-2(1) applies to UNR-Rohn's conversion claim under I.C. XX-X-X-XXX.[3] NBD contends that UNR-Rohn's cause of action accrued "from the time that each check was cashed or otherwise negotiated at NBD Bank." NBD's Brief at 34. UNR-Rohn responds that the discovery rule applies and that its cause of action did not accrue until it knew, or in the exercise of ordinary diligence, should have discovered that Pearson was embezzling funds. Thus, the central issue on cross-appeal is when UNR-Rohn's cause of action accrued.
I.C. § 34-1-2-2(1) provides that an action shall be commenced within two years "after the cause of action has accrued" for injuries to person or character, for injuries to personal property, and for a forfeiture of penalty given by statute. "Courts determine when a cause of action `accrues.'" Malachowski v. Bank One, Indianapolis, 590 N.E.2d 559, 564 (Ind.1992) (citing Barnes v. A.H. Robins Co., Inc., 476 N.E.2d 84, 85 (Ind.1985)).
In determining when different causes of action accrue under I.C. § 34-1-2-2, our courts since 1992 have consistently applied the discovery rule, which provides that a cause of action accrues when the plaintiff knew or, in the exercise of ordinary diligence, could have discovered that an injury had been sustained as a result of the act of another. Madlem v. Arko, 592 N.E.2d 686, 687 (Ind.1992) (negligent notarization); Malachowski, supra (Ind.1992) (injury to personal property); Wehling v. Citizens Nat. Bank, 586 N.E.2d 840 (Ind.1992) (tort claim alleging bank negligently recorded deed to property); City of Hobart Sewage Works v. McCullough, 656 N.E.2d 1185 (Ind.Ct.App. 1995), trans. denied (negligence); Page v. Hines, 594 N.E.2d 485 (Ind.Ct.App.1992) (negligent failure to procure insurance coverage); Groen v. Elkins, 551 N.E.2d 876 (Ind. Ct.App.1990), trans. denied (abuse of process claim).[4] This standard "is based on the reasoning that it is inconsistent with our system of jurisprudence to require a claimant to bring his cause of action in a limited period in which, even with due diligence, he could not be aware a cause of action exists." Barnes, 476 N.E.2d at 86.
In Wehling, our supreme court expanded its application of the discovery rule to all tort actions. 586 N.E.2d at 843. Wehling involved, in part, a suit by property owners against a bank for negligently recording a deed to the owners' real estate and failing to escrow and pay real estate taxes thereon. In reversing the grant of summary judgment in favor of the bank, the supreme court observed the Indiana rule to be that "a cause of action accrues, and thus the statute of limitations beings to run, when the resultant damage of a negligent act is `susceptible of ascertainment.' " Id. at 842. The supreme court found no significant difference between the discovery rule followed in some jurisdictions and the "ascertainment rule" followed in Indiana, and concluded as follows:
We now complete the merging of the `discovery' and `ascertainment' rules. We hold that the cause of action of a tort claim accrues and the statute of limitations begins to run when the plaintiff knew or, in the exercise of ordinary diligence, could have discovered that an injury had been sustained as a result of the tortious act of another.
Id. at 843. In other words, under Indiana law, "a tort action accrues and applicable statutes of limitations begin to run when the injured party knows or, in the exercise of ordinary diligence, could have known, that he or she had sustained an injury." Habig v. Bruning, 613 N.E.2d 61, 64 (Ind.Ct.App. 1993), trans. denied.
Notwithstanding the aforementioned Indiana law, NBD repeatedly claims that no Indiana case has applied the discovery rule to conversion of negotiable instruments and cites numerous cases in other jurisdictions *241 which have refused to apply the discovery rule to I.C. XX-X-X-XXX. Although it is true that none of the Indiana cases cited above involved the accrual date of a claim of conversion, the holding of Wehling and the reasoning inherent in it logically applies to all tort actions. To carve out an exception to the discovery rule in injuries to personal property involving conversion of negotiable instruments would be wholly incongruous and inconsistent with Indiana's system of jurisprudence.[5]
Therefore, the question to be resolved is when UNR-Rohn discovered, or reasonably should have discovered, NBD's alleged conversion of its checks. Here, the designated material reveals that between 1984 and April of 1991, Pearson embezzled hundreds of third-party checks made payable to UNR-Rohn. On April 9, 1991, UNR-Rohn first became suspicious of Pearson's scheme of misappropriating checks when a UNR-Rohn customer went to the company to purchase accessories for a product purchased a week earlier and no record could be found of the sales transaction. After meeting with NBD and Pearson, UNR-Rohn discovered the misappropriation of numerous UNR-Rohn checks. These facts are sufficient to raise a factual dispute regarding when UNR-Rohn could have, in the exercise of ordinary diligence, discovered the conversion of the checks. Therefore, the trial court correctly denied summary judgment against UNR-Rohn on the grounds that their claim was barred by the statute of limitations.
Reversed and remanded in part and affirmed in part.
RILEY and KIRSCH, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  I.C. § 26-1-3-419 (now repealed) provides:
(1) An instrument is converted when:
(a) A drawee to whom it is delivered for acceptance refuses to return it on demand; or
(b) any person to whom it is delivered for payment refused on demand either to pay or to return it; or
(c) It is paid on a forged indorsement.
* * * * * *
(3) Subject to provisions of IC 26-1 concerning restrictive indorsements, a representative, including a depository or collecting bank, who has in good faith and in accordance with the reasonable commercial standards applicable to the business of such representative dealt with an instrument or its proceeds on behalf of one who was not the true owner is not liable in conversion or otherwise to the true owner beyond the amount of any proceeds remaining in his hands.
[2]  We note the limited designated facts before the trial court. The parties failed to designate the banking agreement between the parties, the signature card(s) or any material regarding commercial standards.
[3]  During the period in question, Indiana's version of the U.C.C. did not specify a statute of limitations for conversion of negotiable instruments.
[4]  We have also applied the discovery rule to I.C. § 34-1-2-1. See Habig v. Bruning, 613 N.E.2d 61 (Ind.Ct.App.1993), trans. denied (breach of contract and warranty actions).
[5]  We recognize that the vast majority of authority from other jurisdictions runs against applying the discovery rule to an action for conversion of negotiable instruments under U.C.C. 3-419 in the absence of fraudulent concealment on the part of the defendant asserting the defense of the statute of limitations. Courts in those jurisdictions have refused to apply the discovery rule, finding it inimical to U.C.C. policies of finality, negotiability and uniformity. See Menichini v. Grant, 995 F.2d 1224, 1229 (3d Cir.1993); Haddad's of Ill., Inc. v. Credit Union 1 Credit Union, 286 Ill. App. 3d 1069, 222 Ill. Dec. 710, 713, 678 N.E.2d 322, 325 (1997).

=== CASE 2230030 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:34.515988+00 ===

687 N.E.2d 866 (1997)
178 Ill. 2d 360
227 Ill. Dec. 384
Takayoshi MATSUDA, Appellee,
v.
The COOK COUNTY EMPLOYEES' AND OFFICERS' ANNUITY AND BENEFIT FUND et al., Appellants.
No. 80873.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
September 18, 1997.
Rehearing Denied December 1, 1997.
*867 Richard A. Devine, State's Atty., Cook County, Civil Appeals Div., Donna M. Lach, Asst. State's Atty., Chicago, for Cook County Employees.
Alan R. Borlack, Bailey, Borlack, Nadelhoffer & Carroll, Chicago, for Takayoshi Matsuda.
Justice HEIPLE delivered the opinion of the court:
At issue is whether appellants, the Cook County Employees' and Officers' Annuity and Benefit Fund and the Retirement Board of the County Employees' Annuity and Benefit Fund of Cook County (hereinafter the Funds), during the period relevant to this dispute, could set up an excess benefit fund as required by section 1-116 of the Illinois Pension Code (40 ILCS 5/1-116 (West 1996)) without violating section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code (26 U.S.C. § 415 (1988)). The trial court held that the Funds could not and granted their combined motion for summary judgment. The appellate court reversed. 278 Ill.App.3d 378, 214 Ill. Dec. 867, 662 N.E.2d 433. For the reasons that follow, we affirm the appellate court's decision.
BACKGROUND
Appellee, Dr. Takayoshi Matsuda, an employee of Cook County Hospital for 24 years, retired on May 29, 1993, at age 55. As an employee of Cook County, Dr. Matsuda was a contributing member of the Annuity and Benefit Fund, an annuity and benefit fund established and operated under article 9 of the Illinois Pension Code. 40 ILCS 5/9-101 et seq. (West 1992).
On September 16, 1992, the Illinois General Assembly enacted section 9-1342 of the Illinois Pension Code to provide early retirement *868 incentives to certain members of the Annuity and Benefit Fund. Section 9-134.2 specifically provided that a contributing member would receive a specified increase in his retirement annuity without any reduction in benefits otherwise caused by retiring below age 60 if that member: (1) filed a written application with the Retirement Board before May 1, 1993, requesting early retirement benefits; (2) elected to retire between December 1, 1992, and May 29, 1993; (3) attained the age of 55 on or before the date of retirement; and (4) provided at least 10 years of service prior to retirement. 40 ILCS 5/9-134.2 (West 1996).
In November of 1992, the Funds mailed to Dr. Matsuda unsolicited information regarding the requirements and advantages of the new early retirement incentives, including an estimated personal benefit statement subject to final audit. On April 30, 1993, Dr. Matsuda, who met all the necessary requirements, filed an early retirement application stating that he would retire on May 29, 1993. The Funds subsequently sent Dr. Matsuda an estimated personal benefit statement dated May 13, 1993, calculating that if Dr. Matsuda took early retirement and made additional contributions of $60,317.84 his monthly annuity would amount to $9,967.31. On May 26, 1993, Dr. Matsuda contributed $60,317.84, and three days later he retired.
Several months later, the Funds notified Dr. Matsuda that his monthly annuity would amount to $7,219.85, substantially lower than the previous estimate of $9,967.31, because of the limitations set forth in section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code for qualified retirement plans. 26 U.S.C. § 415 (1988). On December 23, 1993, Dr. Matsuda filed a complaint against the Funds in the circuit court of Cook County, alleging, inter alia, that the Funds violated section 1-116 of the Illinois Pension Code by failing to establish an excess benefit fund to pay out his earned benefits that exceeded any limits set by section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code. The Funds responded by filing a joint motion for summary judgment in which they asserted that, as a matter of federal law, they were prohibited from establishing an excess benefit fund. The trial court granted the Funds' motion for summary judgment. The appellate court reversed and remanded, holding that section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code did not prohibit the Funds from setting up an excess benefit fund as required by section 1-116 of the Illinois Pension Code. 278 Ill.App.3d 378, 214 Ill. Dec. 867, 662 N.E.2d 433.
Subsequent to this court's granting the Funds' petition for leave to appeal to this court, Congress amended section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code by adding section 415(m). 26 U.S.C. § 415(m) (1997). Both parties agree that section 415(m) of the Internal Revenue Code permits the Funds to provide Dr. Matsuda with benefits in excess of section 415's limitations. Moreover, both parties agree that Congress indicated that section 415(m) would apply beginning January 1, 1995, or 19 months after Dr. Matsuda retired. At issue, then, is whether section 415 prohibited the Funds from establishing an excess benefit fund pursuant to section 1-116 of the Illinois Pension Code during this interim 19-month period.
ANALYSIS
We commence by noting that interpreting or construing a statute is a matter of law for the court and appropriate for summary judgment; however, such a drastic measure should be granted only if the movant's right to judgment is clear and free from doubt. Outboard Marine Corp. v. Liberty Mutual Insurance Co., 154 Ill. 2d 90, 102, 180 Ill. Dec. 691, 607 N.E.2d 1204 (1992). To this end, we conduct a de novo review. Delaney v. McDonald's Corp., 158 Ill. 2d 465, 467, 199 Ill. Dec. 696, 634 N.E.2d 749 (1994).
Article 9 of the Illinois Pension Code governs both the Fund and the Retirement Board. See 40 ILCS 5/9-101 et seq. (West 1992). Section 9-150(3) provides:
"Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article, any benefit payable under this Article which would otherwise exceed the maximum limitations on benefits provided by `qualified plans' as set forth in Section 415 of the federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as now or hereafter amended, or any successor thereto, shall be paid only in *869 accordance with Section 1-116 of this Code." 40 ILCS 5/9-150(3) (West 1992).
Section 1-116 of the Illinois Pension Code, referred to in the above statute, provides as follows:
"Federal benefit limitation.
(a) This Section shall apply only to pension funds and retirement systems established under Article 2, 7, 8, 9, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16 or 18.
(b) If any benefit payable by a pension fund or retirement system subject to this Section exceeds the applicable benefit limits set by Section 415 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code of 1986 for tax qualified plans under Section 401(a) of that Code, the excess shall be payable only from an excess benefit fund established under this Section in accordance with federal law.
(c) An excess benefit fund shall be established by any pension fund or retirement system subject to this Section that has any member eligible to receive a benefit that exceeds the applicable benefit limits set by Section 415 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code of 1986 for tax qualified plans under Section 401(a) of that Code. Amounts shall be credited to the excess benefit fund, and payments for excess benefits made from the excess benefit fund, in a manner consistent with the applicable federal law." 40 ILCS 5/1-116 (West 1996).
Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code, referred to in both of the above Illinois statutes, limits the employer share of Dr. Matsuda's pension benefits to $75,000 per year or $6,250.00 per month ($7,219.85 when the $969.85 employee portion is included). 26 U.S.C. § 415(b)(2)(F)(i)(II) (1988).
We must first attempt to ascertain and give effect to the legislature's intent regarding the statutes at issue by considering their language, as this affords the best means of deciphering legislative intent. Balmoral Racing Club, Inc. v. Illinois Racing Board, 151 Ill. 2d 367, 390, 177 Ill. Dec. 419, 603 N.E.2d 489 (1992). We note, however, that the language of Illinois' pension statutes must be liberally construed in favor of the rights of the pensioner. Johnson v. Retirement Board of the Policemen's Annuity & Benefit Fund, 114 Ill. 2d 518, 521, 104 Ill. Dec. 221, 502 N.E.2d 718 (1986). We must also avoid interpretations that render the statutes at issue "insignificant, meaningless, inoperative, or nugatory." Pliakos v. Illinois Liquor Control Comm'n, 11 Ill. 2d 456, 460, 143 N.E.2d 47 (1957).
We observe that section 1-116(c) mandates that "[a]n excess benefit fund shall be established" for any member whose benefits exceed those limited by section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code and that payments for such excess benefits shall be made "in a manner consistent with applicable federal law." (Emphasis added.) 40 ILCS 5/1-116(c) (West 1996). While the Funds acknowledge section 1-116's mandate, they nevertheless assert that the Pension Code required the Funds to remain tax qualified and that the mandate could not be complied with because it conflicted with section 415's ceiling. Specifically, the Funds contend that section 415 prohibited the Annuity and Benefit Fund, as a qualified governmental plan, from establishing a nonqualified excess benefit fund or from using its qualified assets to pay such excess benefits.
In support of their contention that they could not fully comply with section 1-116, the Funds offer the following IRS letter written in 1991:
"Question 10. Would section 415 of the Code be violated if a governmental plan transferred amounts in excess of the section 415 limits to a nonqualified arrangement for distribution to the participant who had the excess?
A. Yes. Governmental plans would violate section 415 by transferring amounts that exceed section 415 under a qualified plan from that plan to a nonqualified arrangement, and distributing those benefits from the nonqualified arrangement. Such a spin-off of qualified funds may also violate other qualification requirements, such as the exclusive benefit rule under Section 401(a)(2)." IRS Information Letter on Section 415 Limitations on Public Plans, 18 Pensions and Benefits (BNA) No. 34, at 1,552 (August 26,1991).
*870 The Funds argue that this letter is dispositive of the instant case because the funding scheme of article 9 of the Pension Code did not provide a mechanism through which a nonqualified excess benefit fund could be funded independently without transferring assets directly from the Annuity and Benefit Fund itself. As noted by the Funds, section 1-116 mandates the creation of an excess benefit fund which, the Funds contend, is a spin-off from the Annuity Benefit Fund because assets from the latter are transferred directly to the former. The Funds therefore posit that the IRS letter and the funding scheme of article 9 indicate that the IRS is likely to view the establishment of a nonqualified excess benefit fund pursuant to section 1-116 of the Illinois Pension Code as a violation of the Annuity and Benefit Fund's tax qualified status.
The Funds correctly observe that article 9's funding scheme does not specifically provide the means for independently funding an excess benefit fund pursuant to section 1-116. However, this fact does not necessarily mean that the IRS would consider that such an excess benefit fund violated federal law. Indeed, we find absolutely nothing within the Internal Revenue Code that prohibits government plans from setting up excess benefit funds pursuant to section 1-116. Moreover, we note that this IRS letter specifically provides: "This is not a ruling, however, and may not be relied on with respect to any transaction." IRS Information Letter on Section 415 Limitations on Public Plans, 18 Pensions and Benefits (BNA) No. 34, at 1,552 (August 26, 1991). This letter merely advises against transfers between qualified and nonqualified plans, and therefore falls short of proving that, as a matter of federal law, the Funds could not separately establish a nonqualified plan to pay out benefits in excess of section 415's limits.
The Funds further assert, however, that section 415(m), amending section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code to allow for excess benefit plans such as called for in section 1-116, indicates that the Internal Revenue Code did not permit the Funds to establish an excess benefit fund and still maintain their tax qualified status prior to this amendment. In support of this assertion, the Funds argue that if a qualified governmental pension plan could have paid benefits exceeding the section 415 cap by paying supplemental benefits through an excess benefit fund, then section 415(m) would not have been necessary.
As the Funds correctly observe, an amendment to a federal statute creates a presumption that Congress intended to change the law. Stone v. Immigration & Naturalization Service, 514 U.S. 386, 397-98, 115 S. Ct. 1537, 1545, 131 L. Ed. 2d 465, 476-77 (1995). However, we agree with Dr. Matsuda that section 415(m) does change the law to the extent that it now allows government entities to establish a qualified governmental excess benefit arrangement as part of their qualified plans. This permits the Funds to pay excess benefits out of their qualified plan without having to first establish and fund a separate nonqualified excess benefit fund as contemplated in section 1-116. In other words, this amendment makes it easier and less expensive for such government entities to set up excess benefit funds for their employees. Section 415(m) does not therefore prove that establishing an excess benefit fund pursuant to section 1-116 would have violated the Internal Revenue Code.
The Funds next assert that section 1-116's mandate to set up a nonqualified excess benefit fund was contingent upon enabling federal legislation, which did not exist until Congress passed section 415(m). The Funds note that in 1991 section 1-116(c) provided in part: "An excess benefit fund shall be established as a special fund in the State Treasury for any pension fund or retirement system subject to this Section * * *." (Emphasis added.) 40 ILCS 5/1-116(c) (West 1992). The Funds point out that in 1993 the state legislature amended section 1-116 to provide in part: "An excess benefit fund shall be established by any pension fund or retirement system subject to this Section * * *." (Emphasis added.) 40 ILCS 5/1-116 (West 1996). The Funds interpret the language in the 1991 version of section 1-116 as establishing an excess benefit fund through the state treasury, thereby avoiding *871 section 415's ceiling. In contrast, the Funds interpret the amended language in the 1993 version of section 1-116 as providing for funding to pass through the Annuity and Benefit Fund itself rather than through the state treasury, thus causing the excess benefit fund under section 1-116 to run afoul of section 415's limitations at that time. The Funds infer from all this that the state legislature intended that the 1991 version of section 1-116 would be operative and noncontingent but that the 1993 version of section 1-116 would be inoperative and silently contingent upon unspecified, future federal enabling legislation.
What the Funds' argument fails to explain, however, is why the state legislature would amend section 1-116, in the manner proffered by the Funds, when that section already provided for an excess benefit fund that fully complied with section 415's ceiling. It would be anomalous to suggest that the state legislature intended to amend section 1-116 to become inoperative and silently contingent upon future federal enabling legislation without detailing this intent in the statute. Indeed, the Funds fail to cite any language whatsoever in either the Illinois Pension Code or the Internal Revenue Code that even remotely supports their interpretation of section 1-116. We therefore reject the Funds' contention that the 1993 amendments to section 1-116 operated to make the continuation of excess benefit funds contingent upon future federal legislation, as this interpretation would have rendered section 1-116 inoperative and meaningless. See Pliakos v. Illinois Liquor Control Comm'n, 11 Ill. 2d 456, 460, 143 N.E.2d 47 (1957) (holding that courts should avoid interpretations that render a statute "meaningless, inoperative, or nugatory"). We instead conclude that the state legislature amended section 1-116 in 1993 quite simply to allow pension funds to establish excess benefit funds directly.
CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the appellate court's reversal of the trial court's order granting the Funds' motion for summary judgment.
Appellate court judgment affirmed.

=== CASE 2230031 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:34.555891+00 ===

687 N.E.2d 21 (1997)
177 Ill. 2d 511
227 Ill. Dec. 98
Rada MAKSIMOVIC, Appellant,
v.
William T. TSOGALIS et al., Appellees.
No. 81493.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
October 17, 1997.
Gregory A. Adamski, Adamski & Conti, Chicago, for Rada Maksimovic.
Wendy L. Nutt, Brittain, Seldz, Morris & Solvak, Chicago, for William T. Tsogalis.
Laura M. Wunder, Assistant Attorney General-Civil Appeals, Chicago, for Illinois Human Rights Commission.
Fay Clayton, Robinson Curley & Clayton, P.C., Chicago, for Chicago Lawyer's Committee.
Gina S. McClard, Illinois Coalition Against Sexual Assault, Springfield, for Illinois Coalition Against Assault.
H. Kent Heller, Heller, Holmes & Associates, P.C., Mattoon, for Illinois Trial Lawyers Association.
Athena T. Taite, Illinois State Bar Association, Springfield, Gerald D. Skoning, Seyfarth, Shaw, Fairweather & Geraldson, Chicago, for Chicagoland Chamber of Commerce.
Gerald L. Maatman, Jr., Baker & McKenzie, Chicago, for Illinois Manufacturers' Association.
Jill S. Mulderink, Seyfarth, Shaw, Fairweather & Geraldson, Chicago, for Illinois Chamber of Commerce.
Justice HEIPLE delivered the opinion of the court:
Must a claim of intentional tort related to allegations of sexual harassment be litigated before the Illinois Human Rights Commission (the Commission), or, stated differently, does the exclusive remedy provision of the Illinois Human Rights Act (Act) (775 ILCS 5/8-111(C) (West 1994)) divest the circuit *22 court of jurisdiction to adjudicate such common law tort claims? This court visited this question in Geise v. Phoenix Co. of Chicago, Inc., 159 Ill. 2d 507, 517, 203 Ill. Dec. 454, 639 N.E.2d 1273 (1994), and held that where a tort claim is "inextricably linked" to claims of sexual harassment such that there is "no independent basis for imposing liability" apart from the Act itself, those claims must be litigated before the Commission-and only before the Commission. We allowed the instant plaintiff leave to appeal (155 Ill.2d R. 315) so that we could clarify the scope of this court's holding in Geise as it regards tort claims which, though related to sexual harassment, have an independent basis in the common law.
We conclude that the plaintiff's common law tort claims of assault, battery and false imprisonment are not inextricably linked with claims of sexual harassment, because the plaintiff has established the necessary elements of each tort independent of any legal duties created by the Act. The plaintiff has established a basis for imposing liability on the defendant independent of any statutory cause of action under the Act, and therefore the circuit court does have jurisdiction to adjudicate the plaintiff's common law tort claims. We reverse and remand.[1]
I
This case comes to us on a grant of summary judgment, so our review is de novo. McInerney v. Charter Golf, Inc., 176 Ill. 2d 482, 484, 223 Ill. Dec. 911, 680 N.E.2d 1347 (1997). From October 1992 until August 1993, Rada Maksimovic worked as a waitress at a restaurant owned and operated by William T. Tsogalis located in Des Plaines, Illinois. Maksimovic quit her job after Tsogalis allegedly made repeated sexual advances towards her.
Subsequently, Maksimovic filed a complaint with the Illinois Human Rights Commission in November 1993, alleging that she was the victim of sexual harassment at the hands of her former manager, Tsogalis, and she sought back pay and reinstatement. Several months later, Maksimovic filed an action for damages in the circuit court of Cook County against defendants William T. Tsogalis, William T. Inc., d/b/a Tiffany's Restaurant, and P.C. Partners, d/b/a Comfort Inn. In the three counts of the complaint relevant to this appeal, the plaintiff alleged that Tsogalis committed the intentional torts of assault, battery and false imprisonment. In the assault count, Maksimovic alleged that Tsogalis threatened to "give her a stiff one up the ass," ordered her to perform oral sex on him, made comments about her breasts and accused her of being too friendly with the customers. In the battery count, the plaintiff alleged that Tsogalis placed his hand under her skirt and grabbed her leg, grabbed her buttocks and touched her while attempting to kiss her. In the false imprisonment count, the plaintiff alleged that Tsogalis confined her in a walk-in cooler where he made sexual advances toward her.
The circuit court held that it lacked subject matter jurisdiction to adjudicate the plaintiff's case because her tort claims were in the nature of sexual harassment and granted summary judgment for the defendants. The appellate court affirmed and held that the circuit court was without jurisdiction to adjudicate claims of intentional tort related to allegations of sexual harassment: "Because the fundamental nature of plaintiff's claims are offensive touchings of a sexual nature and she cannot support a cause of action independent of these allegations, her claims for assault, battery, and false imprisonment are barred by the Act and Geise." 282 Ill. App. 3d 576, 586, 218 Ill. Dec. 3, 668 N.E.2d 166.
II
Our analysis of whether the Act precludes the circuit court from adjudicating common law tort claims related to allegations of sexual harassment naturally begins with a careful reading of the statute. The Act provides in relevant part:
"Except as otherwise provided by law, no court of this state shall have jurisdiction *23 over the subject of an alleged civil rights violation other than as set forth in this Act." 775 ILCS 5/8-111 (C) (West 1994).
The Act goes on to state that it is a "civil rights violation" for any employer or employee "to engage in sexual harassment." 775 ILCS 5/2-102(D) (West 1994). Sexual harassment is defined as:
"any unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual favors or any conduct of a sexual nature when * * * such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive working environment." 775 ILCS 5/2-101(E) (West 1994).
Thus, this court has held that if a common law action is in essence one which seeks redress for a "civil rights violation" as defined by the Act and there is no basis for the action other than the Act, the circuit court lacks jurisdiction to adjudicate the claim. Geise, 159 Ill.2d at 516, 203 Ill. Dec. 454, 639 N.E.2d 1273; Mein v. Masonite Corp., 109 Ill. 2d 1, 7, 92 Ill. Dec. 501, 485 N.E.2d 312 (1985).
But does the Act preclude the circuit court from exercising jurisdiction over all tort claims factually related to incidents of sexual harassment? Our appellate court answered "yes," construing Geise as barring the circuit court from hearing any claim of intentional tort related to allegations of sexual harassment. 282 Ill.App.3d at 585, 218 Ill. Dec. 3, 668 N.E.2d 166. The appellate court's reading of Geise, however, is overly broad.
In Geise, the plaintiff alleged that her employer negligently hired and retained a manager who sexually harassed the plaintiff. Geise, 159 Ill.2d at 511-12, 203 Ill. Dec. 454, 639 N.E.2d 1273. This court observed that, but for the Act's proscription against sexual harassment, the plaintiff would have had no legally cognizable claim against her employer. Geise, 159 Ill.2d at 517, 203 Ill. Dec. 454, 639 N.E.2d 1273. Although the plaintiff in Geise dressed her claims as "negligent hiring" and "negligent retention," the allegations of negligence on the part of the employer were premised on the allegation that the employer hired and retained a manager who engaged in sexual harassment. Geise, 159 Ill.2d at 518, 203 Ill. Dec. 454, 639 N.E.2d 1273. Absent the Act's prohibition of sexual harassment, the employer's hiring and retention of an employee whose conduct created a hostile work environment would not have been an actionable tort. That is to say, in Geise the Act furnished the legal duty that the defendant was alleged to have breached. This court held that such tort claims were in essence claims of a "civil rights violation" and, accordingly, could only be brought before the Commission. Geise, 159 Ill.2d at 518, 203 Ill. Dec. 454, 639 N.E.2d 1273. The rule from Geise is not that the Act precludes the circuit court from exercising jurisdiction over all tort claims related to sexual harassment. Rather, whether the circuit court may exercise jurisdiction over a tort claim depends upon whether the tort claim is inextricably linked to a civil rights violation such that there is no independent basis for the action apart from the Act itself.
The issue in this case then is whether the plaintiff's claims of assault, battery and false imprisonment are inextricably linked to her claim of sexual harassment. Clearly under the standard of Geise they are not. The sexual harassment aspect of this case is merely incidental to what are otherwise ordinary common law tort claims. The plaintiff here has alleged facts sufficient to establish the elements of assault, battery and false imprisonment. These are long-recognized tort actions which exist wholly separate and apart from a cause of action for sexual harassment under the Act. To the extent that the plaintiff has alleged the elements of each of these torts without reference to legal duties created by the Act, she has established a basis for imposing liability on the defendants independent of the Act. Therefore, the plaintiff's tort claims are not inextricably linked to a civil rights violation and the circuit court may exercise jurisdiction over these tort claims.[2]
*24 Our holding here, as in Geise, rests squarely on the language of the Act and the policy underlying it. Common law rights and remedies are in full force in this state unless repealed by the legislature or modified by the decision of our courts. 5 ILCS 50/1 (West 1994); People v. Gersch, 135 Ill. 2d 384, 395-97, 142 Ill. Dec. 767, 553 N.E.2d 281 (1990). A legislative intent to abrogate the common law must be clearly and plainly expressed, and such an intent will not be presumed from ambiguous or doubtful language. Barthel v. Illinois Central Gulf R.R. Co., 74 Ill. 2d 213, 220-22, 23 Ill. Dec. 529, 384 N.E.2d 323 (1978). The provision of the Act at issue here-which by its terms provides an exclusive remedy for "civil rights violations"-makes no mention of common law actions. A legislative intent to abolish all common law torts factually related to sexual harassment is not apparent from a plain reading of the statute.
An action to redress a civil rights violation has a purpose distinct from a common law tort action. A civil rights action under the Act is designed, in part, to eradicate sexual harassment in the workplace. 775 ILCS 5/1-102(B) (West 1994). To achieve this goal, the legislature saw fit to create a Commission vested with exclusive jurisdiction over sexual harassment claims amounting to civil rights violations. This grant of exclusive jurisdiction was intended to promote the efficient and uniform processing of state civil rights claims-not common law tort claims. Assault, battery and false imprisonment existed long before the legislature became interested in sexual harassment and are intended to redress violations of bodily integrity and personal liberty. See 3 W. Blackstone, Commentaries *119-20, 127-28. The adjudication of tort claims has traditionally been within the province of our courts, and we can find nothing in the language of the Act, or the policy underlying it, which indicates that the legislature intended to preclude the circuit court from exercising jurisdiction over all tort claims related to incidents of sexual harassment.
Ill
We conclude that a common law tort claim is not inextricably linked with a civil rights violation where a plaintiff can establish the necessary elements of the tort independent of any legal duties created by the Illinois Human Rights Act. In such a case, the plaintiff has established a basis for imposing liability on the defendant independent of any statutory cause of action under the Act, and therefore the circuit court does have jurisdiction to adjudicate the plaintiff's common law tort claim.
The judgments of the circuit and appellate courts are reversed and the cause is remanded to the circuit court for further proceedings.
Judgments reversed; cause remanded.
NOTES
[1]  In view of our holding, we need not reach the various constitutional issues raised in the amicus briefs filed on behalf of the plaintiff.
[2]  We acknowledge the general policy preference in favor of consolidating litigation. The legislature, however, must have been aware of the potential for duplicative litigation that it created when it devised the Commission. Nevertheless, we observe that a plaintiff has but one satisfaction for an injury, regardless of the number of legal theories he or she may advance. Dial v. City of O'Fallon, 81 Ill. 2d 548, 558, 44 Ill. Dec. 248, 411 N.E.2d 217 (1980).

=== CASE 2230033 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:34.64094+00 ===

687 N.E.2d 350 (1997)
Charles COOPER, Appellant (Defendant),
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee (Plaintiff).
No. 84S00-9610-CR-648.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
November 25, 1997.
*352 Susan K. Carpenter, Public Defender, Lorraine L. Rodts, Deputy Public Defender, Indianapolis, for Appellant.
Jeffrey A. Modisett, Attorney General, Carol A. Nemeth, Deputy Attorney General, Indianapolis, for Appellee.
*351 SHEPARD, Chief Justice.
Charles Cooper was charged with one count of Murder, Ind.Code Ann. § 35-42-1-1(1) (West Supp.1997). The jury found Cooper guilty of Murder, and the trial judge sentenced him to a term of sixty years. Cooper appeals his conviction and sentence. We affirm.
Facts
On the night of April 20, 1995, Cooper, along with James McBride, Sean Dixon, Mike D'Angelo and Lance Debouse, went to a party at a hotel in Terre Haute. Afterwards, they drove around in McBride's mother's car. They stopped at Cooper's residence, where he showed them a revolver that belonged to his brother. When the group returned to the car, Cooper brought the revolver.
As they drove around further, the five men discussed gangs and their respective affiliations. They also talked about doing a "drive-by" directed at a member of a rival gang, meaning they would shoot at that person's house from the car.
Some time during the night, the group stopped at a grocery store, where Cooper purchased cigarettes and a potato. There had been talk among the group about a movie in which a gang member placed a potato on the end of a gun to silence a shot.
Cynthia City finished her shift at the Great Dane trailer plant in Brazil at 1:30 on the morning of April 21, 1995. While driving home, her car broke down. She began walking home. The group saw City along the side of the road, and stopped to give her a ride. She got into the front seat of the car between Cooper and McBride. McBride stopped the car and all five men got out to urinate. City stayed in the car. Cooper returned to the passenger side of the car. With the potato on the end of the gun, he put the gun to City's head and shot her.
Appellant pulled City's body from the car and dragged it into the brush. He removed a wallet from her pocket that contained more than $500.00. He divided the money among the group. The five men returned to Cooper's residence, where he burned the wallet. *353 Later that day, they all went shopping and bought matching outfits and shoes with the money taken from City's wallet. Cooper pawned the murder weapon to a neighbor.
Issues
Cooper presents the following issues on appeal: (1) whether five alleged errors made by counsel at trial deprived him of his Sixth Amendment right to effective assistance of counsel; and (2) whether the trial court properly imposed the maximum sentence for murder.
I. Effective Assistance of Trial Counsel
We evaluate claims concerning denial of the Sixth Amendment right to effective assistance of counsel using the two-part test articulated in Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 104 S.Ct. 2052, 80 L.Ed.2d 674 (1984). Yerden v. State, 682 N.E.2d 1283, 1286 (Ind.1997). To prevail, a convict must show that his attorney's performance fell below an objective standard of reasonableness, see Strickland, 466 U.S. at 687-91, 104 S.Ct. at 2064-66, and that the deficiencies in the attorney's performance were prejudicial to the defense. See id. at 691-96, 104 S.Ct. at 2066-69. Prejudice exists when the conviction or sentence resulted from a breakdown in the adversarial process that rendered the result of the proceeding fundamentally unfair or unreliable. Lockhart v. Fretwell, 506 U.S. 364, 372, 113 S.Ct. 838, 844, 122 L.Ed.2d 180 (1993).
Cooper asserts trial counsel was ineffective in five separate respects: (1) by failing to object to the admission of evidence of his character, including evidence of his gang affiliation and prior uncharged crimes, (2) by failing to request a limiting instruction related to evidence of his drug use after the crime, (3) by failing to object to victim character evidence, (4) by eliciting evidence of Cooper's prior crimes from his own witness, and (5) by eliciting evidence that Cooper was a high school drop out and recipient of social security disability benefits.
Cooper contends the cumulative effect of the alleged errors, considered with additional prejudice allegedly resulting from an incident where the jury viewed him in restraints,[1] rendered the result of the proceeding fundamentally unfair or unreliable. See Smith v. State, 547 N.E.2d 817, 819-20 (Ind.1989).
We need not determine whether counsel's performance was deficient before examining the prejudice suffered as a result of the alleged deficiencies. See Strickland, 466 U.S. at 697, 104 S.Ct. at 2069. Accordingly, we proceed to evaluate whether the alleged trial errors rendered the result of appellant's trial fundamentally unfair or unreliable. When making this evaluation, we consider the totality of the evidence, taking due account of the effect of the alleged errors. Id. at 695-96, 104 S.Ct. at 2068-69.
A review of the record as a whole shows that the witnesses present at the scene testified with general consistency that Cooper brought the gun into the car, Cooper bought the potato to use as a silencer, Cooper was standing closest to the car, and had the gun in his hand immediately after the shot was heard. He dragged the body from the car and hid it in the brush, took control over the proceeds of the crime and divided them among the group, and burned the victim's wallet.
Sean Dixon testified he saw Cooper place the potato on the end of the gun and shoot the victim from the passenger side of the car. (R. at 884-85).
Lance Debouse testified Cooper told him he shot the victim because he had the urge to do it, (R. at 726), and to prove himself to the group. (R. at 725).
A Vigo County Deputy Sheriff testified that he overheard Cooper brag to other county jail inmates that he shot a woman and that his friends "ratted him out." (R. at 1014).
*354 In light of this overwhelming evidence of guilt, we cannot say that counsel's alleged failings, even when viewed cumulatively, rendered the result of the trial fundamentally unfair or unreliable. Thus, Cooper's claim that he was denied effective assistance of counsel must fail.
II. Sentencing
Cooper argues the trial court's sentencing statement does not support imposition of the maximum sentence for murder. He also asks the court to review and revise the sentence.[2]
A. Sentencing Statement. When a trial court enhances a presumptive sentence, it must state its reasons for doing so. Morgan v. State, 675 N.E.2d 1067, 1073 (Ind.1996). The court must identify all significant aggravating and mitigating factors, state why each is considered aggravating or mitigating, and articulate the balancing process by which the court determined that the aggravating factors outweighed the mitigating factors. Id. "These requirements serve the dual purpose of guarding against arbitrary sentences and providing an adequate basis for appellate review." Id. at 1074.
Cooper first claims the sentencing statement is not adequate to permit appellate review because the trial court failed to identify the aggravating circumstances and explain why those circumstances supported enhancing the sentence to the maximum term of years.
The trial court found Cooper's prior criminal record, which included a conviction for battery and for carrying a handgun without a license, to be an aggravating factor.
And, although not explicitly identified as such, it is apparent from the sentencing statement that the court considered the nature and circumstances of the crime to be an aggravating factor. The trial court stated that the crime was gang-related, that Cooper had been driving around with a gun looking for a target to shoot, that the victim was an innocent target of opportunity, and that Cooper looted the victim's body and ceremonially burned her wallet. The particular manner in which a crime is committed may serve as an aggravating factor.
It is also evident from the sentencing statement that the trial court considered Cooper's character to be an aggravating factor. The court stated that Cooper had a dangerous mind set that confuses fear and respect, that he believes violence and raw force command respect. (R. at 196). A defendant's character is a required consideration in the sentencing determination, Ind. Code § 35-38-1-7.1(a)(3)(B) (West Supp. 1997), and may be considered an aggravating factor. See Wray v. State, 547 N.E.2d 1062, 1068 (Ind.1989).
Thus, the trial court identified significant aggravating factors on the record that justify imposition of an enhanced sentence.
Appellant next argues that the sentencing statement is inadequate because it does not show that the trial court undertook to balance any mitigating factors against the aggravating factors. Specifically, he claims the trial court should have found his young age at the time of the crime (twenty-two years), his criminal record (containing only misdemeanor offenses), and the nature and circumstances of the crime (the victim died instantly without prolonged suffering or infliction of pain) to be mitigating factors.
A description of significant mitigating circumstances must be set forth on the record if the trial court reduces the presumptive sentence or uses mitigating circumstances to offset aggravating circumstances. Widener v. State, 659 N.E.2d 529, 533 (Ind.1995). Otherwise, while a trial court *355 may not ignore facts in the record that would mitigate an offense, id. at 534, it need not explain why it found a particular circumstance insufficiently mitigating, id. at 533. A finding of mitigating circumstances is within the trial court's discretion. Id.
It is clear from the sentencing statement that the trial court considered Cooper's criminal record and the nature and circumstances of the crime to be aggravating, not mitigating factors. As discussed above, we find these to be appropriate aggravating factors. And, the trial court apparently did not find Cooper's age to be sufficiently mitigating to offset these aggravating factors. The trial court was not required to state on the record the reasons why it found this factor to be insufficiently mitigating. Id.
Cooper next argues the sentence is improper because the trial court considered facts that are not supported by the record. The trial court stated the "crime was gang-related, a crime about going out and stealing a gun which the Defendant admitted taking, and driving about hunting someone to shoot by doing a drive-by." (R. at 196). Appellant says there was no evidence to support the conclusion that the gun was stolen. He further contends the trial court wrongly implied that the group acted as a gang in obtaining the gun and in carrying out the murder.
The record shows the group went to Cooper's residence where he obtained a gun belonging to his brother, that he took the gun with him that night, and that the brother did not discover the gun was missing until alerted by police. It is fairly inferred from these facts that Cooper took the gun without first getting his brother's permission.
The trial court also specifically attributed the taking of the gun to Cooper, not the group. (R. at 196). This is supported by the record.
Further, the phrase "gang-related" refers to the nature and circumstances of the crime and reflects the fact that before the shooting took place, members of the group expressed a desire to direct a drive-by shooting at the house of a rival gang member. Thus, use of the phrase "gang-related" is supported by the record and does not compel the allegedly unsupported inference that the entire gang is responsible for shooting Cynthia City.
B. Request to Revise. Finally, appellant asks us to exercise our constitutional power to review and revise his sentence. Ind. Const. art. VII, § 4. We will not revise a sentence authorized by statute unless it is manifestly unreasonable in light of the nature of the offense and the character of the offender. Ind. Appellate Rule 17(B); Fointno v. State, 487 N.E.2d 140 (Ind.1986). Sentencing decisions are otherwise left to the sound discretion of the trial court. Sims v. State, 585 N.E.2d 271 (Ind.1992).
Appellant argues the sentence is excessive because the others who were at the scene of the crime and who allegedly share some responsibility for City's death have gone uncharged and unpunished. However, the fact that alleged accomplices remain uncharged does not render the imposition of an enhanced sentence manifestly unreasonable. Cf. Johnson v. State, 687 N.E.2d 345 (Ind. 1997) (imposition of two consecutive, enhanced sentences for murder not manifestly unreasonable despite fact that an alleged accomplice had not been charged).
Accordingly, we do not find the sentence to be manifestly unreasonable, and we decline to revise it.
Conclusion
We affirm the trial court.
DICKSON, SULLIVAN, SELBY and BOEHM, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  The record contains no actual evidence that the jury saw Cooper's leg chain, only a request by counsel that his client be moved to and from the jail outside the jury's presence so they would not see it. Cooper is not entitled to reversal on this ground absent a showing of actual harm. Underwood v. State, 535 N.E.2d 507 (Ind.1989). Reasonable jurors can expect to see a defendant in restraints while in transit. Id.
[2]  On April 21, 1995, when Cooper committed the crime, there were two murder sentencing statutes in effect. Both contained a maximum sentence for murder of sixty years, but the presumptive sentences for murder were different. We described the details of this situation in Smith v. State, 675 N.E.2d 693 (Ind.1996), and concluded that to properly sentence under these circumstances, the trial court should have used the lesser presumptive sentence of forty years. Although not clear from the sentencing statement, the trial court here may have applied the greater presumptive sentence of fifty years. (R. at 240-41). Cooper does not raise this issue on appeal, and we conclude it to be immaterial because the trial court clearly intended to impose the maximum sentence. (R. at 196). Birdsong v. State, 685 N.E.2d 42, 47 n. 2 (Ind.1997).

=== CASE 2230035 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:34.73193+00 ===

687 N.E.2d 32 (1997)
177 Ill.2d 550
227 Ill.Dec. 109
The PEOPLE of the State of Illinois, Appellant,
v.
Genealyn LOVE, Appellee.
No. 82104.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
October 17, 1997.
*33 Domenica A. Osterberger, State's Attys. Appellate Prosecutor, Ottawa, Jim Ryan, Atty. Gen., Criminal Appeals Div., Chicago, State's Atty. Kankakee County, Kankakee, Darryl B. Simko, Asst. Atty. Gen., Chicago, for the People.
State Appellate Defender, Ronald Packowitz, Asst. Appellate Defender, Ottawa, for Genealyn Love.
Justice BILANDIC delivered the opinion of the court:
Section 113-3.1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963 allows circuit courts to order defendants who receive the services of appointed counsel to pay reimbursement for those services. 725 ILCS 5/113-3.1 (West 1994). This appeal concerns the appropriate procedures to be followed in ordering reimbursement under section 113-3.1.
FACTS
Defendant, Genealyn Love, was charged by indictment in the circuit court of Kankakee County with one count of aggravated battery with a firearm and one count of unlawful possession of a weapon by a felon. At his initial court appearance on January 19, 1995, the trial court questioned defendant about his financial resources. Defendant stated that he was unemployed and had no assets other than a 1983 Ford Escort automobile. The trial court therefore appointed the Kankakee County public defender to represent defendant. The trial court also set bail for defendant's release at $25,000. Defendant filed a motion for reduction of bail or release on a recognizance bond. At a bearing on the motion, defendant testified that he was 23 years old, living with his grandfather, and was unable to acquire any money to post a bail bond. The trial court denied defendant's motion and defendant remained in custody.
On February 6, 1995, a bail bond in the amount of $2,500 was posted to secure defendant's release from custody. The bond indicated that the money was posted by Mary Terrell. The bond contained a notice, signed by Terrell, indicating that if defendant failed to comply with the conditions of the bail bond, the money posted would be forfeited, and that even if defendant complied with the bond, the money posted may be used to pay fines, costs or restitution.
On March 7, 1995, Mary Terrell, through her attorney, filed a motion to exonerate bond in which she asked that the bond money she had posted be returned to her. Counsel representing Terrell was present in court on that date to argue the motion. Terrell's counsel stated that Terrell had "changed her mind" about posting the bond money. The trial court denied the motion.
After a bench trial, defendant was found guilty of unlawful possession of a weapon by a felon. The trial court acquitted defendant of aggravated battery with a firearm, but found him guilty of the lesser included offense of reckless conduct.
A presentence investigation of defendant was conducted. That investigation revealed that defendant was currently unemployed and that he had worked for two months at a factory in 1994 through a temporary service. As to defendant's "financial status," the report indicated that defendant's grandparents "provide" for him and that defendant owed money for medical bills. After a brief sentencing hearing, the trial court sentenced defendant to a five-year prison term for the weapons conviction and a one-year term for the reckless conduct conviction. At the same time, the court sua sponte ordered defendant to pay $1,000 for the services of the public defender, to be withheld from the bail bond posted on defendant's behalf. The court did not hold a hearing on the issue of reimbursement.
Defendant appealed his sentences and the reimbursement order to the appellate court. The appellate court affirmed the sentence for unlawful possession of a weapon by a felon and reduced the sentence for reckless conduct from one year to 364 days. The appellate court also determined that the reimbursement order was improperly entered because the trial court did not hold a hearing regarding defendant's ability to pay such reimbursement, as mandated by statute. The appellate court therefore vacated the reimbursement order and remanded to the trial court for a hearing. No. 3-95-0937 (unpublished *34 order under Supreme Court Rule 23). We granted the State's petition for leave to appeal. 155 Ill.2d R. 315. We now affirm the appellate court.
ANALYSIS
In keeping with well-settled constitutional mandates, our Code of Criminal Procedure requires that criminal defendants who cannot afford a lawyer be provided with appointed counsel. See Gideon v. Wainwright, 372 U.S. 335, 83 S.Ct. 792, 9 L.Ed.2d 799 (1963); People v. Cook, 81 Ill.2d 176, 179, 40 Ill.Dec. 825, 407 N.E.2d 56 (1980). Under section 113-3 of the Code, if the trial court determines that a defendant is indigent and desires counsel, an attorney, generally the public defender, must be appointed to represent the defendant. 725 ILCS 5/113-3(b) (West 1994). The Code also provides a mechanism under which a defendant who receives the services of appointed counsel may be required to reimburse the county or state for such services. Section 113-3.1 provides, in pertinent part, as follows:
"(a) Whenever under either Section 113-3 of this Code or Rule 607 of the Illinois Supreme Court the court appoints counsel to represent a defendant, the court may order the defendant to pay to the Clerk of the Circuit Court a reasonable sum to reimburse either the county or the State for such representation. In a hearing to determine the amount of the payment, the court shall consider the affidavit prepared by the defendant under Section 113-3 of this Code and any other information pertaining to the defendant's financial circumstances which may be submitted by the parties. Such hearing shall be conducted on the court's own motion or on motion of the State's Attorney at any time after the appointment of counsel but no later than 90 days after the entry of a final order disposing of the case at the trial level.
* * * * * *
(c) The method of any payment required under this Section shall be as specified by the Court. The court may order that payments be made on a monthly basis during the term of representation; however, the sum deposited as money bond shall not be used to satisfy this court order. Any sum deposited as money bond with the Clerk of the Circuit Court under Section 110-7 of this Code may be used in the court's discretion in whole or in part to comply with any payment order entered in accordance with paragraph (a) of this Section. The court may give special consideration to the interests of relatives or other third parties who may have posted a money bond on the behalf of the defendant to secure his release. At any time prior to full payment of any payment order the court on its own motion or the motion of any party may reduce, increase, or suspend the ordered payment, or modify the method of payment, as the interest of fairness may require. No increase, suspension, or reduction may be ordered without a hearing and notice to all parties." 725 ILCS 5/113-3.1(a), (c) (West 1994).
This appeal focuses on the procedure a trial court must follow in ordering a defendant to pay reimbursement for the services of appointed counsel. Defendant contends that section 113-3.1 requires that, prior to ordering reimbursement, the trial court must conduct a hearing into whether the defendant has the ability to pay such reimbursement. The State argues that section 113-3.1 does not require such a hearing, but that it is solely within the trial court's discretion whether to conduct a hearing into the defendant's ability to pay prior to ordering reimbursement. Alternatively, the State asserts that the posting of a cash bail bond is conclusive evidence of the defendant's ability to pay reimbursement, which obviates the need for a hearing under section 113-3.1. Finally, the State argues that defendant waived any errors in the reimbursement order by failing to object to the order in the trial court.
I
We first address the State's contention that section 113-3.1 does not require the trial court to hold a hearing into the defendant's ability to pay as a precondition to ordering reimbursement of appointed counsel's fees. According to the State, section 113-3.1 empowers trial judges to order reimbursement *35 "at their pleasure," without holding a hearing into the defendant's financial resources. The State asserts that section 113-3.1 merely allows the trial court, in its discretion, to conduct a hearing when the court deems it necessary to arrive at an appropriate reimbursement amount. We disagree. The State's argument ignores both the language of section 113-3.1 and prior precedent of this court.
The language of section 113-3.1(a) clearly requires the trial court to conduct a hearing into the defendant's financial resources as a precondition to ordering reimbursement. Section 113-3.1(a) begins by granting the trial court the authority to order a defendant to pay reimbursement. Subsection (a) then delineates the procedure the court must follow in order to do so:
"In a hearing to determine the amount of the payment, the court shall consider the affidavit prepared by the defendant under Section 113-3 of this Code and any other information pertaining to the defendant's financial circumstances which may be submitted by the parties. Such hearing shall be conducted on the court's own motion or on motion of the State's Attorney at any time after the appointment of counsel but no later than 90 days after the entry of a final order disposing of the case at the trial level." 725 ILCS 5/113-3.1(a) (West 1994).
Thus, section 113-3.1(a) plainly requires that the trial court conduct, within the specified time period, a hearing into the defendant's financial resources to determine his ability to pay reimbursement. The State nonetheless insists that section 113-3.1(a) mandates only that, if the trial court holds a hearing, then the court must consider the defendant's financial circumstances. According to the State, whether to hold a hearing in the first instance is solely up to the discretion of the trial court. The State's interpretation is not logical. Under this interpretation, the statute compels the trial court to consider specific factors at a hearing, but does not compel that the hearing be conducted in the first place. According to the State, a trial court may avoid the legislature's express mandate to consider the defendant's financial circumstances by simply dispensing with a hearing. We are under a duty to interpret statutes so as to avoid absurd consequences. People v. Bole, 155 Ill.2d 188, 195, 184 Ill.Dec. 423, 613 N.E.2d 740 (1993). Moreover, we find nothing in the language of section 113-3.1 which supports the State's contention that a hearing into the defendant's financial circumstances is merely optional.
Any doubt that such a hearing is mandated by section 113-3.1 is quickly dispelled when the history of the reimbursement statute is reviewed. Prior to 1982, statutory authority for the recovery of appointed counsel fees from indigent defendants was contained in section 110-7(g) of the Code. Section 110-7(g) provided as follows:
"Whenever a defendant who has been admitted to bail utilizes the services of a public defender or other appointed counsel, the amount deposited may be used to reimburse the county funding the legal services." Ill.Rev.Stat.1979, ch. 38, par. 110-7(g).
This predecessor version did not provide for a hearing or for any consideration of the defendant's ability to pay reimbursement. It was this omission which, in part, led this court to hold section 110-7(g) unconstitutional in People v. Cook, 81 Ill.2d 176, 40 Ill.Dec. 825, 407 N.E.2d 56 (1980). In Cook, this court found section 110-7(g) unconstitutional on two grounds. One ground was that the statute violated the due process rights of indigent defendants because it failed to provide for inquiry into the defendant's ability to pay reimbursement. Cook, 81 Ill.2d at 185, 40 Ill.Dec. 825, 407 N.E.2d 56. In reaching its holding, the Cook court examined the United States Supreme Court decision in Fuller v. Oregon, 417 U.S. 40, 94 S.Ct. 2116, 40 L.Ed.2d 642 (1974).
In Fuller, the Supreme Court considered the constitutionality of an Oregon statute which, inter alia, imposed an obligation on defendants who received appointed counsel to reimburse the State for the costs of that representation. The Oregon statute specifically provided that " `[t]he court shall not sentence a defendant to pay costs unless the defendant is or will be able to pay them,'" and imposed a duty on the trial court to consider the defendant's financial resources *36 and the nature of the burden that payment will impose on the defendant. Fuller, 417 U.S. at 43 n. 5, 94 S.Ct. at 2120 n. 5, 40 L.Ed.2d at 649 n. 5, quoting Or.Rev.Stat. § 161.665. The defendant in Fuller argued that the statute infringed upon the constitutional right to appointed counsel because a defendant's knowledge that he may be obligated to repay the costs of representation might impel him to decline appointed counsel. The Supreme Court rejected this challenge to the Oregon statute, finding that the statute "is carefully designed to insure that only those who actually become capable of repaying the State will ever be obligated to do so. Those who remain indigent or for whom repayment would work `manifest hardship' are forever exempt from any obligation to repay." Fuller, 417 U.S. at 53, 94 S.Ct. at 2124, 40 L.Ed.2d at 654.
In addition to Fuller, the Cook court also looked at the case law of other states. The court observed that, "[o]ther courts, in considering reimbursement statutes of this kind, have similarly focused upon the presence or absence of procedural safeguards requiring judicial examination into an indigent defendant's present or future ability to reimburse as the hinge on which the question of the statute's constitutionality turns." Cook, 81 Ill.2d at 184, 40 Ill.Dec. 825, 407 N.E.2d 56. The Cook court agreed that the constitutionality of a reimbursement statute depended upon its providing for inquiry into the defendant's ability to pay reimbursement. The 1978 statute's failure to provide for such an inquiry therefore rendered the statute unconstitutional. The court reasoned that "[a] summary decision which orders reimbursement without affording a hearing with opportunity to present evidence and be heard acts to violate an indigent defendant's right to procedural due process." Cook, 81 Ill.2d at 186, 40 Ill.Dec. 825, 407 N.E.2d 56. The court further noted that reimbursement ordered without this procedural safeguard could restrain a defendant from exercising his right to the assistance of counsel because "if he knows that the money or other property posted for his bail will be subject to seizure to pay for legal services, regardless of his inability to pay he may choose not to exercise this constitutionally assured right." Cook, 81 Ill.2d at 186, 40 Ill.Dec. 825, 407 N.E.2d 56.
This court in Cook thus established that due process requires a hearing into a defendant's ability to pay reimbursement as a precondition to ordering such reimbursement. The Illinois legislature responded to Cook in 1982 by enacting section 113-3.1, the provision at issue in this case. Section 113-3.1 was clearly intended to correct the due process violation identified in Cook by requiring that, prior to ordering reimbursement, the trial court conduct a hearing which considers the defendant's financial ability to pay reimbursement. The legislative intent to eliminate the due process violation identified in Cook is demonstrated by the following comments of one of the House sponsors of the new statute:
"Now, what we're doing is trying to rectify a problem. Two years ago I passed legislation which went up to the Supreme Court and the Supreme Court struck it down on the basis that we did not set forth proper procedures for a hearing as to when we can assess an attorneys fee against a defendant. * * * This Bill is an attempt to rectify the problems in my Bill that I had two years ago." 82d Ill. Gen. Assem., House Proceedings, May 6, 1981, at 103-04 (statements of Representative Stearney).
Accordingly, the history of the reimbursement statute leaves no doubt that, in enacting section 113-3.1, the legislature intended to require, not merely allow, the trial court to conduct a hearing into the defendant's financial circumstances prior to ordering reimbursement.
The State does not direct us to any decision interpreting section 113-3.1 in the manner it urges here. To the contrary, the decisions of our appellate court have consistently held that section 113-3.1 requires a hearing into the defendant's financial circumstances prior to ordering the defendant to pay reimbursement of public defender fees. See, e.g., People v. Webb, 276 Ill.App.3d 570, 574, 213 Ill.Dec. 103, 658 N.E.2d 852 (1995) (reimbursement statute requires a hearing into the defendant's financial circumstances before the court may order reimbursement); *37 People v. Henderson, 232 Ill.App.3d 230, 239, 173 Ill.Dec. 213, 596 N.E.2d 837 (1992) (same); People v. Reynolds, 152 Ill.App.3d 216, 220, 105 Ill.Dec. 294, 504 N.E.2d 163 (1987) (section 113-3.1 satisfies due process because it requires a hearing into the defendant's financial circumstances as a precondition to ordering reimbursement). The State's contention that section 113-3.1 does not mandate a hearing into the defendant's financial circumstances is rejected.
II
The State also contends that, even if section 113-3.1 generally requires a hearing into the defendant's ability to pay, no such hearing was required in this case because the cash bail bond posted on defendant's behalf conclusively established defendant's ability to pay reimbursement, at least up to the amount of the bond. The State relies on several decisions of the Fourth District of our appellate court which held that a cash bond posted to secure a defendant's release is "definitive evidence" of his ability to pay a reimbursement order, obviating the need for any hearing into the defendant's ability to pay. People v. Hanna, 288 Ill.App.3d 109, 223 Ill.Dec. 361, 679 N.E.2d 812 (1997); People v. Nunez, 197 Ill.App.3d 332, 143 Ill.Dec. 137, 553 N.E.2d 1123 (1990); People v. Baker, 195 Ill.App.3d 785, 142 Ill.Dec. 71, 552 N.E.2d 421 (1990). As the State acknowledges, other appellate decisions have rejected the reasoning of the Fourth District cases and held that a hearing under section 113-3.1 is required even where a cash bail bond has been posted on the defendant's behalf. See People v. Webb, 276 Ill.App.3d 570, 574-75, 213 Ill.Dec. 103, 658 N.E.2d 852 (1995); People v. Henderson, 232 Ill.App.3d 230, 238-39, 173 Ill.Dec. 213, 596 N.E.2d 837 (1992).
We agree with defendant that the existence of a bail bond does not allow the trial court to dispense with the hearing required by section 113-3.1(a). This conclusion is mandated by this court's decision in Cook, 81 Ill.2d 176, 40 Ill.Dec. 825, 407 N.E.2d 56. See Webb, 276 Ill.App.3d at 574, 213 Ill.Dec. 103, 658 N.E.2d 852. The statute invalidated in Cook had provided that reimbursement for appointed counsel services could be obtained only from indigent defendants who had posted bail. See Ill.Rev.Stat.1979, ch. 38, par. 110-7(g). One ground upon which this court invalidated the statute was that, in differentiating between indigent defendants who post bail and those who do not, the statute ran afoul of the equal protection guarantee. In so holding, the Cook court specifically rejected the State's argument that a rational basis for the differentiation existed because the ability to post bail conclusively establishes the defendant's financial ability to pay for the services of appointed counsel. The court reasoned that:
"This court has never adopted any presumption (which would be, in this case, an irrebuttable one) that the posting of bail, without more, was a sufficient indicium of ability to pay wholly or partially for legal counsel. Bail may be posted with borrowed funds or by relatives or friends. * * *
* * * * * *
* * * There is no rational relationship between the legislative purpose of reimbursement for the expense of appointed counsel and a statute which imposes an obligation only on one segment of this class of indigent defendants based upon the improper and seemingly conclusive presumption that the posting of bail demonstrates an ability to pay for those legal services." (Emphasis added.) Cook, 81 Ill.2d at 181-83, 40 Ill.Dec. 825, 407 N.E.2d 56.
The State's argument here is premised upon the precise presumption which this court rejected in Cook. The State insists that the posting of a cash bond on a defendant's behalf is "conclusive evidence" of the defendant's ability to pay legal fee reimbursement, obviating the need for a hearing. See Baker, 195 Ill.App.3d at 796, 142 Ill.Dec. 71, 552 N.E.2d 421. In other words, the State argues that the posting of a cash bond creates an irrebuttable presumption that the defendant has the ability to pay for legal services. Accordingly, the State's position is directly contrary to this court's decision in Cook.
We see no reason to depart from the Cook court's rejection of a conclusive presumption of ability to pay for legal services arising *38 from the posting of a bail bond. There is no basis in the language of section 113-3.1 for dispensing with a hearing into the defendant's financial circumstances simply because a cash bail bond has been posted. Section 113-3.1 does make reference to the possibility that money deposited as a bail bond may be available to satisfy an order of reimbursement. See 725 ILCS 5/113-3.1(c) (West 1994). The statute does not, however, provide that the hearing mandated by subsection (a) may be dispensed with where that is the case. Rather, the statute contemplates that, should the trial court determine that reimbursement is appropriate, the court may order that the reimbursement amount be paid out of the bond. 725 ILCS 5/113-3.1(c) (West 1994). Accordingly, the existence of a bail bond does not affect the need for a hearing under subsection (a), but merely provides a potential fund for satisfaction of a reimbursement order.
Further, section 113-3.1 dictates that, when considering whether to order that reimbursement be withheld from a bail bond, the trial court should consider whether the bond money was posted by a third party. Section 113-3.1(c) provides that "[t]he court may give special consideration to the interests of relatives or other third parties who may have posted a money bond on the behalf of the defendant to secure his release." 725 ILCS 5/113-3.1(c) (West 1994). The trial court will have the opportunity to consider the interests of such third parties, however, only if the court conducts a hearing on the reimbursement issue.
Moreover, we continue to find persuasive the reasoning espoused in Cook for rejecting a conclusive presumption of ability to pay. As Cook recognized, bail money may be borrowed or may be posted by relatives or friends. Cook, 81 Ill.2d at 181, 40 Ill.Dec. 825, 407 N.E.2d 56. As such, the fact that bail money is posted may have no bearing on whether the defendant has the ability to pay reimbursement for the services of appointed counsel. The focus of the hearing required by section 113-3.1(a) must be on the defendant's ability to pay because reimbursement is properly ordered only where the court finds that the defendant has a reasonably foreseeable ability to pay such reimbursement. See Webb, 276 Ill.App.3d at 575, 213 Ill.Dec. 103, 658 N.E.2d 852; Henderson, 232 Ill.App.3d at 239, 173 Ill.Dec. 213, 596 N.E.2d 837; People v. Phillips, 150 Ill.App.3d 531, 534, 103 Ill.Dec. 933, 502 N.E.2d 80 (1986). The circumstances of this case amply illustrate the invalidity of the State's presumption. Here, the record reveals that a third party, Mary Terrell, posted the $2,500 bond to secure defendant's release on bail. In fact, counsel for Terrell appeared before the court prior to trial and attempted to secure the return of that money to Terrell. A "presumption" of ability to pay on the part of the defendant based upon the mere filing of a cash bail bond thus does not conform to the reality of this case. Additionally, where, as here, a bail bond has been posted by a third party, the fairness of requiring a hearing prior to ordering reimbursement from that bond is even more apparent.
Accordingly, we hold that section 113-3.1 requires that the trial court conduct a hearing into a defendant's financial circumstances and find an ability to pay before it may order the defendant to pay reimbursement for appointed counsel. Such a hearing is required even where a cash bail bond has been posted on the defendant's behalf. The hearing must focus on the foreseeable ability of the defendant to pay reimbursement as well as the costs of the representation provided. See 725 ILCS 5/113-3.1(a) (West 1994); Webb, 276 Ill.App.3d at 574-75, 213 Ill.Dec. 103, 658 N.E.2d 852; Henderson, 232 Ill.App.3d at 239, 173 Ill.Dec. 213, 596 N.E.2d 837; People v. Terry, 170 Ill.App.3d 484, 488-89, 120 Ill.Dec. 655, 524 N.E.2d 685 (1988). Further, if a bail bond has been posted, the court should consider whether a third party provided the money for that bond. See 725 ILCS 5/113-3.1(c) (West 1994); Webb, 276 Ill.App.3d at 573, 213 Ill.Dec. 103, 658 N.E.2d 852; People v. Reynolds, 152 Ill.App.3d 216, 220, 105 Ill.Dec. 294, 504 N.E.2d 163 (1987). The trial court may, in its discretion, decide to give special consideration to the interests of such third party. Henderson, 232 Ill. App.3d at 239, 173 Ill.Dec. 213, 596 N.E.2d 837; People v. Gutierrez, 156 Ill.App.3d 555, 559, 109 Ill.Dec. 126, 509 N.E.2d 787 (1987). To the extent the decisions in People v. Hanna, *39 288 Ill.App.3d 109, 223 Ill.Dec. 361, 679 N.E.2d 812 (1997), People v. Nunez, 197 Ill. App.3d 332, 143 Ill.Dec. 137, 553 N.E.2d 1123 (1990), and People v. Baker, 195 Ill.App.3d 785, 142 Ill.Dec. 71, 552 N.E.2d 421 (1990), are inconsistent with this opinion, they are hereby overruled.
III
Finally, the State contends that defendant waived any error in the reimbursement order by failing to object to the order in the trial court. Defendant responds that the trial court's error in failing to conform to section 113-3.1 should be considered plain error. In the alternative, defendant contends that his trial counsel's failure to object constituted ineffective assistance of counsel.
We find that application of the waiver rule is inappropriate under the circumstances of this case. Where, as here, the trial court wholly ignored the statutory procedures mandated for a reimbursement order under section 113-3.1, and instead ordered reimbursement sua sponte without any warning to the defendant, fairness dictates that waiver should not be applied. The hearing required by section 113-3.1 is a safeguard designed to insure that a reimbursement order entered under that section meets constitutional standards, as identified by this court in Cook. Here, the trial court failed to conduct any hearing or to otherwise engage in any consideration of defendant's financial circumstances and failed to allow defendant any opportunity to present evidence or otherwise contest the imposition of a reimbursement order. Rather, the record reveals that the trial court proceeded as if the imposition of a reimbursement order was a perfunctory exercise, performed as a rule in every case. As discussed at length earlier in this opinion, however, reimbursement under section 113-3.1 is not simply a mechanism to be routinely employed in every case. Constitutional principles require that reimbursement be ordered only when certain conditions are satisfied. The trial court's failure to adhere to the procedural safeguards mandated by section 113-3.1 requires vacatur of the reimbursement order, despite defendant's failure to object.
CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the judgment of the appellate court vacating the reimbursement order and remanding for a hearing pursuant to section 113-3.1.
Appellate court judgment affirmed.

=== CASE 2230038 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:34.870039+00 ===

90 N.Y.2d 950 (1997)
687 N.E.2d 1328
665 N.Y.S.2d 45
Paul Jerge et al., Respondents,
v.
Christopher Buettner et al., Defendants, and New York Central Mutual Fire Insurance Company, Appellant.
Court of Appeals of the State of New York.
Argued September 11, 1997
Decided October 16, 1997.
Roy A. Mura, Buffalo, and Carolyn M. Henry for appellant.
Flaherty & Shea, Buffalo (James P. Shea and William E. Carey of counsel), for respondents.
Concur: Chief Judge KAYE and Judges TITONE, BELLACOSA, SMITH, LEVINE and CIPARICK. Taking no part: Judge WESLEY.
Order reversed, with costs, plaintiffs' motion for summary judgment denied, cross motion of defendant New York Central *953 Mutual Fire Insurance Company for summary judgment granted and judgment granted declaring that defendant insurer has no obligation to defend or indemnify Christopher Buettner in the subject underlying action, for the reasons stated in the dissenting opinion by then-Justice Wesley at the Appellate Division (225 AD2d 294, 298-299).

=== CASE 9742151 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:07:36.415945+00 ===

OPINION
HANSON, Justice.
Appellant Christopher Jacob Earl appeals his conviction of ten counts of first-degree murder in connection with the April 28, 2003, deaths of Hollis Chromey and her children, Jerrod and Katie Zapzal-ka, in Long Prairie, Minnesota. Earl bases his appeal on four issues: (1) whether the district court erred in admitting into evidence Earl’s statement to police, taken after appellant had invoked his right to counsel; (2) whether the jury instructions misstated the state’s burden of proof on accomplice liability; (3) whether the evidence was sufficient to convict Earl of aiding and abetting first-degree murder while committing kidnapping or while committing criminal sexual conduct; and (4) whether seven of Earl’s convictions must be vacated because he may only be formally adjudicated guilty of a maximum of one count of first-degree murder for each victim. We affirm Earl’s convictions of first-*714degree murder while committing kidnapping of Chromey and Jerrod Zapzalka (Counts 7 and 9) and first-degree murder while committing criminal sexual conduct of Katie Zapzalka (Count 10), but vacate the other seven convictions (Counts 1 through 6 and 8).
Early on April 28, 2003, Jonathan Carpenter and Earl drove to Long Prairie from the Twin Cities with masks, gloves, electrical tape, heavy flashlights, and a BB gun that was a replica of a rifle. They planned to steal from a specific home, but were unable to. locate it. Rather than drive away empty-handed, they randomly selected the Chromey home and, shortly after 3:30 a.m., entered through a side door. They found Hollis Chromey sleeping in the living room on the couch, and her two children, 16-year-old Jerrod Zapzalka and 18-year-old Katie Zapzalka, sleeping in their bedrooms. Carpenter and Earl forced the three victims into the kitchen at gunpoint and bound their wrists and ankles with electrical tape. They then began to search the home for valuables.
Earl testified at his trial and gave the following version of events. Realizing that there was nothing valuable in the Chromey home, Earl stopped searching and began to talk with Chromey. Carpenter told Earl to stand guard by the door and kept searching for a while. When Earl returned to the kitchen, he saw that both of the women were gone. He then noticed Carpenter placing Katie on the bed in her room, and asked what was going on. At that moment, Chromey, who had managed to free herself and Jerrod, emerged from Jerrod’s bedroom and attempted to strike Earl with a chair. Earl knocked Chromey backward. Carpenter grabbed the chair and knocked Chromey to the floor, rendering her unconscious. Jerrod went after Carpenter, dislodging his mask. Carpenter hit Jerrod and knocked him out. Carpenter then stomped on Chromey’s and Jerrod’s heads. After assaulting Chromey and Jerrod, Carpenter brandished a knife in Earl’s face and told him to continue standing guard. At some point, a maul belonging to the Chromey family was used to beat Chromey’s and Jerrod’s heads.
Carpenter returned to Katie’s room and raped her. Earl claimed that he did not witness the rape, but saw Carpenter emerge from Katie’s room with a “big grin on his face.” According to Earl, Carpenter then used the knife to cut the throats of Chromey, Jerrod, and Katie.
After the killings, Carpenter and Earl discarded two blood-stained knives in the Chromey’s microwave and threw the maul onto the couch. Earl testified that they fled to burn their masks, clothing, and gloves. They next drove to Lake Park, Minnesota, where they stayed throughout the day and overnight with Bobbie Gorden, a former girlfriend of Carpenter’s, and her husband. On the morning of April 29, 2003, they followed Bobbie into town so she could fill their tank with gas. They returned to her home while it was unoccupied, taking two handguns, a shotgun, a holster, brass knuckles, handcuffs, CDs, DVDs, and jewelry. They then drove back to the Twin Cities.
On April 30, 2003, Robert Jorgenson went to the Brooklyn Park police, informing them that Earl had told him that Earl and Carpenter had killed a family up north over the weekend. Jorgenson, a security guard who frequented a convenience store where Earl worked, said that Earl told him that a burglary had gone bad, that the mother and son had fought back, and had revealed one of their masked faces, and that “we did it,” “we tied them up,” and “we” killed them with knives. Earl also told Jorgenson he had committed certain other crimes. Earl informed Jorgenson that he and Carpenter would be at Car*715penter’s father’s house for the day, and Jorgenson and Earl had discussed Jorgen-son going to the police with the information.
A high-risk warrant-execution team entered the Carpenter home in Minneapolis that afternoon and found Earl lounging in a chair and Carpenter standing in a bedroom. Both were armed. Outside the Carpenter home, police found Earl’s car, which contained physical evidence connecting Carpenter and Earl to the Long Prairie crime and to other burglaries.
Earl was interviewed at the Minneapolis Police Department. He initially invoked his right to counsel but after a later discussion with police officers and a second Miranda warning, he gave a statement, which was videotaped. In his statement, Earl admitted that he had participated in the burglary in Long Prairie and in several other burglaries in the Twin Cities area.
Earl was indicted on three counts of aiding and abetting first-degree premeditated murder, three counts of aiding and abetting first-degree murder while committing burglary, three counts of aiding and abetting first-degree murder while committing kidnapping, and one count of aiding and abetting first-degree murder while committing first-degree criminal sexual assault.
Before trial, Earl moved for the suppression of his videotaped statement, arguing that it was obtained in violation of his Miranda rights. The trial court denied the motion, finding that the Miranda warnings were adequate, that Earl voluntarily reinitiated contact after his contacts with the police had ceased, and that Earl’s waiver of his right to counsel and subsequent statement were made knowingly and voluntarily.
The state’s theory of the case at trial was that Earl actively planned and participated in the burglary that led to the Long Prairie killings, and that due to his previous association with Carpenter, he could have reasonably foreseen that death could result from the burglary. To support this theory, the state offered evidence of several burglaries Carpenter and Earl had committed, one of which involved the deaths of two people.
Earl’s former fiancée, Lisa Madison, testified that Earl and Carpenter had burglarized a home early in the morning of April 6, 2003. She testified that she rode in the car with them, and kept lookout while they committed the burglary. She testified that on the way to the burglary, Earl and Carpenter stopped to buy duct tape, “to tie the people up * * ⅜ if there were people in the house.” The occupants of the home testified that on April 6, 2003, they were awakened, threatened, and bound by two masked men. The men stole computers, cameras, personal digital assistants, and jewelry. As they left, one of them announced that they were “the Jack Boys.” Madison also stated that Earl discussed his plans to burglarize the Long Prairie house with her. She testified that Earl shaved his head before leaving for Long Prairie, and told her he did it so that he would not leave DNA evidence at the scene.
Jorgenson testified that Earl told him that Carpenter had also killed an elderly Minneapolis man and his disabled daughter. These killings had occurred two weeks before the Long Prairie killings. Earl told Jorgenson that he helped clean up the crime scene and removed valuables and cash, which Earl later testified amounted to $16,000. Madison testified that she was in the getaway car after this burglary and that Earl was so excited about the amount of money he and Carpenter had taken that he began throwing it *716around the car, kissed Carpenter’s hands, and told him he was “the man.”
Erica Overlie, Carpenter’s former girlfriend, testified that Carpenter had overheard her parents say that her grandparents had guns. Earl testified that Overlie had said that her grandparents were always away from home on Sunday mornings. Overlie’s grandmother testified that two masked and gloved men entered her home in New London, Minnesota, on April 27, 2003, the Sunday after Easter. When she asked them what they wanted, they told her they had the wrong home and left.
Raelynn Jones, with whom Earl briefly lived, testified that Earl approached her and told her that he and Carpenter robbed houses and “we kill people,” and asked whether there was anyone she wanted killed. Jones gave them the name and address of her estranged mother, who lived in Long Prairie, and told them they could kill her. Jones testified that later she had a falling-out with Earl and Carpenter and told them to call off their plans.
Sarah Dombrovski, Earl’s former workmate, testified that Earl told her that he and Carpenter robbed houses. She stated that Earl told her they looked for unoccupied homes, but that if anyone was there, they had weapons and would “take care of business.”
Bobbie and Shane Gorden testified that Earl and Carpenter arrived at their Lake Park home at about 7 a.m. on April 28, 2003. They let Earl and Carpenter stay overnight and drove with them into town to buy them cigarettes and enough gas to get back to the Twin Cities. Shane Gor-den testified that Earl asked why he had a tear drop tattoo under his eye and whom he had killed to get the tattoo, and Shane responded that he and Bobbie had lost a child, and the tattoo was in memory of the child. According to Shane Gorden, Earl said that he and Carpenter, “should have five, because they had killed five people.”
The coroner who investigated the Long Prairie deaths testified about findings as to each of the three victims. Chromey’s lips were cut, her nose was fractured, and four teeth were broken, exposing the roots. She had five distinct head wounds inflicted by a maul-type hammer. Her skull was fractured and she sustained brain injury. Her throat was deeply cut, severing her carotid artery and jugular vein and hitting her vertebrae. Jerrod Zapzalka suffered a skull fracture and bleeding of the brain. His throat was sawed, severing the carotid artery, jugular vein, larynx, and the strap muscles on both sides of his neck. Both Chromey and Jerrod died as a result of complex homicidal action, including both the blows to the head and the slit throats. Katie Zapzalka’s neck was cut in two places. A first cut severed her larynx but did not kill her. A second cut sawed through her neck to the bone. She died as a result of exsanguination due to sharp-force neck injuries.
The state offered substantial physical evidence to corroborate the witnesses’ testimony. Evidence from Earl’s car included two bloody flashlights, a walkie-talkie, binoculars, masks, a Minnesota atlas with a route out of Long Prairie marked, a broken section of a golden-toned bracelet, and a used condom containing DNA that matched Carpenter’s and Katie’s DNA. Evidence from the Chromey home included electrical tape from the victims’ bodies, a blood-covered maul, two bloody knives, a used condom that matched Carpenter’s DNA, and another section of the golden-toned bracelet. The state also offered physical evidence that Earl and Carpenter had planned and participated in burglaries both before and after the Long Prairie killings. This included pieces of jewelry, DVDs, computers, a video camera and vid*717eotape, strong boxes, and weaponry belonging to the victims, as well as receipts for cars, police equipment, hotel stays, and pawn shop activities.
Earl claimed that he did not participate in the killings, but admitted that he went to Long Prairie with the intention of committing a burglary. Earl testified that he did not attempt to stop the Long Prairie killings or to escape because he panicked and was afraid for his life. He claimed that it was not reasonably foreseeable to him that Carpenter would kill the Chro-mey family or that he would sexually assault Katie.
At the close of trial, the jury returned guilty verdicts on all ten counts of first-degree murder. The trial judge entered convictions for all counts, and sentenced Earl to three consecutive life prison sentences without the possibility of parole on counts 7, 9, and 10: aiding and abetting first-degree murder of Hollis Chromey while committing kidnapping, aiding and abetting first-degree murder of Jerrod Zapzalka while committing kidnapping, and aiding and abetting first-degree murder of Katie Zapzalka while committing criminal sexual conduct.
I.
Earl claims that police violated his right to counsel by continuing his interrogation after he unequivocally asked to talk to a lawyer. The Minneapolis police took Earl into custody and read him his Miranda rights at around 6 p.m. on April 30, 2003. Earl responded, “I think I want to talk to a lawyer first.” Earl argues that after he invoked his right to counsel, the police continued contact with him for the purpose of inducing him to revoke his request for counsel and waive his Miranda rights. The state does not dispute that Earl invoked his right to counsel, but argues that some time after Earl did so, he reinitiated contact with the police, revoked his invocation of his right to counsel, waived his Miranda rights and voluntarily gave a videotaped statement.
The following are relevant excerpts of the exchanges between Earl and Bureau of Criminal Apprehension (BCA) Agents Robert Berg and Bradley Barker after Berg read Earl his Miranda rights:
Berg: Okay. You want to talk to us?
Earl: I think I want to talk to a lawyer first.
Barker: You want to talk to a lawyer first, huh? ‘Kay. I think you need one.
Earl: Um-hm.
Berg: Big time. Stand up. Stand up, cuffs back on you.
Barker: How’s that for tight? You’ll be wearing those for a while.
[Brief exchange about whether Earl needed medical attention.]
Barker: Just so you know what’s going on, you’re gonna be sitting here for a little bit, and there’s gonna be a squad car from Todd County/Long Prairie that’s gonna be coming down here to pick ya up, and that’s where you’re headed from this point. Urn, there’s a lot of stuff ahead of ya, and think very hard and fast about what’s going on. ‘Kay? If you want to talk to us you holler, and we’ll talk to you. If not, that’s fine too.
After the BCA officers left, Earl sat alone in his interview room, hands cuffed behind him, for approximately 2 hours. Eventually, Earl asked a police officer who came in to photograph him whether he was going to get a chance to “speak to someone.” A few minutes later, Earl asked, “Those other two detectives coming back in at all?” At that moment, Robert Berg looked into the room and said “That’s Chris, that[’s] not Jon.” The following exchange occurred:
*718Earl: So you guys coming back in or what?
Berg: No, you wanted an attorney.
Earl: Well I asked one guy to put the handcuffs in front of me and to have you come back in, he said you’d come back in, but (inaudible).
Berg: We’re here now. You want to talk to us?
Earl: Yes I want to talk.
Some conversation about Earl’s fiancée ensued, after which the following exchange occurred:
Berg: Chris, uh one of the Minneapolis detectives just came in here and took a photo of you, a Polaroid of you and I just stuck my head in the door and you indicated to me that you had told the officer that came in that removed the handcuffs from the front — er from the back to the front that you wanted us to come back in and talk to you.
Earl: Yes.
Berg: Okay. Um, you understand your rights?
Earl: Yes I do.
Berg: [Repeats Miranda warning.] Now at 6 o’clock you were given those uh rights before you indicated that you did want an attorney, it’s now 8:07, April 30th, you have to tell us what you want Chris.
Earl: Um, still kind of scared about everything. Are you guys going to be able to watch Lisa so nothing happens to her?
[Conversation about Lisa]
Berg: Let’s go back to this attorney deal. Do you now want to talk to us?
Earl: How’s this going to help me out, talking to you guys without talking to an attorney?
Berg: We can’t tell you, we can’t advise you, I’m not going to advise you, now that’s a decision—
Earl: But you said you’d be honest with me, and I want to know if it will help. If it—
Berg: Well look at it this way. You know if you were a prosecutor or judge and jury and you had two individuals, one individual that says I made a terrible terrible mistake but I’m willing to accept the consequences and do the right thing, you have the other individual that says, “Go to hell.” “Prove it.” You know which one do you look more favorably on, it’s just kind of common sense.
Earl: Um-hm.
Berg: The only thing that we can tell you is we will make it known to the prosecutor, to the judge, or the jury you know that you did cooperate, but as far as offering you anything or telling you that you’re gonna get this or you’re not gonna get that we can’t do that.
Earl: What are the charges against me?
Berg: Murder. Three times, maybe five.
Thereafter, Earl stated that he was willing to talk to the BCA officers without an attorney present. The officers then took his statement.
The state bears the burden to prove, by a fair preponderance of the evidence based on a totality of the circumstances, that an accused “knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily waived his right to counsel” once Miranda rights have been invoked. State v. Hannon, 636 N.W.2d 796, 806 (Minn.2001) (citations omitted). We have set forth an extensive list of factors relevant to the totality of the circumstances, including
the defendant’s age, maturity, intelligence, education, experience, ability to *719comprehend, lack of or adequacy of warnings, length and legality of detention, nature of the interrogation, physical deprivations, and access to counsel and Mends.
State v. Miller, 573 N.W.2d 661, 672 (Minn.1998).
We review the district court’s findings of fact as to circumstances surrounding a suspect’s statements for clear error. Id. However, we make an independent subjective determination as to whether the waiver was voluntary. Id.
In Miranda v. Arizona, the United States Supreme Court held that a criminal suspect has a right to counsel during custodial interrogations. 384 U.S. 436, 469, 86 S.Ct. 1602, 16 L.Ed.2d 694 (1966). The Court established a bright-line rule in Edwards v. Arizona, where it held:
[A]n accused, * * * having expressed his desire to deal with the police only through counsel, is not subject to further interrogation by the authorities until counsel has been made available to him, unless the accused himself initiates further communication, exchanges, or conversations with the police.
451 U.S. 477, 484-85, 101 S.Ct. 1880, 68 L.Ed.2d 378 (1981). This court has noted that there are three steps to the Edwards analysis. State v. Munson, 594 N.W.2d 128, 138-39 (Minn.1999). First, the court must determine whether the suspect invoked his right to counsel during a custodial interrogation. Id. at 138. If it is shown that a suspect invoked his right to counsel, “courts may admit responses to further questioning only on finding that [the accused] (a) initiated further discussions with the police, and (b) knowingly and intelligently waived the right invoked.” Id. (citing Smith v. Illinois, 469 U.S. 91, 95, 105 S.Ct. 490, 83 L.Ed.2d 488 (1984)).
The United States Supreme Court has held that “interrogation” includes not only express questioning, but also its functional equivalent. Rhode Island v. Innis, 446 U.S. 291, 301, 100 S.Ct. 1682, 64 L.Ed.2d 297 (1980). The Court stated, “the term ‘interrogation’ under Miranda refers not only to express questioning, but also to any words or actions on the part of the police (other than those normally attendant to arrest and custody) that the police should know are reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response from the suspect.” Id. (footnote omitted). In determining whether police tactics were likely to elicit an incriminating response, we must focus our inquiry on the perceptions of the suspect rather than on the intent of the police, and must consider the totality of the circumstances surrounding the suspect’s custody. Id.; State v. Tibiatowski, 590 N.W.2d 305, 310-11 (Minn.1999). Relying on Innis, we have said that “the central question becomes whether the evidence in the record shows that the officers should have known that their conversation was reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response from [the suspect] or to get [the suspect] to revoke his right to counsel.” Munson, 594 N.W.2d at 142.
The district court concluded that Earl voluntarily waived his right to counsel and ruled that his statement was admissible. The court found that Earl reinitiated contact and that the BCA officers’ responses to Earl could not be characterized as interrogation intended to induce an incriminating statement. The court looked at the totality of the circumstances, including that Earl was older than 21, that he showed he understood his rights by initially invoking his right to counsel, that his admission to “previous juvenile matters” suggested prior experience with the criminal justice process, and that he understood that he was suspected in three violent deaths. The court also found that the *720BCA agents’ comments merely invited Earl to think about his situation and draw his own conclusions, and that the totality of the circumstances indicated that Earl did not interpret the BCA agents’ statements as promises of leniency, either express or implied. Therefore, the court denied Earl’s motion to suppress his statement.
We conclude that the district court’s findings were not clearly erroneous and we determine that Earl’s waiver of his right to counsel was voluntary. The record demonstrates that Earl reinitiated contact with police after initially invoking his right to counsel. The totality of the circumstances shows that he knowingly and intelligently revoked the invocation of his right to counsel. First, Earl essentially turned himself in for the purpose of speaking to the police, and he came to the interrogation with that predisposition. Second, the police properly terminated the interrogation as soon as Earl invoked his right to counsel. They did not attempt to persuade him to revoke that invocation; to the contrary, they reinforced his need for counsel because of the serious charges he was facing. Third, there was a 2-hour break in the interrogation while police waited for Todd County authorities to take custody of Earl. Fourth, police did not return to the interrogation room until after Earl had asked to speak with them. Fifth, although the suggestion by police that it was in Earl’s best interest to talk to them comes dangerously close to impermissible interrogation and should have been avoided, we ultimately conclude that it did not defeat the voluntariness of Earl’s waiver because it was made only in response to his direct question and in a manner that made it clear that the decision was Earl’s to make. Finally, police made no promises to induce Earl’s revocation.
Under these circumstances, we hold that Earl’s statement was voluntary and that the district court did not err in denying Earl’s motion to suppress his statement.
II.
Although Earl did not object to the jury instructions at trial, he now argues that the instructions on accomplice liability materially misstated the law, resulting in plain error affecting his substantial rights such that his right to a fair trial was compromised.
Failure to object to jury instructions generally results in a waiver of the issue on appeal. State v. Crowsbreast, 629 N.W.2d 433, 437 (Minn.2001). However, we have discretion to examine instructions that were not objected to at trial “if the instructions contain plain error affecting substantial rights or an error of fundamental law.” Id.; State v. White, 684 N.W.2d 500, 508 (Minn.2004). We analyze jury instructions “with the understanding that trial courts possess significant discretion in the selection of instruction language and that instructions must be read as a whole to determine whether they accurately describe the law.” State v. Smith, 674 N.W.2d 398, 402 (Minn.2004).
The district court’s instructions on accomplice liability followed those recommended in the Jury Instruction Guide as follows:
If the defendant intentionally aided another person in committing a crime, ⅜ * * ^ defen(}ant ⅛ also guilty of any other crime the other person commits while trying to commit the intended crime, if that other crime was reasonably foreseeable as a probable consequence of trying to commit the intended crime.
10 Minn. Dist. Judges Ass’n, Minnesota Practice — Jury Instruction Guides, Crim*721inal, CRIMJIG 4.01 (4th ed.1999). Earl argues that this instruction conflicts with the requirements of the accomplice liability-statute, which reads as follows:
A person liable under subdivision 1 [for aiding and abetting] is also liable for any other crime committed in pursuance of the intended crime if reasonably foreseeable by the person as a probable consequence of committing or attempting to commit the crime intended.
Minn.Stat. § 609.05, subd. 2 (2004) (emphasis added).
Earl argues that the statutory requirement that the crime be “reasonably foreseeable by the person” imposes a subjective standard for accomplice liability. Earl relies on an advisory committee note to the statute to show that the legislature intended to impose a subjective standard: “[This statute] is * * * consistent with the philosophy of personal fault underlying criminal liability that a person should not be liable for crimes not intended by him * * * unless they were reasonably foreseeable by him.” Minn.Stat. Ann. § 609.05 advisory comm. cmt. — 1963 (West 2003).
The state counters that the language of CRIMJIG 4.01 was approved in two prior cases and there is no need to revisit this issue. Alternatively, the state argues that there is no functional difference between “reasonably foreseeable by the person” in the statute and “reasonably foreseeable” in the jury instruction.
We have reviewed the language of CRIMJIG 4.01 in two cases and in both instances found the instruction to be not erroneous. See White, 684 N.W.2d at 509 (holding that jury instructions identical to the ones used in this case, when read as a whole, did not confuse or mislead the jury or materially misstate the law); State v. Peirce, 364 N.W.2d 801, 809-10 (Minn.1985) (holding that the “reasonable foreseeability” test for accomplice liability did not allow jurors to return a verdict on something less than proof beyond a reasonable doubt). Our holding in White rejected the specific contention that it was error to omit the words “by the person” in the instructions. See White, 684 N.W.2d at 509.
In addition, in several other decisions since at least 1988 we have consistently recast the words of the statute, omitting the phrase “by the person.” See, e.g., State v. Pierson, 530 N.W.2d 784, 789 (Minn.1995) (after quoting the accomplice liability statute, summarizing the elements of proof under the statute, including the requirement that the state must show that “the murder was reasonably foreseeable as a probable consequence of the intended crime”); State v. Russell, 503 N.W.2d 110, 114 (Minn.1993) (stating “[a]mple evidence also exists to demonstrate that [the victim’s] death was committed in furtherance of the aggravated robbery and that the murder was a reasonably foreseeable probable consequence of the robbery”); State v. Merrill, 428 N.W.2d 361, 367 (Minn.1988) (stating “[a] person may also be held liable for the crimes of an accomplice under subdivision 2 if the accomplice’s crime was ⅜ * ⅜ a reasonably foreseeable consequence of the intended crime”). Moreover, we disagree with Earl’s contention that the words “reasonably foreseeable by the person” in the statute impose a subjective standard. The standard would be subjective if the statute merely said “foreseeable by the person,” but the word “reasonably” implies some degree of objectivity.
Further, the state’s theory of the case throughout the trial was that the murders were reasonably foreseeable to Earl, based on extensive testimony about his past association with Carpenter. For *722example, in its closing argument, the state said:
[Earl] admitted that he aided and abetted Mr. Carpenter in [the burglary]. Well, but he didn’t think Mr. Carpenter would kill the Chromeys [sic] or the Zapzalkas that night. That’s what he said. But then when he went further— and you heard his words — he said something different, didn’t he? Consider that defendant told Dombrovski, they will take care of business before this happened. Clearly, he was already foreseeing what the future might bring if there were problems at a house. Murder was certainly foreseeable in the plans that the Jack Boys had when they went into a house. It was foreseeable. Defendant told Raelynn Jones, “We kill people.” Again, foreseeable that people would be killed.
Thus, even if the statute had mandated a subjective standard, the state’s evidence satisfied that standard by focusing on what Earl himself foresaw.
We hold that, under the circumstances of this case, the district court did not err in basing the jury instructions on CRIMJIG 4.01. To avoid the necessity of dealing with this issue in the future, we suggest that all future instructions on accomplice liability use the entire statutory phrase “reasonably foreseeable to the person.”1
III.
Earl argues that the evidence was insufficient to convict him of aiding and abetting first-degree murder while committing kidnapping and aiding and abetting first-degree murder while committing criminal sexual conduct. Earl claims that the evidence of kidnapping was insufficient because the confinement was incidental to the commission of the burglary, and that the evidence of criminal sexual conduct was insufficient because Katie Zapzalka’s rape was not reasonably foreseeable as a probable consequence of the burglary. The state counters that Earl applies the wrong analysis because the felony underlying both convictions was murder, not burglary.
In reviewing an appeal alleging insufficient evidence, this court must review the record to determine whether the evidence, viewed in the light most favorable to the conviction, is sufficient to permit the jurors to reach their verdict. State v. Smith, 669 N.W.2d 19, 30-31 (Minn.2003).
A. Kidnapping
For a court to convict a defendant of kidnapping, the state must show that the defendant has confined or removed the victim from one place to another without that person’s consent. Minn. Stat. § 609.25, subd. 1 (2004). The “confinement or removal must be criminally significant in the sense of being more than merely incidental to the underlying crime, in order to justify a separate criminal sentence.” Smith, 669 N.W.2d at 32. Earl argues that the evidence was insufficient to show that he and Carpenter confined or removed their victims other than incidentally to the burglary they intended to commit. Earl argues that because his victims were confined merely to keep them out of *723the way while he committed, burglary, no kidnapping occurred.
Although the confinement or removal in this case may have been necessary to commit the burglary, it was not merely incidental. Earl testified that he awoke the Chromey family and removed them to the kitchen, bound them with electrical tape, and stood by while Carpenter searched the house for valuables. This is purposeful behavior in its own right. It constitutes criminal conduct distinct from the burglary, the criminal sexual conduct, or the murders of Chromey and her children. Therefore, we conclude that the evidence was sufficient to support the verdict of guilty of aiding and abetting first-degree murder while committing kidnapping.
B. Criminal Sexual Conduct
To show accomplice liability for aiding and abetting first-degree murder while committing criminal sexual conduct, the state must prove, among other things, that the person aided by the defendant caused the victim’s death, and, at the time of the victim’s death, the person aided by the defendant was committing first-degree criminal sexual conduct with force or violence. Minn.Stat. § 609.05; Minn.Stat. § 609.342 (2004). The state could prove that Earl aided and abetted Katie Zapzal-ka’s rape by showing either that Earl “had a knowing role in the commission of the crime and did nothing to thwart its completion,” or that the crime was reasonably foreseeable by Earl as a probable consequence of committing or attempting to commit the crime intended. State v. Arrendondo, 531 N.W.2d 841, 845 (Minn.1995); Minn.Stat. § 609.05, subds. 1-2 (2004).
Earl argues that he did not have a knowing role in the commission of first-degree murder while committing criminal sexual conduct. He claims that the rape came as a “complete surprise,” and that he learned of it only afterward. He also claims that criminal sexual conduct was not reasonably foreseeable to him as a consequence of the burglary he intended to commit. The state argues that because Earl took no action to thwart Katie’s murder, and because he played a knowing role in the overall chain of events leading to her murder, Earl should be held liable for Carpenter’s criminal sexual conduct as well.
Although Earl testified that he was unaware of the rape until after the fact, he also admitted that he saw Carpenter remove Katie Zapzalka from the kitchen and lay her on her bed. He also admitted that by the time he saw Carpenter put Katie on the bed, he knew there was nothing worth stealing in the house. He further admitted that he stood guard in the living room while Carpenter returned to the bedroom after incapacitating Chromey and Jerrod Zapzalka. Viewing the evidence in a light most favorable to the conviction, the jury reasonably could have found that the only reason Carpenter told Earl to stand guard was to prevent the interruption of the rape. We hold that the evidence was sufficient to support the verdict of guilty of aiding and abetting first-degree murder while committing criminal sexual conduct.
IV.
Earl argues that seven of his convictions must be vacated because a person cannot be convicted multiple times based on the same conduct against the same victim. Minn.Stat. § 609.04 (2004); State v. Pippitt, 645 N.W.2d 87, 96 (Minn.2002) (holding that the defendant could not be convicted of two counts of murder for the same act against the same victim). The state agrees, but points out that the underlying guilty verdicts should remain in force for each of these seven counts. See *724State v. Pflepsen, 590 N.W.2d 759, 766 (Minn.1999) (holding that the underlying guilty verdict of a lesser-included crime remains intact and the district court may later convict and sentence on that crime if a separate adjudicated conviction is later vacated). Accordingly, we vacate Earl’s convictions under counts 1 through 6 and 8, recognizing that the jury verdicts on those counts remain in force.
Affirmed in part; vacated in part.
. Earl also argues that the district court should have included a reference to reasonable foreseeability in connection with each of the charged offenses. But instead of describing the reasonable foreseeability requirement within the instructions for each offense, the district court made a preliminary description of reasonable foreseeability that applied to all offenses. When viewed in their entirety, the instructions did not confuse or mislead the jury and were a correct statement of the law.

=== CASE 9742152 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:07:36.424019+00 ===

ANDERSON, Paul H., Justice
(concurring).
I concur in the result reached by the majority and its reasoning on all of the issues except for part of its conclusion regarding Minn.Stat. § 609.25, subd. 1 (2004), the kidnapping statute. The majority reads this statute too broadly when it concludes that the placement and confinement of the Chromey family members in the kitchen of their home was not incidental to the burglary and thus constitutes kidnapping. Therefore, I would vacate Christopher Earl’s conviction under Count 7 (murder of Hollis Chromey while committing kidnapping) and Count 9 (murder of Jerrod Zapzalka while committing kidnapping), and remand for sentencing under either Count 1 or 4 (aiding and abetting the first-degree premeditated intentional murder of Chromey, or aiding and abetting the first-degree murder of Chromey while committing a burglary), and for sentencing under either Count 8 or 6 (aiding and abetting the first-degree premeditated intentional murder of Jerrod Zapzalka, or aiding and abetting the first-degree murder of Jerrod Zapzalka while committing burglary).

=== CASE 9742153 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:07:36.429298+00 ===

MEYER, Justice
(concurring).
I write separately to note my disagreement with the majority’s conclusion that Earl voluntarily waived his right to counsel and that therefore his videotaped statement was properly admitted. I believe the police engaged in improper interrogation of Earl before he revoked his right to counsel. This interrogation was in direct violation of the Miranda prohibition and rendered the statement constitutionally inadmissible. Nevertheless, I would conclude that the admission of the statement was harmless error and, therefore, I concur in the result.
In Rhode Island v. Innis, the United States Supreme Court stated that “the term ‘interrogation’ under Miranda refers not only to express questioning, but also to any words or actions on the part of the police (other than those normally attendant to arrest and custody) that the police should know are reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response from the suspect.” 446 U.S. 291, 301, 100 S.Ct. 1682, 64 L.Ed.2d 297 (1980) (footnotes omitted). The Court noted that its concern in Miranda was that the “interrogation environment” created by the interplay of interrogation and custody would “subjugate the individual to the will of his examiner” and undermine the privilege against compelled self-incrimination. Id. at 299, 100 S.Ct. 1682 (citing Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436, 457-58, 86 S.Ct. 1602, 16 L.Ed.2d 694 (1966)).
In Edwards v. Arizona, the Supreme Court held that once a suspect has invoked the right to counsel, the police are completely barred from further interrogation until counsel is provided. 451 U.S. 477, 484-85, 101 S.Ct. 1880, 68 L.Ed.2d 378 (1981). The Court noted that “[h]ad [the suspect] initiated the meeting [the next day], nothing in the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments would prohibit the police from merely listening to his voluntary, volunteered statements and using them against him at trial.” Id. at 485, 101 S.Ct. 1880. In a footnote, the Court considered *725the probability that in such a meeting initiated by the suspect, the conversation would not be entirely one-sided and the police would likely engage in some sort of interrogation:
In that event, the question would be whether a valid waiver of the right to counsel and the right to silence had occurred, that is, whether the purported waiver was knowing and intelligent and found to be so under the totality of the circumstances, including the necessary fact that the accused, not the police, reopened the dialogue with the authorities.
Id. at 486 n. 9,101 S.Ct. 1880.
This court has stated that the Edwards analysis is concerned with whether the suspect invoked his or her right to counsel during a custodial interrogation, whether the suspect then initiated further discussions with police, and whether the suspect knowingly and intelligently waived the right invoked. State v. Munson, 594 N.W.2d 128, 138-39 (Minn.1999). This court has extended protections to suspects that are in addition to those described in Edwards, and it is these additional protections that the majority fails to address and that are dispositive for this case.
In Munson, we considered a situation where, after invocation of the right to counsel, police kept interacting with a suspect and the suspect revoked the right to counsel. 594 N.W.2d at 133. We stated that “the central question becomes whether the evidence in the record shows that the officers should have known that their conversation was reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response from [the suspect] or to get [the suspect] to revoke his right to counsel.” Id. at 142 (emphasis added). In Munson, the suspect unequivocally invoked his right to counsel, upon which the interrogating officers did stop asking him questions, but began speaking to each other about federal drug charges and a “window of opportunity” to talk that was “closing quickly.” Id. at 133. When Munson questioned them about what they meant, the officers informed him repeatedly that they could not talk to him unless he revoked his right to a lawyer. Id. at 133-34. Eventually, Munson agreed to revoke his right and made a statement. Id. at 134. Our analysis focused on whether the police engaged in impermissible interrogation before Munson reinitiated the conversation by asking them a question, and hinged on whether the state sustained its burden of proving that the officers’ comments to each other consisted of “innocent banter.” Id. at 140-41. We noted the district court’s finding that the officers’ statements were “ ‘designed to [pique] Munson’s curiosity and ultimately to elicit from him a retraction of his * * * request to consult with an attorney.’ ” Id. at 142. We agreed, holding that the state did not meet its burden and that the district court erred in not suppressing Munson’s statements. Id. at 143.
In State v. Hannon, we cited the Edwards caution that “additional safeguards [are] necessary when an accused asks for counsel” and held that police must “limit their questions to ones designed to clarify the [suspect’s] desires regarding the presence of counsel.” 636 N.W.2d 796, 806 (Minn.2001) (citing Edwards, 451 U.S. at 484, 101 S.Ct. 1880). We held that the police’s comments amounted to improper interrogation when, immediately after Hannon invoked his right to counsel, the police told him, ‘Tour side of this story will never be known.” Id. at 805.
Munson and Hannon, read together, mandate that until a suspect revokes a previously invoked right to counsel, the police are forbidden to engage in words or conduct that they should know are reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating re*726sponse from the suspect, or to get the suspect to revoke the right to counsel. Stated another way, what the police say or do after the suspect reinitiates contact is central to our analysis. Here, Earl asked the police point-blank how “this [was] going to help me out, talking to you guys without talking to an attorney.” The police appropriately responded that they could not advise Earl. Earl persisted in wanting to know whether talking to the police without an attorney would help him. The police responded by saying:
Well look at it this way. You know if you were a prosecutor or judge and jury and you had two individuals, one individual that says I made a terrible terrible mistake but I’m willing to accept the consequences and do the right thing, you have the other individual that says, “Go to hell.” “Prove it.” You know which one do you look more favorably on, it’s just kind of common sense.
The police then said they would not disclose what Earl’s girlfriend told them and “[t]he only way we can judge your truthfulness and. your honesty with us, is for you to tell us and that’s the important part, and that’s going to show your cooperation.” The police suggested that by talking to them without an attorney, Earl would be demonstrating “cooperation” and that his “cooperation” would be viewed favorably by the prosecutor, judge, and jury. As in Munson, this was not “innocent banter.” As in Munson, no direct threat or promise of favorable treatment was made, but the appeal to Earl’s “common sense” was a time-honored rhetorical device designed for the purpose of inducing him to revoke his right to counsel.1 As in Munson, it was designed to pique Earl’s interest and elicit a retraction of his request for counsel. Because the police used words intended to induce Earl to revoke his right to counsel, and Earl then immediately revoked his right to counsel, this inducement constituted a clear violation of Earl’s rights under Miranda.
Under these circumstances, where the police induce a suspect to revoke a previously invoked right to counsel, the appropriate remedy is to suppress the statement. See, e.g., Edwards, 451 U.S. at 487, 101 S.Ct. 1880. For this reason, I would hold that the district court erred in denying Earl’s motion to suppress his statement and would perform a harmless error analysis.
Criminal convictions will not be overturned if the error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. State v. Staats, 658 N.W.2d 207, 215 (Minn.2003). To meet this standard, the verdict must be “surely unattributable” to the error. Id. To determine whether a verdict was surely unattributable to an error, this court must consider “the manner in which the evidence was presented, whether it was highly persuasive, whether it was used in closing argument, and whether it was effectively countered by the defendant.” State v. Al-Naseer, 690 N.W.2d 744, 748 (Minn.2005). In addition, this court must determine whether the evidence of guilt is strong enough to convict the defendant without the use of the statement. See id.
Earl argues that the state made repeated and effective use of the statement, painting Earl as a cold-blooded, remorseless killer. The state focuses on the other evidence of Earl’s guilt, claiming that it is overwhelming even without the statement. But as we stated in Al-Naseer, we must consider all of these factors.
*727The state’s theory of the case was that Earl went to Long Prairie with the intent to commit a burglary, and that given what he knew about Carpenter and the circumstances of previous burglaries the pair had committed, he should have anticipated the likelihood that death would occur. The majority of the videotaped statement, including Earl’s admissions that he went to Long Prairie to burglarize and that he knew Carpenter had killed others, was corroborated by Earl in his trial testimony. In those few instances where the state used the statement to impeach Earl’s testimony, the state was introducing an alternative theory of the case in which Earl was an active participant.2 The state referred to Earl’s statement briefly in its closing arguments, mentioning it only three times in the more than 30 transcript pages. In addition, Earl was given the opportunity to explain any discrepancies between the statement and his testimony.
The circumstantial evidence against Earl was overwhelming. Numerous friends and acquaintances testified about Earl’s activities and statements in the days before and after the Long Prairie killings. Earl’s own testimony placed him inside the Chromey residence after buying masks and gloves, stealing heavy flashlights, attempting to steal guns, buying and marking a map with the location around Long Prairie, and purchasing electrical tape. No physical evidence placed him inside the Chromey residence, but his vehicle contained a large quantity of physical evidence connected to the crime.
Between the evidence and testimony presented by the state and Earl’s own testimony, the evidence of guilt was strong enough to support guilty verdicts without Earl’s statement. Taking all of the factors of the Alr-Naseer test into consideration, any error committed by the district court in admitting Earl’s custodial statement was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
I would hold that the district court erred in denying Earl’s motion to suppress his statement, but because the error was harmless, I agree with the majority’s conclusion that Earl’s conviction should be upheld.
. The state does not argue that Earl's cooperation actually did result in more favorable treatment at trial, or that the police thought Earl's cooperation would result in more favorable treatment. Indeed, there is no legal authority for such a proposition.
. The state used the statement to impeach Earl’s testimony on whose idea it was to burn evidence at his uncle's northern Minnesota property and on whether he had hit any of the victims. In his statement, he said he hit Chromey; at trial, he clarified that he deflected the chair with which she came at him.

=== CASE 2230042 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:34.966814+00 ===

702 N.W.2d 510 (2005)
STATE of Iowa, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Kevin Eugene CAQUELIN, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 04-1683.
Court of Appeals of Iowa.
May 11, 2005.
Linda Del Gallo, State Appellate Defender, and Theresa R. Wilson, Assistant Appellate Defender, for appellant.
Thomas J. Miller, Attorney General, Kevin Cmelik, Assistant Attorney General, Timothy N. Schott, County Attorney, and Wendy S. Samuelson, Assistant County Attorney, for appellee.
Considered by SACKETT, C.J., and MAHAN and ZIMMER, JJ.
MAHAN, J.
Kevin Caquelin appeals the convictions and sentences entered by the district court following his guilty pleas to introducing a controlled substance into a detention facility in violation of Iowa Code section 719.8 (2003) and possession of a controlled substance in violation of Iowa Code section 124.401(5). Specifically, he contends he received an illegal sentence because the district court failed to merge his two offenses pursuant to Iowa Code section 701.9. We affirm.
I. Background Facts & Proceedings.
On May 4, 2004, the State charged Caquelin by trial information with introducing a controlled substance into a detention facility (Count I) and driving while barred (Count II). On July 23, 2004, pursuant to a plea agreement, the State amended *511 Count II of the trial information to reflect a charge of possession of controlled substance. Caquelin pled guilty to the two charges on September 2, 2004. On October 12, 2004, the district court sentenced Caquelin to an indeterminate term of incarceration not to exceed five years on Count I and six months of incarceration on Count II. The court ordered the sentences to be served consecutively. Caquelin appeals.
II. Standard of Review.
Where a defendant alleges he has illegally been sentenced under the merger statute, our review is for the correction of errors at law. See State v. Anderson, 565 N.W.2d 340, 342 (Iowa 1997); see also Iowa R.App. P. 6.4.
III. Merger of Offenses.
Iowa Code section 701.9 provides:
No person shall be convicted of a public offense which is necessarily included in another public offense of which the person is convicted. If the jury returns a verdict of guilty of more than one offense and such verdict conflicts with this section, the court shall enter judgment of guilty of the greater of the offenses only.
Our supreme court has held that this statute "codifies the double jeopardy protection against cumulative punishment." State v. Gallup, 500 N.W.2d 437, 445 (Iowa 1993). Thus, we look to legislative intent to determine whether merger is required under section 701.9. See id. Legislative intent is indicated, in part, by whether the crimes at issue meet the legal elements test for lesser-included offenses. State v. Halliburton, 539 N.W.2d 339, 344 (Iowa 1995); see generally Blockburger v. United States, 284 U.S. 299, 304, 52 S. Ct. 180, 182, 76 L. Ed. 306, 309 (1932). To apply the legal elements test,[1] we look to the elements of each offense and determine if the greater can be committed without also committing the lesser. State v. Hickman, 623 N.W.2d 847, 850 (Iowa 2001). If the greater offense cannot be committed without also committing the lesser offense, the lesser is an included offense of the greater. Id. Even though a crime may meet the legal elements test for lesser-included offenses, separate punishment is permissible if the legislature intended to impose multiple punishments for both offenses. See Halliburton, 539 N.W.2d at 344.
In order to be convicted of introducing a controlled substance into a detention facility, a class D felony, the State must prove that the defendant (1) introduced a controlled substance or intoxicating beverage into the premises of a detention facility and (2) was not authorized by law to do so. Iowa Code § 719.8. In contrast, in order to prove a defendant guilty of possession of a controlled substance, a serious misdemeanor, the State must show the defendant (1) knowingly or intentionally possessed a controlled substance and (2) knew the substance he possessed was a controlled substance. Id. § 124.401(5). Thus, the issue is whether possession is a necessary element of introducing a controlled substance into a detention facility. Caquelin contends that it is, because a person cannot introduce a controlled substance into a detention facility without exerting dominion and control over the contraband. Contrarily, the State asserts that possession is not necessarily an element because section 719.8 encompasses *512 situations where a person mails contraband into a prison or relies on someone else to transport the contraband into the facility.
Our supreme court has not definitively decided this issue. However, in State v. Grady, 215 N.W.2d 213, 214 (Iowa 1974), the court addressed an analogous issue and held that possession is not a necessary legal element of delivery. There, the court reasoned that a person could conceivably act as a broker in the drug trade, thereby effecting delivery of a controlled substance by transfer of title or sale without ever having possession. Id. Similarly, in State v. Spivie, 581 N.W.2d 205, 208-09 (Iowa Ct.App.1998), this court determined that possession was not a necessary legal element of manufacturing a controlled substance. Relying on the reasoning employed by the supreme court in Grady, this court determined that a defendant could also finance the manufacturing of controlled substances and be a part of the venture without being in actual possession of the illegal substance. Id. at 209. In accord with the dictates of Grady and Spivie, it seems self-evident that one might introduce a controlled substance into a detention facility without necessarily being in possession of the substance. Therefore, in accordance with the reasoning of the aforementioned case law, we conclude that possession is not a necessary legal element of introducing a controlled substance into a detention facility.
A review of case law from other jurisdictions addressing similar situations bolsters our conclusion. At least one other state supreme court has recently held that taking controlled substances into a jail may be proven without necessarily proving possession. See Paramo v. State, 896 P.2d 1342, 1345 (Wyo.1995). A number of federal court decisions, although dealing with a different set of statutes, further compel our conclusion that possession is not a necessary element of introducing controlled substances into a detention facility. See, e.g., United States v. Campbell, 652 F.2d 760, 762-63 (8th Cir.1981). For example, in United States v. Ahmad, 347 F. Supp. 912, 921-22 (M.D.Pa.1972), aff'd in part and rev'd in part sub nom. United States v. Berrigan, 482 F.2d 171 (3d Cir.1973), the district court concluded that an attempt to introduce contraband into a federal prison had been proved against an outside sender who transmitted unapproved mail through a courier. Thus, although the outside sender did not have actual or constructive possession of the contraband at issue, the federal district court determined the outside sender had violated the federal statute prohibiting the introduction of contraband into federal penal institutions.[2]Id. Relying on Ahmad, the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals similarly held that possession of a controlled substance was not necessarily included in the offense of introduction of contraband onto the grounds of a federal penal institution. Campbell, 652 F.2d at 762-63. The Eighth Circuit further noted a number of other cases where convictions were approved for both possession of a controlled substance and introduction of a controlled substance into a penal institution. See id. at 762 (citing United States v. Corral, 578 F.2d 570 (5th Cir.1978); United States v. Yanishefsky, 500 F.2d 1327 (2d Cir.1974); United States v. Jiminez, 454 F. Supp. 610 *513 (M.D.Tenn.1978); United States v. Ward, 431 F. Supp. 66 (W.D.Okl.1976)).
Caquelin attempts to rely on the decisions from two other jurisdictions that have reached contrary conclusions. See Goodwin v. State, 342 Ark. 161, 27 S.W.3d 397, 400 (2000), rev'd on other grounds by McCoy v. State, 347 Ark. 913, 69 S.W.3d 430 (2002); Brown v. State, 35 S.W.3d 183, 190 (Tex.App.2000), rev'd on other grounds by Brown v. State, 89 S.W.3d 630 (Tex. Crim.App.2002). However, both Arkansas and Texas employ case law that is inconsistent with current Iowa legal precedent. For example, in Arkansas, possession is considered a lesser-included offense of delivery. See Glover v. State, 273 Ark. 376, 619 S.W.2d 629, 630 (1981). This is in direct conflict with our supreme court's holding in Grady, 215 N.W.2d at 214. Further, it appears that Texas employs a factual basis analysis for determining whether a lesser offense is included in a greater one. See, e.g., Duhrkopf v. State, 671 S.W.2d 147, 151 (Tex.App.1984) ("The relevant test is whether the possession offense can be proved by the same facts necessary to establish the offense charged."). Iowa has abandoned the factual basis analysis, and as previously mentioned applies the "impossibility test." Shearon, 660 N.W.2d at 55. Consequently, we find the cases relied upon by Caquelin to be nonpersuasive.
Further, assuming arguendo that Caquelin's crimes had met the legal elements test, merger of his sentences would still be improper based upon the clear legislative intent to the contrary. See State v. Lewis, 514 N.W.2d 63, 69 (Iowa 1994). Based on the differing purposes of the statutes at issue, we believe it is apparent the legislature intended multiple punishments for both offenses. Iowa Code section 124.401(5) prohibits possession of a controlled substance within the general public. This section was designed to punish an individual who possesses drugs for personal use because such conduct is destructive to society in general. In contrast, section 719.8 prohibits the introduction of a controlled substance into a detention facility because the introduction of contraband threatens the security and disrupts the balance of Iowa's penal institutions. The purpose of section 124.401(5) is to protect the public at-large from substance abusers. Contrarily, the purpose of section 719.8 is to protect the security of the facilities in which convicted criminals are incarcerated. Thus, we think it is clear the legislature intended that a defendant who violates section 124.401(5) and section 719.8 be punished under both statutes. In light of the foregoing, we conclude the district court did not err by failing to merge Caquelin's offenses. Consequently, we affirm his convictions and sentences.
AFFIRMED.
NOTES
[1]  The "legal elements test" is also referred to as the "impossibility test," see, e.g., State v. Shearon, 660 N.W.2d 52, 55 (Iowa 2003), and the Blockburger test, see, e.g., Halliburton, 539 N.W.2d at 344.
[2]  At the time Ahmad was decided, the statute under which the defendant was charged, 18 U.S.C. § 1791, provided: "Whoever, contrary to any rule or regulation promulgated by the Attorney General, introduces or attempts to introduce into or upon the grounds of any Federal penal or correctional institution or takes or attempts to take or send therefrom anything whatsoever, shall be imprisoned not more than ten years."

=== CASE 2230049 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:35.13724+00 ===

687 N.E.2d 979 (1997)
178 Ill. 2d 175
227 Ill. Dec. 497
The PEOPLE of the State of Illinois, Appellee,
v.
Martin M. WOOLLEY, Appellant.
No. 79483.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
September 25, 1997.
Rehearing Denied December 1, 1997.
*981 State Appellate Defender, Chicago, Charles W. Hoffman, Asst State Appellate Defender, Supreme Court Unit-Chicago, Chicago, State Appellate Defender, Supreme Court Unit, Springfield, for Martin M. Woolley.
Jim Ryan, Attorney General, Criminal Appeals Div., Chicago, State's Attorney of Henry County, Cambridge, Penelope M. George, *982 Assistant Attorney General, Chicago, for the People.
Justice BILANDIC delivered the opinion of the court:
The defendant, Martin M. Woolley, was charged by indictment in Henry County with six counts of murder (720 ILCS 5/9-1(a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3) (West 1994)), one count of armed violence (720 ILCS 5/33A-2 (West 1994)), one count of armed robbery (720 ILCS 5/18-2(a) (West 1994)), one count of robbery (720 ILCS 5/18-1(a) (West 1994)), and one count of unlawful possession of a weapon by a felon (720 ILCS 5/24-1.1(a) (West 1994)), arising out of the February 20, 1995, shooting deaths of Rane Baldwin and Dianna Turley in Kewanee, Illinois. After a jury trial, the defendant was found guilty on all counts. The circuit court entered judgment on two counts of intentional murder, one count of armed violence, one count of armed robbery, and one count of unlawful possession of a weapon by a felon. A capital sentencing hearing was held before the same jury. The jury found the defendant eligible for the death penalty on the basis of three statutory aggravating factors. 720 ILCS 5/9-1(b)(3), (b)(6), (b)(11) (West 1995). The jury further found that there were no mitigating factors sufficient to preclude imposition of the death penalty. Accordingly, the circuit court sentenced the defendant to death. The circuit court also sentenced the defendant to concurrent terms of 30 years' imprisonment on the armed violence conviction, 30 years' imprisonment on the armed robbery conviction, and 5 years' imprisonment on the unlawful possession of a weapon by a felon conviction. The defendant's death sentence has been stayed pending his direct appeal to this court. Ill. Const. 1970, art. VI, § 4(b); 134 Ill.2d Rs. 603, 609(a).
For the reasons that follow, we affirm the defendant's convictions for murder, armed robbery and unlawful possession of a weapon by a felon. We vacate the defendant's conviction and sentence for armed violence. We also vacate the defendant's death sentence and remand for a new capital sentencing hearing.
FACTS
At approximately 10 p.m. on February 20, 1995, the bodies of Rane Baldwin and Dianna "Dee" Turley were found in Phylly's Cue and Brew tavern (Phylly's) in Kewanee, Illinois. Peter Dolieslager, Baldwin's boyfriend, testified that he called the tavern at approximately 9:45 p.m. and talked to Baldwin, who was tending bar. Dolieslager arrived at the tavern shortly thereafter and discovered the bodies of Baldwin and Turley lying on the floor.
Autopsies revealed that Turley had been shot once in the forehead from a distance of less than three to four feet. The bullet entered Turley's head at a slightly upward angle. Baldwin had been shot three times in the head. The pathologist who conducted the autopsies could not determine the order in which the three bullets struck Baldwin. One bullet struck her right cheek and would not have been fatal. A second bullet entered her head and lodged in her spine, and would have caused instant paralysis but not instant death. A third bullet entered the right side of her head and would have killed her instantly. None of the bullets which struck Baldwin were fired at close range.
The State presented testimony from several witnesses that both the defendant and his wife, Marcia Woolley, were frequent patrons of Phylly's and that they were present at the tavern throughout the day of February 20, 1995. According to these witnesses, the defendant and his wife arrived at the tavern at approximately 1 p.m. During the afternoon, they drank beer and talked with other patrons. The Woolleys left the tavern at approximately 5 or 5:30 p.m. to go home and prepare dinner for Marcia's children. They returned to the tavern around 6 p.m. and spent the evening drinking beer, talking, and playing pool with Jeff Ince and Debbie Brose. Ince was a bartender at Phylly's and had been working until 7 p.m., when he was relieved by Baldwin.
Brose testified that while the group was playing pool, sometime between 8 and 8:30 p.m., she saw the imprint of a gun under the defendant's shirt stuck in the back of his pants. Neither Ince nor Brose saw the defendant move a gun from his pants to his *983 jacket pocket while they were at the tavern. Dee Turley and Kathy Kouris arrived at Phylly's at approximately 8:30 p.m. Ince and Brose left the tavern at 9:15 p.m. Remaining in the tavern at that time were the defendant, his wife, Turley, Baldwin, Kouris and Rick Van Waes.
Ince testified that, on the evening of the murders, the defendant made a comment to him that he was the type of person who "could walk into McDonalds and just open up on everybody." Dolieslager testified that he had a conversation with the defendant in Phylly's on February 18, 1995, in which the defendant commented that it would be easy to commit a robbery if you killed the witnesses. Dolieslager admitted that he never mentioned this statement to the police when he was questioned after the murders. Dolieslager also testified that on February 18, 1995, while he and the defendant were in Phylly's, the defendant and Baldwin discovered that they had attended school together and they engaged in a lengthy conversation. The defendant's wife, who was also present, became jealous and was "visibly upset" that the defendant and Baldwin were talking.
On February 21, 1995, the defendant and his wife voluntarily went to the Kewanee police station for questioning. The defendant told investigators that he and Marcia had been at Phylly's the day before but had left at 9:25 p.m. He denied any knowledge of the murders. Beginning at approximately 7 p.m., the defendant was interrogated by Kewanee Police Detective Joseph Cervantez and Illinois State Police Lieutenant Richard Shannahan. During this interrogation, the officers left the room briefly and, upon returning, informed the defendant that they "had him." According to the officers, the defendant stated that he wanted an attorney and then said, "I killed them, yeah, I killed them." The defendant subsequently withdrew his request for an attorney and gave a statement regarding the murders. More detailed testimony concerning this sequence of events was presented during the hearing on the defendant's motion to suppress his confession. That testimony is discussed in conjunction with our analysis of the suppression issue.
The defendant filed a motion to suppress his confession, which was denied, and the confession was admitted into evidence. The defendant stated therein that he and Marcia were at Phylly's during both the afternoon and the evening of February 20, 1995. They arrived for the evening at around 6:30 or 7 p.m. At that time, Rane Baldwin was tending bar and Jeff Ince and Debbie Brose were present in the bar. The defendant and Marcia were both drinking beer and playing pool with Ince and Brose. Dee Turley and Kathy Kouris arrived at Phylly's at around 8:30 or 9 p.m. Ince, Brose and Kouris left at approximately 9:30 p.m. At this time, Turley, Marcia, and the defendant were sitting, in that order, on bar stools along the bar. The defendant stated that he decided to rob the tavern. He had been carrying a 9 millimeter gun in the back of his pants. He pulled out the gun and shot Baldwin two or three times in the head, causing her to fall to the ground. He then shot Turley once in the head, causing her to fall. Turley was standing when the defendant shot her and Marcia was sitting on a bar stool between the defendant and Turley. The defendant related that he looked out the front window of the tavern and then walked around behind the bar and took the money out of the cash register and two money bags from underneath the register. At that time, Baldwin moved or made a noise and the defendant shot her again in the head. The defendant then grabbed Marcia and dragged her out of the bar. They got into a pickup truck they had borrowed from a friend and drove home. The defendant took the cash out of the money bags and burned the bags and their remaining contents in a wood stove. He hid the cash in a hole in the wall of a bedroom closet and put the gun in a freezer located in his friend Carl Girkin's garage. The next day, the defendant asked Girkin to throw the gun into a river. The defendant stated that Marcia did not handle the gun that evening and that she had no prior knowledge of what he was going to do.
Lieutenant Shannahan testified that the physical evidence at the crime scene was consistent with the version of events given in the defendant's statement. On cross-examination, *984 Lieutenant Shannahan testified that he did not perform any tests on the defendant's hands to determine if he had recently fired a gun. Lieutenant Shannahan stated that the gunshot residue test is antiquated and unreliable.
Carl Girkin was called by the State and testified that on February 21, 1995, the defendant told him he had put a gun in the freezer in Girkin's garage. The defendant asked Girkin to dispose of the gun by throwing it into the river. Girkin, however, kept the gun because there was nothing wrong with it and he enjoys firearms. Girkin took the gun out of the freezer and put it in a dresser drawer at his girlfriend's house. Kewanee police later recovered the gun from that location. Forensic testing revealed that bullets and spent shell casings recovered from the murder scene were fired from this gun.
Illinois State Police officers recovered $287.25 in cash from a hole in the wall of a bedroom closet in the Woolleys' house. Fingerprints lifted from the currency matched those of the defendant.
Illinois State Police crime scene technician Mike Ogryzek examined the murder scene and formulated a reconstruction of the crimes. Turley's body was found lying on the floor with her ankle resting on the bottom of a bar stool. Ogryzek opined that Turley was shot at close range, from between three to six feet away, and that she was sitting on a bar stool when she was shot. Baldwin's body was located on the floor behind the bar. Ogryzek testified that the bullet to Baldwin's cheek would have caused her body to spin and the bullet that lodged in her spine would have caused immediate paralysis and caused her to fall to the floor. In his opinion, the shooter of these two shots was located in the southwest corner of the bar and could have been coming out of the men's bathroom. Ogryzek further testified that, at the time the third bullet entered Baldwin's head, her head was in contact with some hard surface, such as the floor. In his opinion, this shot was fired while Baldwin was lying on the floor by someone standing over her. Ogryzek testified that the shooter of this shot could not have been standing on a bar stool on the other side of the bar because of the distance across the bar and the angle of the shot.
The State also called Donald Tomsha. In March of 1995, Tomsha was incarcerated with the defendant at the Henry County jail while the defendant was awaiting trial. Tomsha had been convicted of burglary in 1993 and possession of a controlled substance in 1994. When he met the defendant in jail, Tomsha had been charged with burglarizing three businesses. Tomsha subsequently pled guilty to those burglaries and received a sentence of six months in jail and probation.
Tomsha testified that the defendant confessed to him that he had shot and killed the victims. The defendant told Tomsha that he shot the bartender as she was turning up the volume on the television at the defendant's request. The defendant then handed the gun to his wife to shoot Turley, but Marcia "froze" and the defendant took the gun back and shot Turley himself. The defendant took money from the cash register, then shot the bartender again because she was still alive. The defendant told Tomsha he gave the gun to a friend who was supposed to throw it into a river. Tomsha stated that the defendant wrote all of this down on a legal pad and signed it in Tomsha's presence. According to Tomsha, the defendant also wrote several other statements, including one containing an exculpatory version of the events at Phylly's. Tomsha took the documents the defendant had written and turned them over to the authorities. These statements were admitted into evidence at trial.
Tomsha stated that he was not testifying in exchange for favorable treatment and he did not expect any benefit as a result of his testimony. Tomsha agreed, however, that it was "possible" that his providing this information about the defendant to the authorities helped him to avoid prison on his own charges.
Tomsha and the defendant both submitted handwriting samples. FBI Document Examiner John Sardone, a handwriting expert, testified that the defendant's samples were written in a deliberate manner and did not contain his naturally occurring handwriting. *985 Because of the deliberate nature of the defendant's samples, Sardone could not positively identify the defendant as the author of the written statements turned over to the authorities by Tomsha. Sardone was able to conclude that all of these documents were written by the same person, and that they were not written by Tomsha. Sardone also concluded that the signatures on the documents matched the defendant's signature in the known samples.
The State introduced the defendant's prior conviction for burglary and then rested its case.
The defendant testified on his own behalf. He stated that he and Marcia went to Phylly's at approximately 1 or 1:30 p.m. on February 20, 1995. The defendant had stuck his gun in the back of his pants because they planned on doing some target shooting that afternoon. Both he and Marcia were drinking beer. They left the bar at around 5 p.m. to prepare dinner for Marcia's children and returned to the bar afterwards. He and Marcia played pool and continued to drink beer. Dee Turley and Kathy Kouris arrived at the bar at around 8 or 8:30 p.m. Marcia was very jealous of other women having contact with the defendant and had been carrying a grudge against Turley for a long time. Marcia, Turley, and Kouris each drank shots of alcohol, with Marcia consuming two or three shots. When Kouris left the bar, Marcia and Turley were bickering.
At around 10 p.m., the defendant went to the men's bathroom to smoke some "one-hitters" of marijuana. At this time, his gun was in the pocket of his coat which was draped over the back of a bar stool. While he was in the bathroom, he first heard Baldwin raise her voice about something and then heard two or three gunshots. When he came out of the bathroom, he saw Marcia with one foot up on a bar stool leaning over the bar with the gun. Marcia then fired another shot. Turley was already lying on the floor. Marcia was sitting on her bar stool in a daze and the defendant took the gun from her. The defendant looked out the door to see if anyone heard the shots. He then walked around the bar and saw Baldwin lying on the floor behind the bar. The defendant decided to try to "cover things up" by making it look like a robbery. He took the money out of the register and the money bags from underneath the register. He then grabbed Marcia and they left the bar. They went home, where the defendant proceeded to hide the money and burn the money bags. He later put the gun in his friend's garage.
The defendant testified that he and Marcia discussed what their "story" would be if questioned by the police. The defendant told Marcia that, "if it came down to it," she should tell the police that he committed the murders. Sometime the next day, the defendant told Carl Girkin to dispose of the gun. The defendant ultimately gave a statement to police confessing to the crimes because he was trying to prevent Marcia from being taken away from her children. He was not thinking about the severity of the punishment at that time.
The defendant testified that he became acquainted with Donald Tomsha in jail. Tomsha was very nervous about the prospect of going to prison. The defendant stated that he never spoke to Tomsha about his case. The defendant did, however, have all the documents regarding his case, including police reports, interviews, and discovery, in his cell, where any other inmate could look at them. The defendant did not write any of the documents Tomsha attributed to him.
The defendant denied making a statement to Pete Dolieslager about "killing all the witnesses" in order to get away with a robbery. He also denied ever making the comment about "opening up in a McDonalds" attributed to him by Jeff Ince. When he and Ince had this conversation, it was a conversation about crime generally and the defendant simply commented on how that sort of thing is happening now. The defendant also denied ever making comments to Dave Aldred to the effect that the Kewanee police were a "joke" and it would be easy to commit a crime in Kewanee. The defendant further testified that Marcia had previously worked at Phylly's and that, as a result, he knew that the largest amount of cash was present at the bar on Thursday nights, not on Monday nights, which was the night the murders occurred. The defendant denied that he intended *986 to rob Phylly's or that he shot Baldwin or Turley. The defendant stated that he had frequently seen people reach over the bar to grab a bottle of beer.
On cross-examination, the defendant denied having financial problems, but admitted that business at his tattoo shop was slow and he was behind in the rent. The Woolleys' only income came from the tattoo shop. He also conceded that Monday nights at Phylly's were generally less crowded. When the defendant went into Phylly's on the afternoon of February 20, 1995, he took the gun into the bar because he did not want to leave it in the truck. When he returned to Phylly's after going home at dinnertime, the gun was in his coat pocket. The defendant admitted he had no intention of target shooting in the evening because it was already dark.
The defense also presented the testimony of Kewanee Police Detective Kenneth Ince. Detective Ince testified that he took a statement from Marcia Woolley on February 21, 1995. In that statement, Marcia stated that the defendant shot Turley first and Baldwin second. During an offer of proof, taken outside the presence of the jury, Marcia Woolley took the stand and stated that she would invoke her fifth amendment privilege against self-incrimination in response to all questions regarding the murders.
David Dailey testified for the defense that he had been married to Marcia Woolley for 10 years before they were divorced in 1990. Dailey stated that he and Marcia had gone hunting together and Marcia knew how to fire a gun. Dailey also related that Marcia had a very violent temper when consuming alcohol and that she would get very jealous of other women. According to Dailey, when jealous, Marcia would "do things physically." On cross-examination, Dailey admitted that his divorce from Marcia was not amicable and that there had been a fight for custody of the children, which Marcia won.
Dawn Swearingen also testified for the defense. Swearingen stated that she was aware of animosity between Dee Turley and Marcia Woolley. Approximately two years' earlier, Marcia had told her that she suspected an affair between the defendant and Turley. Marcia stated that "someday she would get her revenge on Dee." According to Swearingen, Marcia made similar comments on quite a few occasions. Swearingen, however, never saw Marcia actually carry out any of these threats.
Rita DeVinney also testified that she had heard Marcia Woolley, on many occasions, threaten to "get" Turley "when she least expected it." DeVinney stated that Marcia asked her one Friday night to meet her at Phylly's to "back her up" so that she could "get" Turley. DeVinney did not know what Marcia meant by "get" Turley so she did not meet Marcia.
Gail Weir also testified that she had witnessed Marcia Woolley and Turley argue or fight. Weir stated that, approximately one year earlier, she heard Marcia accuse Turley of having an affair with the defendant and threaten her that she "would get what she had coming." Marcia also told Weir that she had caught the defendant at Turley's house.
In rebuttal, the State called David Aldred. Aldred testified that he works at Blue Chip Industries and that he helped the defendant and Marcia obtain jobs there. The Woolleys worked at Blue Chip for a couple of months and then quit. The defendant told Aldred that he was having financial problems and that he owed a lot of money in taxes. The defendant also made a comment to Aldred, in early 1994, that it would be easy to commit a crime in Kewanee. On another occasion, while the defendant and Aldred were both drunk, defendant told Aldred that it would not bother him to "shoot up" an establishment or to kill someone.
Following closing arguments, the jury deliberated and returned a verdict finding the defendant guilty on all counts. The eligibility phase of the defendant's death sentencing hearing commenced immediately. No evidence was presented at the eligibility hearing, but arguments were presented by both sides. The jury found the defendant eligible for the death penalty based upon three statutory aggravating factors: (1) murder of two or more individuals (720 ILCS 5/9-1(b)(3) (West 1994)); (2) murder in the course of another felony (720 ILCS 5/9-1(b)(6) (West 1994)); and (3) murder committed in a cold, *987 calculated and premeditated manner pursuant to a preconceived plan, scheme or design to take a human life (720 ILCS 5/9-1(b)(11) (West 1994)).
The aggravation-mitigation phase of the death penalty hearing began one week later. The State first called Lieutenant Rod Huber of the Henry County sheriff's department. Lieutenant Huber testified that the defendant had been convicted in 1982 and 1984 of misdemeanor theft, in 1984 of criminal damage to property, a misdemeanor, and in 1984 of possession of cannabis, a misdemeanor.
The State again called Donald Tomsha. Tomsha testified that the defendant told him that he had done Baldwin "a favor" by shooting her the third time, since she would have been paralyzed had she lived. Tomsha testified that the defendant expressed no remorse for the murders, but rather, stated he would do it again. According to Tomsha, the defendant stated that he should have shot and killed Marcia and then shot himself to make it appear that Marcia shot everyone and then killed herself.
Tomsha also testified that defendant told him about other burglaries he had committed in the Kewanee area. According to Tomsha, the defendant admitted to burglarizing Blue Chip Industries, G & J Tavern, Phylly's, and Pines Trailer. Tomsha testified that the defendant wrote out a document relating his commission of several burglaries along with a map showing the location of the tools he had stolen from Blue Chip. Tomsha turned this document over to Lieutenant Huber.
Detective Cervantez testified for the State that the Kewanee police had been investigating a burglary at Phylly's, two burglaries at Pines Trailer, two burglaries at G & J Tavern, and a burglary at Blue Chip. The items stolen during the Blue Chip burglary included tools known as micrometers, other tools belonging to Dave Aldred, and a tool box belonging to Dave Greenhagen. The stolen micrometers were recovered from the location specified on the map contained in the document Tomsha attributed to the defendant. The tools and the tool box taken in that burglary were located in the possession of the defendant's step-father. On cross-examination, Detective Cervantez admitted that the police had located no evidence which linked these burglaries to any particular person. He also conceded that Tomsha could have committed these burglaries.
The State also presented evidence that the defendant was convicted of burglary in 1986 for breaking into a fertilizer factory. The defendant and another man were caught at the scene preparing to load equipment into their vehicle. The defendant was sentenced to 30 months' probation. In 1987, the defendant was caught by police attempting to use a crow bar to pry open the door of a liquor store. The defendant was arrested on charges of criminal damage to property, attempted burglary, and possession of burglary tools. These charges formed the basis of a petition to revoke the defendant's probation. The defendant's probation was revoked and he was sentenced to three years' imprisonment.
The State also presented evidence that, in 1987, the defendant was evaluated for the TASC (Treatment Alternatives for Special Clients) program, a statewide program for substance-abusing felony offenders. The defendant was deemed not acceptable for the program because he stated that he felt he could not deal with the structure of the program. According to the program coordinator, the defendant essentially told them that he did not want to participate in the program.
The State presented evidence that the defendant was convicted of felony theft in 1989. The defendant and another man had broken into the residence of the other man's friend and stolen a knife, some bottles of liquor, and a leather jacket. The State also presented evidence that the defendant was convicted in 1986 of misdemeanor theft for threatening another man and taking 24 cassette tapes from him.
Finally, the State called various family members of the victims, who described the impact on their lives resulting from the victims' deaths.
In mitigation, the defendant called several neighbors who testified that the defendant was a good neighbor who was helpful and caused no problems. They also testified that *988 the defendant treated Marcia's children as if they were his own. The defendant's former boss at Pines Trailer stated that he was a good employee who got along well with his coworkers. A friend of the defendant testified that the defendant treated Marcia's children very well and had purchased bicycles for all of them. The defendant's sister testified that she and the defendant were separated at a young age when they were each adopted by different families. She stated that the defendant harbored a lot of anger about the adoption. The defendant's half-sister also testified that the defendant had some pent-up feelings about being adopted. She also relayed that the defendant was good with Marcia's children.
Psychiatrist Robert Chapman testified for the defense. Dr. Chapman caused a psychological test, the MMPI, to be administered to the defendant and examined the defendant personally. Dr. Chapman made three diagnoses of the defendant: (1) adult attention deficit disorder (ADD); (2) substance abuse disorder; and (3) antisocial personality disorder. Dr. Chapman described adult ADD as a pervasive difficulty in maintaining attention and concentration, causing abnormal impulsiveness. The adult ADD sufferer irritates others easily and, as a result, receives the message that he is not liked or that he is a bad person. According to Dr. Chapman, the second diagnosis, antisocial personality disorder, often accompanies adult ADD. Antisocial personality disorder manifests in behavior such as difficulties with authorities before the age of 15, school punishments, academic difficulties, and family conflicts, leading later to criminal behavior as an adult. With regard to the diagnosis of substance abuse disorder, Dr. Chapman relayed that the defendant had started using alcohol and marijuana as a teenager. The defendant told him that, at one point, he had a $250-per-day drug habit. The defendant also told him that he had used illegal drugs while in prison in 1988. Dr. Chapman testified that the defendant had suffered from these disorders for many years. The adult ADD and the substance abuse disorder could both be treated in prison. If the defendant were treated for these disorders, he could be a good prisoner.
On cross-examination, Dr. Chapman admitted that the second half of the defendant's MMPI was invalidated by the way in which the defendant filled it out. He conceded that it was possible that, on this half of the test, the defendant deliberately exaggerated his answers in an effort to appear more disturbed than he was. Dr. Chapman believed, however, that a more probable explanation was that, given his ADD, the defendant simply was not able to maintain his concentration for the second half of the test. Dr. Chapman also admitted that all of the information he used to evaluate the defendant came from the defendant himself and he did not verify any of this information using other sources. Dr. Chapman further admitted that more than half of the people in prison suffer from antisocial personality disorder. Dr. Chapman conceded that the defendant had graduated from high school.
Following closing arguments, the jury returned a verdict finding no mitigating factors sufficient to preclude a sentence of death. Accordingly, the trial court sentenced the defendant to death. The defendant's post-trial motion was subsequently denied. This direct appeal followed.
ANALYSIS
Trial Issues
Motion to Suppress Confession
The defendant first argues that the circuit court erred in denying his motion to suppress his confession on the ground that the police violated his right to counsel during custodial interrogation.
As noted, the defendant filed a motion to suppress his February 21, 1995, confession to police. The circuit court held a hearing on the motion. The State presented the testimony of the two police officers to whom the defendant had given the confession. Lieutenant Shannahan testified that he and Detective Cervantez began their interview of the defendant at approximately 7 p.m. on February 21, 1995. The defendant had previously been read his Miranda rights. At approximately 9:30 or 9:45 p.m., Lieutenant Shannahan learned that Marcia Woolley, who was being interviewed separately, had provided *989 some information about the murders. He and Detective Cervantez left the room to speak with Detective Ince. Detective Ince informed them that Marcia had stated that the defendant shot Baldwin and Turley. Lieutenant Shannahan and Detective Cervantez then re-entered the room in which the defendant was waiting. Detective Cervantez told the defendant that Marcia had implicated him as the shooter. According to Lieutenant Shannahan's testimony, the following then occurred: "[The defendant] kind of sat up straight up into his chair and basically said that he wanted an attorney. He then said that I killed them. Yeah. I killed them." When asked how long the interval of time was between the defendant's request for an attorney and his statement "I killed them," Lieutenant Shannahan testified that it was "[j]ust a matter of seconds. It was almost conjunctive."
Lieutenant Shannahan testified that Detective Cervantez then started to say something to the defendant, but Lieutenant Shannahan stopped him. Lieutenant Shannahan told the defendant that he had two statements he wanted to make to him. First, he told the defendant that "this is the only opportunity you will get to talk to us." Second, he told the defendant that, in order for him to talk to them, he would have to "recant" his request for an attorney. The defendant then indicated that he wanted to talk to them without an attorney. The officers thereafter continued their interrogation of the defendant regarding the murders, during which the defendant implicated himself as the shooter. A formal tape-recorded statement was taken later. That statement was transcribed and the defendant signed each page. In that statement, the defendant stated that he had previously requested an attorney but had withdrawn that request.
Lieutenant Shannahan agreed that the defendant's request for an attorney was "unequivocal." Lieutenant Shannahan was aware that, once a suspect requests an attorney, the interrogation must cease. He believed, however, that the defendant had re-initiated the interview by his statement "I killed them, yeah, I killed them."
Detective Cervantez testified to the same events as Lieutenant Shannahan. In particular, Detective Cervantez stated that, after the defendant was told his wife had implicated him, the defendant "looked up and he stated he wanted an attorney and then as he put his head back down, he said, yeah, I killed them. Yeah, I killed them." Detective Cervantez described the defendant's request for an attorney as "clear." When asked about the time interval between the defendant's request for an attorney and his statement "I killed them," Detective Cervantez responded that "[i]t wasn't really two,it was like in the same breath." Detective Cervantez testified that, based upon the defendant's statement "I killed them," he believed that the defendant still wanted to discuss the murders.
The defendant testified on his own behalf. The defendant related that after he was told by the police that his wife had implicated him, he stated that he wanted an attorney, followed by "I didn't do it, I didn't do it." The defendant denied that his request for an attorney was followed by his statement that he killed the victims. According to the defendant, Detective Cervantez then told him that "if he wanted to play hard ball, they could play hard ball," and that it would be "easier" for the defendant if he would go ahead and talk to them. The officers then left the room for a short period of time. Upon returning, Lieutenant Shannahan told him that "this was the time" to talk to them and that it would be "easier" on him if he talked to them now.
On cross-examination, the defendant admitted that his second statement was unsolicited and voluntary. The defendant described this statement as more of an "out-loud thought" than it was an "actual statement." The defendant testified that he eventually told the officers that he would talk to them without an attorney "[a]fter a period of time there when they keep [sic] telling me I should talk to them, yes."
During arguments on the motion, defense counsel conceded that the defendant's comment immediately following his request for an attorney (either "I killed them" or "I didn't do it") was unsolicited, and clarified *990 that the defense was not seeking suppression of that statement. Rather, the defense was seeking suppression only of the defendant's subsequent confession, given in response to further police questioning. The trial court denied the defendant's motion to suppress.
The defendant makes two arguments with regard to the trial court's ruling on the motion to suppress. First, the defendant contends that the trial court erred because it failed to make the requisite determination that the defendant, rather than the police, initiated further conversation after the defendant's request for counsel. The defendant asserts that a new suppression hearing is therefore required. In the alternative, the defendant argues, even if we find that the trial court made the requisite finding that the defendant initiated further conversation, that finding was manifestly erroneous and should be reversed. Therefore, the defendant contends, his motion to suppress should have been granted and he is entitled to a new trial.
In Edwards v. Arizona, 451 U.S. 477, 485, 101 S. Ct. 1880, 1885, 68 L. Ed. 2d 378, 386 (1981), the Supreme Court held that when an accused invokes his right to have counsel present during custodial interrogation, he may not be subject to further interrogation without the presence of counsel unless "the accused himself initiates further communication, exchanges, or conversations with the police." See also Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436, 86 S. Ct. 1602, 16 L. Ed. 2d 694 (1966); Minnick v. Mississippi, 498 U.S. 146, 153, 111 S. Ct. 486, 491, 112 L. Ed. 2d 489, 498 (1990); People v. Brown, 169 Ill. 2d 132, 149, 214 Ill. Dec. 433, 661 N.E.2d 287 (1996). If the police subsequently initiate a conversation with the accused in the absence of counsel, the accused's statements are presumed involuntary and are not admissible as substantive evidence at trial. People v. Winsett, 153 Ill. 2d 335, 349, 180 Ill. Dec. 109, 606 N.E.2d 1186 (1992). Any waiver of the right to counsel given in a discussion initiated by the police is presumed invalid. Winsett, 153 Ill.2d at 350, 180 Ill. Dec. 109, 606 N.E.2d 1186. The Edwards rule is designed to "`prevent police from badgering a defendant into waiving his previously asserted Miranda rights.'" Minnick, 498 U.S. at 150, 111 S. Ct. at 489, 112 L.Ed.2d at 496, quoting Michigan v. Harvey, 494 U.S. 344, 350, 110 S. Ct. 1176, 1180, 108 L. Ed. 2d 293, 302 (1990).
Edwards and its progeny direct that a two-part inquiry be conducted to determine if an accused's statements made in response to police interrogation which followed the accused's request for an attorney are admissible as substantive evidence at trial. See Oregon v. Bradshaw, 462 U.S. 1039, 1044-45, 103 S. Ct. 2830, 2834, 77 L. Ed. 2d 405, 412 (1983); People v. Olivera, 164 Ill. 2d 382, 389-90, 207 Ill. Dec. 433, 647 N.E.2d 926 (1995); People v. Hicks, 132 Ill. 2d 488, 493, 139 Ill. Dec. 486, 548 N.E.2d 1042 (1989). The preliminary inquiry is whether the accused, rather than the police, initiated further discussion after invoking the right to counsel. Bradshaw, 462 U.S. at 1044-45, 103 S. Ct. at 2834, 77 L.Ed.2d at 411-12; Olivera, 164 Ill.2d at 390, 207 Ill. Dec. 433, 647 N.E.2d 926. In order for the accused to "initiate" further conversation, for these purposes, the accused must make a statement that evinces a "willingness and a desire for a generalized discussion about the investigation." Bradshaw, 462 U.S. at 1045-46, 103 S. Ct. at 2835, 77 L.Ed.2d at 412; Olivera, 164 Ill.2d at 390-91, 207 Ill. Dec. 433, 647 N.E.2d 926. Inquiries or statements that relate to the routine incidents of the custodial relationship will not generally "initiate" a discussion for purposes of the Edwards rule. Bradshaw, 462 U.S. at 1045, 103 S.Ct. at 2835, 77 L. Ed. 2d at 412.
If the accused did not initiate a conversation with the police after a request for counsel, statements made in response to further interrogation are inadmissible under Edwards. If, however, the accused did initiate a conversation, it must next be determined whether the accused's subsequent waiver of the right to counsel was knowing and intelligent. Bradshaw, 462 U.S. at 1044, 103 S. Ct. at 2834, 77 L.Ed.2d at 412; Hicks, 132 Ill.2d at 493, 139 Ill. Dec. 486, 548 N.E.2d 1042. The question at this juncture is whether the totality of the circumstances, including the fact that the accused reopened dialogue with the police, shows that the accused knowingly and intelligently waived his right to the presence of counsel during questioning. Olivera, *991 164 Ill.2d at 390, 207 Ill. Dec. 433, 647 N.E.2d 926; Hicks, 132 Ill.2d at 493, 139 Ill. Dec. 486, 548 N.E.2d 1042.
There is no dispute in this case that the defendant invoked his right to counsel during custodial interrogation. There is also no dispute that the police subsequently interrogated the defendant and obtained his confession as a result. Accordingly, the first determination for the trial court to have made was whether the defendant, after invoking his right to counsel, initiated further conversation with the police in a manner evincing a willingness for a generalized discussion about the investigation. Olivera, 164 Ill.2d at 390, 207 Ill. Dec. 433, 647 N.E.2d 926. The defendant argues that the trial court failed to make this determination.
The record does not support the defendant's argument. The record reveals that the trial judge began his ruling by noting that one of the issues presented by the motion to suppress was "whether or not the defendant re-initiated conversation." The trial court thereafter noted that there was no controversy over the fact that the defendant had requested an attorney. The court then emphasized that both sides admitted that, after the request for an attorney was made, the defendant made another statement which was unsolicited and voluntary.
The trial judge's comments show that he was aware that whether the defendant initiated further conversation was a necessary determination. The record also demonstrates that the trial court focused on the fact that the defendant, after requesting an attorney, made another statement. The court's obvious reason for focusing on that circumstance was to determine whether this statement constituted "initiation" within the meaning of the Edwards rule. Both of the interrogating officers testified at the suppression hearing that they interpreted the defendant's second statement as his initiation of further conversation. We ordinarily presume that the trial judge knows and follows the law unless the record indicates otherwise. People v. Gaultney, 174 Ill. 2d 410, 420, 221 Ill. Dec. 195, 675 N.E.2d 102 (1996). The record in this case does not indicate that the trial court failed to apply the proper standard in ruling on the motion to suppress.
We further determine, contrary to the defendant's assertion, that the evidence supports the finding that the defendant initiated further conversation with the police after invoking his right to counsel. Both Lieutenant Shannahan and Detective Cervantez testified that, although the defendant's request for counsel was clear, the defendant re-initiated the interview by making the subsequent statement. Both officers testified that the defendant's subsequent statement indicated to them that he wished to continue discussing the murder investigation. As noted, "initiation" by the accused, in this context, requires only that the accused make a statement that evinces a "willingness and a desire for a generalized discussion about the investigation." Bradshaw, 462 U.S. at 1045-46, 103 S. Ct. at 2835, 77 L.Ed.2d at 412; Olivera, 164 Ill.2d at 390-91, 207 Ill. Dec. 433, 647 N.E.2d 926. The suspect does not have to explicitly state that he wishes to resume interrogation. In Bradshaw, a plurality of the Supreme Court held that a suspect's question to police"Well, what is going to happen to me now?"although ambiguous, constituted initiation within the Edwards rule because it evinced a willingness for a generalized discussion about the investigation. Bradshaw, 462 U.S. at 1045-46, 103 S. Ct. at 2835, 77 L.Ed.2d at 412. Even a suspect's exculpatory statement following his request for counsel may constitute an initiation of further conversation about the investigation. In People v. Hicks, 132 Ill. 2d 488, 493, 139 Ill. Dec. 486, 548 N.E.2d 1042 (1989), this court held that a suspect initiated further conversation by "gratuitously offering exculpatory statements" to police.
The defendant's statement following his request for counsel in this case could clearly be considered his initiation of further conversation with the police. Whether the defendant said "I killed them" or "I didn't do it," the defendant's statement could be found to evince a willingness to continue a generalized discussion about the investigation. Consequently, we are not persuaded that the trial court's finding that the defendant initiated *992 further conversation was manifestly erroneous.
The defendant correctly points out that the trial court declined to decide the factual question of whether his second statement was "I killed them" or "I didn't do it." The defendant submits that the trial court was required to make this factual determination in order to decide if the comment constituted initiation of further dialogue. We agree with the State that it was appropriate for the trial court to refrain from making this factual determination. As discussed above, either comment, "I killed them" or "I didn't do it," could be found to evince a willingness for a generalized discussion of the investigation. Although the substance of an accused's statement is, of course, crucial to a determination of whether the accused initiated further conversation, here the trial court could refrain from deciding between the two conflicting accounts of the statement because either choice would lead to the same result. The trial court properly ruled that the jury should decide whose version of this statement to believe.
The defendant also argues that the timing of the second statement precludes a finding that it constituted initiation of further conversation. As the defendant points out, both of the interrogating officers testified that the second statement was made by the defendant immediately following his request for an attorney. This testimony, the defendant contends, demonstrates that the second statement was simply a part of the request itself and was not an initiation of further conversation. We disagree. The two interrogating officers did not interpret the defendant's second statement to be a part of the request itself. Rather, each officer believed that, by this statement, the defendant was demonstrating his willingness to continue the discussion of the investigation. Moreover, the defendant himself testified at the suppression hearing and, although he disputed the substance of the second statement, he did not claim that it was a part of his request for an attorney. Nothing in Edwards or its progeny suggests that a suspect's initiation of further conversation cannot immediately follow his request for counsel. Whether the defendant's second statement constituted initiation of further conversation or was simply a part of the request for counsel was a question of fact for the trial court to decide. We find no reason to reverse the trial court's ruling on this issue.
The trial court was therefore required to determine whether the defendant's subsequent waiver of his right to counsel was knowing and intelligent. Olivera, 164 Ill.2d at 390, 207 Ill. Dec. 433, 647 N.E.2d 926. The trial court found that the waiver was knowing and intelligent and the defendant has not challenged that finding on appeal. We therefore affirm the trial court's ruling denying the defendant's motion to suppress his confession.
Ineffective Assistance of Counsel
The defendant next challenges his convictions on the ground that his trial counsel rendered ineffective assistance. The defendant argues that defense counsel was ineffective in failing to challenge inaccurate testimony of Lieutenant Shannahan regarding the availability of tests to determine if an individual has recently fired a gun. During defense counsel's cross-examination of Lieutenant Shannahan, the following colloquy took place:
"Q. Now did you perform any tests on the defendant's hands to determine if, whether or not he had fired any gun?
A. No. That test is antiquated. Nobody has used it in years.
Q. You don't use it anymore?
A. No. It is unreliable."
The defendant contends that defense counsel was ineffective for failing to challenge this testimony through further cross-examination and by failing to call an expert witness to dispute the assertion regarding the unreliability of gunshot residue tests. According to the defendant, while the gunshot residue tests known as "paraffin" tests are no longer generally accepted in the scientific community, two other gunshot residue tests, "atomic absorption analysis" and "neutron activation analysis," have both been proven reliable and have been held admissible in criminal prosecutions. Given that the decisive issue at trial *993 was whether the defendant or his wife shot and killed the victims, the defendant argues that counsel's failure to challenge Lieutenant Shannahan's inaccurate testimony was highly prejudicial to his defense.
We agree with the State that this issue is raised prematurely. The defendant points to several cases that refer to the tests he now asserts should have been performed. See People v. Ward, 154 Ill. 2d 272, 315-16, 181 Ill. Dec. 884, 609 N.E.2d 252 (1992); People v. Johnson, 114 Ill. 2d 170, 194-98, 102 Ill. Dec. 342, 499 N.E.2d 1355 (1986). The record, however, does not contain any evidence to substantiate the defendant's contention that reliable, accepted gunshot residue tests existed which could have been performed or any evidence as to what such tests could have shown. As a result, we are unable to evaluate the defendant's claim that evidence existed which could have been introduced to contradict Lieutenant Shannahan's testimony. Because this argument relies on matters outside the record, we cannot address it in this appeal.
Armed Violence and Armed Robbery Convictions
The defendant next contends that he was improperly convicted of both armed robbery and armed violence based on the predicate felony of robbery. The defendant was charged with one count of armed robbery in that he "while armed with a dangerous weapon, a gun, took property, being United States Currency, from the presence of Rane Baldwin, by the use of force, in violation of 720 ILCS 5/18-2(a)." The defendant was also charged with one count of armed violence in that he "while armed with a dangerous weapon, a handgun, performed acts prohibited by Illinois Compiled Statutes, Chapter 720, Act 5, Section 18-1, in that he intentionally and without legal justification took property, being United States Currency, from the presence of Rane Baldwin, by the use of force, in violation of 720 ILCS 5/33A-2." The defendant was convicted of both offenses and sentenced to concurrent terms of 30 years' imprisonment on the armed robbery conviction and 30 years' imprisonment on the armed violence conviction.
Relying on this court's recent decision in People v. Lewis, 175 Ill. 2d 412, 222 Ill. Dec. 296, 677 N.E.2d 830 (1996), the defendant contends that his conviction and sentence for armed violence must be vacated. The defendant argues that, because his armed robbery and armed violence convictions were both premised on his commission of robbery while armed with a handgun, he was convicted of two substantively identical offenses which carry sentences that are unconstitutionally disproportionate. In Lewis, we held that the penalties for armed robbery and armed violence predicated on robbery committed with a category I weapon, such as a handgun, are unconstitutionally disproportionate. In reaching this holding, we first determined that the two offenses were substantively identical. Armed robbery, however, carried a minimum prison sentence of 6 years (730 ILCS 5/5-8-1(a)(3) (West 1994)), while armed violence carried a mandatory minimum term of 15 years' imprisonment (720 ILCS 5/33A-3(a) (West 1994)). Accordingly, we held that the penalty for armed violence predicated on robbery committed with a category I weapon violates the proportionate penalties clause of the Illinois constitution. On that basis, we upheld the circuit court's dismissal of the armed violence charge. Lewis, 175 Ill.2d at 418-19, 222 Ill. Dec. 296, 677 N.E.2d 830.
The State essentially concedes that Lewis governs our decision in this case, and urges that we reconsider Lewis. We decline to do so. The State also argues that we should find that the defendant waived this error by failing to raise it in the trial court. The Lewis decision was premised on People v. Christy, 139 Ill. 2d 172, 151 Ill. Dec. 315, 564 N.E.2d 770 (1990). In Christy, the defendant had failed to raise the disproportionate penalties argument in the trial court. Nevertheless, this court held that the defendant did not waive the issue because "`a constitutional challenge to a statute can be raised at any time.'" Christy, 139 Ill.2d at 176, 151 Ill. Dec. 315, 564 N.E.2d 770, quoting People v. Bryant, 128 Ill. 2d 448, 454, 132 Ill. Dec. 415, 539 N.E.2d 1221 (1989). Waiver is therefore not appropriate here. Accordingly, under the authority of Lewis and Christy, *994 the defendant's conviction and sentence for armed violence must be vacated.
The defendant contends that he is therefore entitled to be resentenced on his remaining noncapital convictions. Because the defendant was sentenced to identical concurrent terms for armed violence and armed robbery, we agree with the State that resentencing is not required as a result of the vacatur of the armed violence conviction and sentence. See People v. Donaldson, 91 Ill. 2d 164, 170-71, 61 Ill. Dec. 780, 435 N.E.2d 477 (1982).
Given our holding, we need not consider the defendant's alternative argument that his armed robbery conviction must be vacated under the "one act, one crime" doctrine because that conviction and his conviction for armed violence were based upon the same conduct.
In summary, we reject the defendant's contentions that he is entitled to a new trial. The defendant's convictions for murder, armed robbery, and unlawful possession of a weapon by a felon are affirmed. The defendant's conviction and sentence for armed violence, however, are vacated.
Sentencing Issues
Characterization of Misdemeanor Convictions as Felonies
The defendant charges that he is entitled to a new sentencing hearing because the prosecutor improperly told the jury that it should consider the defendant's prior misdemeanor convictions as felonies.
During the aggravation-mitigation phase, the State called Lieutenant Rod Huber to testify about some of the defendant's prior convictions. In particular, Lieutenant Huber testified that the defendant had been convicted of three misdemeanors. In 1982, at the age of 17, the defendant was convicted of misdemeanor theft after he admitted to breaking into an automobile and stealing stereo equipment and $19 in cash. In 1984, the defendant was convicted of misdemeanor theft after he made an unauthorized entry into a residence and stole some cash. Also in 1984, the defendant was convicted of misdemeanor criminal damage to property after he and another man kicked in the sides of an automobile. During his direct examination, Lieutenant Huber agreed with the prosecutor that each of these offenses "could have been" charged as felonies, but were charged as misdemeanors. During closing arguments, the prosecutor continued with this theme, arguing to the jury as follows:
"At age seventeen in Henry County he committed his first criminal violation that we are aware of and it was a charge that had the elements of a burglary and a felony theft, but it was charged as misdemeanor theft.
When he was nineteen, again he committed an offense that had all the elements of burglary and a felony theft. In fact, today it would be a residential burglary. He pled to a misdemeanor theft.
He had a criminal damage to property charge in Henry County when he was nineteen years of age, could have been a felony. He was allowed to plead on a misdemeanor.
* * * * * *
All you heard Officer Benson, I believe, testify to a criminal charge in Knox County, that the defendant eventually pled to misdemeanor theft, had all the elements of a robbery.
* * * * * *
This defendant has committed numerous felony type offenses. He has been convicted of numerous felonies, and almost all of his conduct that he has ever been convicted of, the misdemeanors had all the elements of felonies."
The prosecutor touched on this theme again in rebuttal closing argument, stating that the Henry County cases had "all the elements of felonies."
The defendant contends that the prosecutor committed error in eliciting testimony from Lieutenant Huber that his misdemeanor convictions "could have been" felonies and in urging the jury to consider his prior misdemeanor convictions as felonies.
This issue is governed by our decision in People v. Williams, 161 Ill. 2d 1, 204 Ill. Dec. 72, 641 N.E.2d 296 (1994). In Williams, evidence was presented during the defendant's *995 death sentencing hearing regarding the defendant's prior conviction for voluntary manslaughter. That evidence included the defendant's confession in the prior case in which he related that he held the victim, James Fortner, down while an accomplice beat and choked Fortner. During closing arguments at the death sentencing hearing, the prosecutor repeatedly characterized the defendant's acts with regard to Fortner's death in the prior case as "cold blooded murder" and "conspiracy to commit murder." On appeal, the defendant contended that he was denied a fair sentencing hearing because the prosecutor improperly characterized his voluntary manslaughter conviction as murder. The defendant argued that the prosecutor's remarks were factually and legally incorrect and highly prejudicial. This court agreed that the defendant was denied a fair sentencing hearing by the prosecutor's remarks. We reasoned that:
"It is a fundamental principle of criminal jurisprudence that a conviction of a lesser offense operates as an acquittal of a greater offense. [Citation.] Whatever the prosecutor's personal opinion on the nature of defendant's participation in the Fortner killing, the fact remains that defendant was not convicted of murder or conspiracy to commit murder. The prosecutor's statement that defendant participated in a conspiracy to commit murder and that his conduct amounted to cold blooded murder were misrepresentations of the evidence and the law." Williams, 161 Ill.2d at 78, 204 Ill. Dec. 72, 641 N.E.2d 296.
We held in Williams that the defendant was denied a fair sentencing hearing based on these comments and other misconduct by the prosecution. We concluded that the prosecutors' conduct "appears to have been a calculated course of action to play upon and incite the emotions and prejudices of the jury." Williams, 161 Ill.2d at 81, 204 Ill. Dec. 72, 641 N.E.2d 296. A new sentencing hearing was therefore ordered. We recently reaffirmed this holding in People v. Hooper, 172 Ill. 2d 64, 81-83, 216 Ill. Dec. 633, 665 N.E.2d 1190 (1996), where we held that a prosecutor committed error in arguing to the jury that the defendant's prior conviction for voluntary manslaughter should be considered murder.
The same type of improper argument that we condemned in Williams was repeated by the prosecutor in this case. As we noted in Williams, "[i]t is of vital importance to society and to the defendant that any decision to impose the death penalty is, and appears to be, based upon reason rather than emotion." Williams, 161 Ill.2d at 77, 204 Ill. Dec. 72, 641 N.E.2d 296, citing People v. Holman, 103 Ill. 2d 133, 163, 82 Ill. Dec. 585, 469 N.E.2d 119 (1984). The death penalty determination must therefore focus on the particular character and record of the defendant. Holman, 103 Ill.2d at 163, 82 Ill. Dec. 585, 469 N.E.2d 119. Moreover, because of the qualitative difference between death and other forms of punishment, a high standard of procedural accuracy is required when determining whether the death penalty will be imposed. Hooper, 172 Ill.2d at 76, 216 Ill. Dec. 633, 665 N.E.2d 1190; Williams, 161 Ill.2d at 77, 204 Ill. Dec. 72, 641 N.E.2d 296. It is also well settled that parties in closing arguments may not go beyond the evidence presented and inferences therefrom, misstate the law, or express personal opinions on the evidence. Williams, 161 Ill.2d at 78, 204 Ill. Dec. 72, 641 N.E.2d 296. In particular, prosecutorial arguments that are calculated to divert the jurors' attentions from the evidence and play upon their emotions are manifestly improper at a capital sentencing hearing.
The prosecution may properly present evidence at the aggravation-mitigation phase concerning the details of crimes for which the defendant has previously been convicted. People v. Owens, 102 Ill. 2d 88, 112, 79 Ill. Dec. 663, 464 N.E.2d 261 (1984). The prosecution may not, however, characterize the defendant's prior offenses as more serious than actually adjudicated. Here, as in Williams, the prosecutor clearly sought to mischaracterize the defendant's criminal history. Regardless of the prosecutor's personal opinions on the seriousness of the defendant's prior offenses, the defendant was convicted only of misdemeanors and it was improper for the prosecutor to characterize those misdemeanors as felonies and to urge *996 the jury to consider them as such. A defendant may not be sentenced on the basis of "`assumptions concerning his criminal record which [are] materially untrue.'" Lewis v. Lane, 832 F.2d 1446, 1457 (7th Cir.1987), quoting Townsend v. Burke, 334 U.S. 736, 741, 68 S. Ct. 1252, 1255, 92 L. Ed. 1690, 1693 (1948).
The State attempts to distinguish Williams by asserting that here, unlike in Williams, there was evidence, in the form of Lieutenant Huber's testimony, to "support" the characterization of these offenses as felonies. This attempt to distinguish Williams is unavailing. In Williams, the State asserted on appeal that there was no dispute as to the defendant's participation in the Fortner killing, only as to the "label to attach to it." This court rejected the State's argument, noting:
"The State's assertion on appeal that the only dispute regarding defendant's participation in the Fortner homicide was merely `the label to attach to it' ignores the clear legal differentiation between adjudications of guilt of voluntary manslaughter and murder. It also demonstrates the same disregard shown by the prosecutor of the mandate that there be a high degree of accuracy in a proceeding to determine whether a defendant should be put to death. The `label' attached to defendant's criminal conduct in the final adjudication of the Fortner case was `voluntary manslaughter,' not murder." Williams, 161 Ill.2d at 79, 204 Ill. Dec. 72, 641 N.E.2d 296.
Moreover, in Williams, substantial evidence, including the defendant's own confession, was introduced at the death penalty hearing regarding the defendant's role in the killing of Fortner. Thus, it was not a lack of evidence to support the characterization of "murder" that prompted this court's holding in Williams. The legal principle violated in this case is indistinguishable from that violated in Williams.
The State contends that any error resulting from the prosecutor's comments was harmless. We disagree. Given the facts of this case, we find that the prosecutor's improper comments deprived the defendant of a fair and reliable sentencing hearing. The evidence presented by the State in aggravation was not overwhelming. That evidence consisted primarily of the defendant's prior criminal history. While the defendant did have prior criminal convictions, all of those convictions were for nonviolent, property crimes and none involved any injury to a person. The record reveals that the defendant was convicted of two felonies, a 1986 burglary of a fertilizer plant and a 1989 felony theft wherein the defendant and another man stole a knife, some liquor, and a jacket from the house of the other man's friend. The remainder of the defendant's prior convictions were for misdemeanor offenses. The prosecutor's comments, however, attempted to improperly enhance the defendant's prior criminal history. The comments were a calculated attempt by the prosecutor to encourage the jury to base its sentencing decision on something other than an accurate account of the defendant's criminal record.
Moreover, the prosecutor's comments to this effect were not isolated references. A major theme of both the prosecutor's opening and closing arguments at the aggravation-mitigation phase was the defendant's "extensive" history of criminal convictions which, according to the prosecutor's comments, should all be considered to have been felonies. In Williams, we found it significant that the prosecutor's improper comments were not simply "isolated comments made in the course of a lengthy and otherwise proper argument." Williams, 161 Ill.2d at 78, 204 Ill. Dec. 72, 641 N.E.2d 296; cf. Hooper, 172 Ill.2d at 83, 216 Ill. Dec. 633, 665 N.E.2d 1190 (prosecutor's comment, though highly improper, did not constitute reversible error because it was an isolated remark). In addition, the defendant here presented a number of witnesses in mitigation, including friends, relatives and coworkers, and a psychiatrist who related that the defendant suffered from several disorders, including drug and alcohol abuse. On this record, we cannot conclude, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the prosecutor's deliberate and repeated mischaracterization of the defendant's criminal record did not contribute to the jury's decision to sentence the defendant to death. People v. Jimerson, *997 166 Ill. 2d 211, 228, 209 Ill. Dec. 738, 652 N.E.2d 278 (1995); see also Lewis v. Lane, 832 F.2d 1446, 1457 (7th Cir.1987) ("The difference between two prior felony convictions and four prior felony convictions in determining whether to impose the death penalty is without a doubt significant"). We hold that the defendant is therefore entitled to a new sentencing hearing.
The State also contends that the defendant waived consideration of this issue because defense counsel failed to object to the improper comments. The defendant urges that we consider this error to be plain error or, in the alternative, find that his counsel rendered ineffective assistance in failing to object. A defendant's waiver of a capital sentencing issue will be excused under the plain error rule where the evidence is closely balanced or where the error is of such magnitude that the defendant was denied a fair sentencing hearing. People v. Rissley, 165 Ill. 2d 364, 394, 209 Ill. Dec. 205, 651 N.E.2d 133 (1995); People v. Szabo, 94 Ill. 2d 327, 355, 68 Ill. Dec. 935, 447 N.E.2d 193 (1983). We have already found that the prosecutor's comments deprived the defendant of a fair and reliable death sentencing hearing and that the evidence in aggravation was not overwhelming. The defendant's waiver is therefore excused under the plain error rule. See People v. Johnson, 146 Ill. 2d 109, 146-47, 165 Ill. Dec. 682, 585 N.E.2d 78 (1991) (waiver excused because issue of prosecutorial misstatements concerned fairness of death sentencing hearing); Holman, 103 Ill.2d at 176-77, 82 Ill. Dec. 585, 469 N.E.2d 119; Szabo, 94 Ill.2d at 355, 68 Ill. Dec. 935, 447 N.E.2d 193.
Accordingly, we vacate the defendant's death sentence and remand for a new capital sentencing hearing. We address the remaining sentencing issues because they are likely to recur on remand.
Unconstitutionally Vague Aggravating Factor
The defendant argues that the jury was allowed to consider an unconstitutionally vague statutory aggravating factor at the aggravation-mitigation phase of the hearing. As noted, one of the three statutory aggravating factors found to exist by the jury at the eligibility phase was that the defendant committed murder in a "cold, calculated and premeditated manner pursuant to a preconceived plan, scheme or design to take a human life by unlawful means." 720 ILCS 5/9-1(b)(11) (West 1995). At the close of the aggravation-mitigation phase, both the prosecutor and the trial court told the jurors they should consider this aggravating factor in their deliberations. The defendant claims that section 9-1(b)(11) of the Criminal Code of 1961 is unconstitutionally vague and was therefore improperly considered by the jury at his death sentencing hearing.
As the defendant acknowledges, this court in People v. Johnson, 154 Ill. 2d 356, 372-73, 181 Ill. Dec. 926, 609 N.E.2d 294 (1993), rejected the argument that the aggravating factor contained in section 9-1(b)(11) is unconstitutionally vague. The defendant asks us to reconsider our holding in Johnson in light of the Florida Supreme Court's more recent decision in Jackson v. State, 648 So. 2d 85 (Fla.1994). Subsequent to the Florida Supreme Court's decision in Jackson, however, this court has reaffirmed the Johnson holding that section 9-1(b)(11) is not unconstitutionally vague. People v. Mulero, 176 Ill. 2d 444, 223 Ill. Dec. 893, 680 N.E.2d 1329 (1997); People v. Williams, 173 Ill. 2d 48, 89-90, 218 Ill. Dec. 916, 670 N.E.2d 638 (1996). We therefore decline the defendant's invitation to reconsider our holding on this issue.
Prosecution's Rebuttal Closing
The defendant also argues that the trial court improperly allowed the prosecution to present both an initial and a rebuttal closing argument at the aggravation-mitigation phase. This was improper, the defendant contends, because the State bears no burden of proof at this stage of a death sentencing hearing. This court has repeatedly rejected the argument that it is improper for the prosecution to present rebuttal argument at the aggravation-mitigation phase of a death sentencing hearing. People v. Williams, 161 Ill. 2d 1, 56, 204 Ill. Dec. 72, 641 N.E.2d 296 (1994); People v. Kitchen, 159 Ill. 2d 1, 47, 201 Ill. Dec. 1, 636 N.E.2d 433 (1994); People v. Fair, 159 Ill. 2d 51, 94, 201 Ill. Dec. 23, 636 *998 N.E.2d 455 (1994). The defendant presents no persuasive basis for reconsideration of those decisions.
Constitutionality of the Death Penalty Statute
Finally, the defendant makes several constitutional challenges to the Illinois death penalty statute, each of which has been previously rejected by this court. We decline to reconsider our previous decisions rejecting the argument that the death penalty statute is unconstitutional because it places a burden on the defendant which precludes meaningful consideration of mitigating evidence. See People v. Johnson, 154 Ill. 2d 356, 373, 181 Ill. Dec. 926, 609 N.E.2d 294 (1993); People v. Bean, 137 Ill. 2d 65, 138, 147 Ill. Dec. 891, 560 N.E.2d 258 (1990). We also decline to reconsider our previous decisions rejecting the argument that the death penalty statute is unconstitutional because it allows the sentencer to weigh the "vague" aggravating factor of "any other reason" why a defendant should be sentenced to death. See People v. Young, 128 Ill. 2d 1, 59, 131 Ill. Dec. 86, 538 N.E.2d 461 (1989); People v. Orange, 121 Ill. 2d 364, 390-91, 118 Ill. Dec. 1, 521 N.E.2d 69 (1988). Finally, we decline to reconsider our previous holdings rejecting the argument that various features of our death penalty statute, considered jointly, render the statute unconstitutional. See People v. Edgeston, 157 Ill. 2d 201, 247, 191 Ill. Dec. 84, 623 N.E.2d 329 (1993).
CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, the defendant's convictions for murder, armed robbery and unlawful possession of a weapon by a felon are affirmed. The defendant's conviction and sentence for armed violence are vacated. The defendant's death sentence is also vacated and this cause is remanded to the circuit court for a new capital sentencing hearing.
Judgment affirmed in part and reversed in part; death sentence vacated; cause remanded.

=== CASE 2230050 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:35.160675+00 ===

270 Neb. 344
STATE OF NEBRASKA EX REL. COUNSEL FOR DISCIPLINE OF THE NEBRASKA SUPREME COURT, RELATOR,
v.
RICHARD E. CARLSON, RESPONDENT.
No. S-05-766.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
Filed April 29, 2005.
HENDRY, C.J., WRIGHT, CONNOLLY, GERRARD, STEPHAN, and McCORMACK, JJ.
PER CURIAM.
INTRODUCTION
Respondent, Richard E. Carlson, was admitted to the practice of law in the State of Nebraska on May 12, 1967. On April 27, 2005, the U.S. Attorney for the District of Nebraska filed an information (Information) in the U.S. District Court for the District of Nebraska, "United States of America v. Richard E. Carlson, Case 4:05CR3056," charging respondent with one count of violating 18 U.S.C. § 1344 (2000) (violation of banking laws of United States), a felony. In summary, the Information charged respondent with devising a scheme to defraud two banks by obtaining funds by false and fraudulent pretenses. On April 27, respondent offered to plead guilty and filed a "Petition to Enter a Plea of Guilty" in the U.S. District Court for the District of Nebraska.
FACTS
On June 21, 2005, respondent filed with this court a voluntary surrender of license, voluntarily surrendering his license to practice law in the State of Nebraska. In his voluntary surrender of license, respondent stated that he "freely, knowingly and voluntarily admit[ted] that the allegations made against [him] in the Information are true and that [his] conduct as alleged in the Information constitute[d] violations of [his] oath of office as an attorney . . . and [Canon 1,] DR 1-102(A)(1), (3) and (4) of the Code of Professional Responsibility." In addition to surrendering his license, respondent voluntarily consented to the entry of an order of disbarment and waived his right to notice, appearance, and hearing prior to the entry of the order of disbarment.
ANALYSIS
Neb. Ct. R. of Discipline 15 (rev. 2001) provides in pertinent part:
(A) Once a Grievance, a Complaint, or a Formal Charge has been filed, suggested, or indicated against a member, the member may voluntarily surrender his or her license.
(1) The voluntary surrender of license shall state in writing that the member knowingly admits or knowingly does not challenge or contest the truth of the suggested or indicated Grievance, Complaint, or Formal Charge and waives all proceedings against him or her in connection therewith.
Pursuant to rule 15, we find that respondent has voluntarily surrendered his license to practice law, stated in writing that he knowingly admits the truth of the suggested disciplinary allegations against him, and waived all proceedings against him in connection therewith. We further find that for purposes of this voluntary surrender, respondent has admitted the allegations against him in the Information, which, in summary, allege that respondent devised a scheme to defraud two banks by obtaining funds by false and fraudulent pretenses, that respondent has admitted that he violated Canon 1, DR 1-102(A)(1), (3), and (4), and his oath of office as an attorney, Neb. Rev. Stat. § 7-104 (Reissue 1997), and that respondent has consented to the entry of an order of disbarment. We further find that respondent has admitted to facts which facts are not consistent with adherence to the Code of Professional Responsibility or his oath of office as an attorney.
CONCLUSION
Upon due consideration of the voluntary surrender in this matter, the court finds, for purposes of this voluntary surrender, that respondent knowingly has admitted the suggested disciplinary allegations and the allegations in the Information filed against him and that his admissions are knowingly made. The court accepts respondent's surrender of his license to practice law, finds that respondent should be disbarred, and hereby orders him disbarred from the practice of law in the State of Nebraska, effective immediately. Respondent shall forthwith comply with Neb. Ct. R. of Discipline 16 (rev. 2004), and upon failure to do so, he shall be subject to punishment for contempt of this court. Accordingly, respondent is directed to pay costs and expenses in accordance with Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 7-114 and 7-115 (Reissue 1997) and Neb. Ct. R. of Discipline 10(P) (rev. 2003) and 23 (rev. 2001).
JUDGMENT OF DISBARMENT.
Miller-Lerman, J., not participating.

=== CASE 2230051 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:35.170558+00 ===

687 N.E.2d 621 (1997)
Robert JENNINGS, Appellant-Defendant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee-Plaintiff.
No. 59A01-9706-CR-193.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
December 8, 1997.
Susan K. Carpenter, Public Defender, Lorraine L. Rodts, Deputy Public Defender, Indianapolis, for Appellant-Defendant.
*622 Jeffrey A. Modisett, Attorney General, Andrew L. Hedges, Deputy Attorney General, Indianapolis, for Appellee-Plaintiff.
OPINION
ROBERTSON, Judge.
Robert Jennings appeals the sixty-nine (69) year prison sentence imposed for crimes related to two successive burglaries of the same building. The sole issue raised on appeal may be restated as:
whether Jennings' sentence violates the limitation upon consecutive sentences imposed by Ind.Code 35-50-1-2 (1994).
We reverse and remand with instructions that Jennings be resentenced for an aggregate term not exceeding fifty-five (55) years.
FACTS
The facts in the light most favorable to the verdict reveal that during the evening of March 22, 1991, and the early morning of March 23, 1991, Jennings and his accomplice made three round trips from Lawrenceville to Leipsic to burglarize a hardware store in Leipsic. The first two burglaries were committed with the intent to steal property. The third burglary was committed with the intent to commit an arson to conceal the earlier burglaries. On the third trip, Jennings set fire to the hardware store.
Jennings was charged in a four count information. Two of the counts, Burglary and Theft, related to the first break-in which took place "on or about March 22, 1991." The other two counts, Burglary and Arson, related to the third break-in which took place "on or about March 23, 1991." Jennings was also charged as an habitual offender. Jennings was convicted on all four counts and was adjudicated an habitual offender. Ultimately, Jennings was sentenced to 50 years for Arson (20 years + the 30-year habitual offender enhancement), 8 years for each of the Burglary convictions, and 3 years for the Theft conviction. The trial court ordered that all sentences run consecutively for a total of sixty-nine (69) years.
DECISION
Courts are duty bound to correct sentences which violate the trial court's statutory authority to issue consecutive sentences under I.C. XX-XX-X-X. Sinn v. State, 609 N.E.2d 434, 436 (Ind.Ct.App.1993), trans. denied. As stated in Tedlock v. State, 656 N.E.2d 273 (Ind.Ct.App.1995):
In 1994, our general assembly amended I.C. XX-XX-X-X to impose a previously nonexistent limitation upon a trial court's discretion to impose consecutive sentences. The relevant portion of the amended statute, which [Defendant] argues has been violated, reads:
The court may order terms of imprisonment to be served consecutively even if the sentences are not imposed at the same time. However, except for murder and felony convictions for which a person receives an enhanced penalty because the felony resulted in serious bodily injury if the defendant knowingly or intentionally caused the serious bodily injury, the total of the consecutive terms of imprisonment, exclusive of terms of imprisonment under IND.CODE 35-50-2-8 [habitual offender statute] and IND. CODE 35-50-2-10 [habitual substance offender statute], to which the defendant is sentenced for felony convictions arising out of an episode of criminal conduct shall not exceed the presumptive sentence for a felony which is one (1) class of felony higher than the most serious of the felonies for which the person has been convicted.
Id. at 276 (Emphasis original). Jennings was originally sentenced after the effective date of the statutory amendment. Therefore, he is entitled to the ameliorative benefit of the amendment. See id. (Approved in Palmer v. State, 679 N.E.2d 887, 892 n. 4 (Ind.1997)).
Jennings argues that the four charged felonies relate to a single episode of criminal conduct triggering the limitation on the trial court's discretionary authority to order consecutive sentences. The State argues that the two charged burglaries (with their attendant felonies) represent two separate *623 criminal episodes. We agree with Jennings.[1]
Our legislature has defined the term "episode of criminal conduct" to mean:
offenses or a connected series of offenses that are closely related in time, place, and circumstances.
I.C. XX-XX-X-X(b) (1995). In Tedlock, we held that this 1995 amendment was applicable to the 1994 version of the statute. 656 N.E.2d at 276. The term "episode of criminal conduct" has been held to mean offenses or a connected series of offenses that are closely related in time, place, and circumstance that a complete account of one charge cannot be related without referring to details of the other charge. Reynolds v. State, 657 N.E.2d 438, 440 (Ind.Ct.App.1995); Tedlock, 656 N.E.2d at 276. In Reynolds, we rejected the defendant's argument that three successive burglaries committed against different victims constituted a single criminal episode, noting that each burglary could be described without referring to the details of the others. 657 N.E.2d at 441. Similarly, in Tedlock, we rejected defendant's argument that four sales of a particular illegal security to different victims over a two-year time span constituted a single criminal episode, noting that a complete account of each of the four sales could be related without referring to the details of another.
In the present case, all four offenses were committed at the same place on the same night (before and after midnight). A complete account of the Burglary/Arson cannot be related without referring to the Burglary/Theft because the Burglary/Arson was committed with the intention of concealing the Burglary/Theft. Therefore, we hold that all four of the counts against Jennings relate to a single criminal episode as that term has been defined by I.C. XX-XX-X-X(b) (1995).
The 1994 ameliorative sentencing statute, as set out above, provides that the total of the consecutive terms of imprisonment, exclusive of the habitual offender enhancement, cannot exceed the presumptive sentence for a felony which is one class higher than the most serious felony for which the defendant has been convicted. Here, the most serious of Jennings' convictions was the Arson, a class B felony. The presumptive sentence for a class A felony at the time of Jennings' sentencing was twenty-five (25) years. I.C. XX-XX-X-X (Reduced from thirty (30) years by the same 1994 ameliorative Act discussed above. P.L. 164-1994). Therefore, we reverse and remand with instructions that Jennings be resentenced for an aggregate term not exceeding fifty-five (55) years (25 years + the 30-year habitual offender enhancement) in accordance with I.C. XX-XX-X-X (1994). See Payne v. State, (Ind.1997) 688 N.E.2d 164, 166.
Judgment reversed and remanded for resentencing.
SHARPNACK, C.J., and BAKER, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Even had we agreed with the State that the two charged burglaries constituted separate criminal episodes, we would have been obliged to shave three years off of Jennings' twenty-eight (28) year aggregate sentence (exclusive of the habitual offender enhancement) for the Burglary/Arson episode. See infra.

=== CASE 2230053 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:35.206457+00 ===

687 N.E.2d 1099 (1997)
293 Ill. App. 3d 129
227 Ill. Dec. 617
Marshall SPIEGEL, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
ZURICH INSURANCE COMPANY, State Farm Insurance Company, Continental Casualty Company, and Employers Mutual Casualty Company, Defendants-Appellees.
No. 1-97-0842.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, Sixth Division.
November 7, 1997.
Daniel C. Meenan, Jr. of Feiwell and Meenan, Chicago, for Plaintiff-Appellant.
Sedgwick, Detert, Moran & Arnold, Chicago (Marlene A. Kurilla), for Defendant-Appellee Zurich.
Rooks, Pitts and Poust, Chicago (Stephen E. Sward, Carolyn J. Jones), for Defendant-Appellee State Farm.
Querrey & Harrow, Ltd., Chicago (Michael Resis and Victor J. Piekarski), for Defendant-Appellee Continental Casualty.
Presiding Justice GREIMAN delivered the opinion of the court:
Plaintiff Marshall C. Spiegel appeals the trial court's entry of summary judgment against him, finding that coverage in insurance policies for malicious prosecution claims does not include coverage for sanctions imposed by a court. We affirm.
*1100 In an unrelated federal case, the seventh circuit imposed $34,000 in sanctions against plaintiff pursuant to Rule 38 of the Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure (Fed. R.App. P. 38) for filing a frivolous appeal. Spiegel v. Continental Illinois National Bank, 790 F.2d 638 (7th Cir.1986). Plaintiff, the beneficiary of a trust established by his father, Oscar Spiegel, filed two lawsuits in federal district court against the trustee, Continental Illinois National Bank, and certain employees of the trustee, disputing the propriety of the trustee's management of the trust. The first lawsuit concluded when the district court granted summary judgment to the defendants and plaintiff did not appeal. The second lawsuit concluded when the district court dismissed the complaint based partially on res judicata from the first lawsuit and partially on the failure of the complaint to set forth a claim for mail fraud, as a matter of law. Plaintiff appealed the dismissal of his second lawsuit. The seventh circuit affirmed the dismissal of plaintiff's complaint and imposed sanctions against plaintiff under Rule 38 of the Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure (Fed. R.App. P. 38) for filing a frivolous appeal. Spiegel, 790 F.2d 638.
Plaintiff then tendered claims for the Rule 38 sanctions to the four defendant insurance carriers, i.e., Zurich Insurance Company (Zurich), State Farm Insurance Company (State Farm), Continental Casualty Company (Continental), and Employers Mutual Casualty Company, based on the policies' coverage for malicious prosecution claims. There is no dispute that the insurance policies at issue afford coverage for "malicious prosecution" under their coverage for "personal injury."
When the insurance carriers declined to cover the claims predicated upon the Rule 38 sanctions, plaintiff filed a four-count complaint alleging breach of contract against each insurance carrier. Plaintiff voluntarily dismissed, without prejudice, defendant Employers Mutual Casualty Company and, therefore, it is not a party in this appeal.
On November 14, 1996, State Farm filed a motion for summary judgment. In its motion, State Farm asserted that plaintiff's claim for breach of contract could be resolved as a matter of law because a cause of action for malicious prosecution was not filed against plaintiff and the insurance policies did not provide coverage to plaintiff for these judicially imposed punitive damages.
On February 5,1997, the trial court granted summary judgment in favor of State Farm. The order also noted that the other defendants (Zurich and Continental) "made oral joinders to State Farm's motion." Accordingly, the trial court also entered summary judgment in favor of the other two defendants.
On appeal, plaintiff asserts that the trial court erred in entering summary judgment because, as a matter of law, the offense of malicious prosecution is equivalent to the conduct of frivolous litigation for which sanctions were imposed and, therefore, falls within the coverage afforded by the subject insurance policies. We disagree.
Our review of a summary judgment ruling is de novo. McNamee v. State of Illinois, 173 Ill. 2d 433, 438, 220 Ill. Dec. 147, 672 N.E.2d 1159 (1996); Outboard Marine Corp. v. Liberty Mutual Insurance Co., 154 Ill. 2d 90, 102, 180 Ill. Dec. 691, 607 N.E.2d 1204 (1992). Summary judgment is proper where there are no genuine issues of material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Outboard Marine, 154 Ill.2d at 102, 180 Ill. Dec. 691, 607 N.E.2d 1204. Where no factual issues are raised on appeal, the sole question on review is whether the trial court's entry of summary judgment is proper as a matter of law. McNamee, 173 Ill.2d at 438, 220 Ill. Dec. 147, 672 N.E.2d 1159.
To establish malicious prosecution, the plaintiff must (1) show that the defendant brought the underlying suit maliciously; (2) show that the defendant brought the underlying suit without probable cause; (3) establish that the former action was terminated in his or her favor; and (4) plead and prove some "special injury" or special damage beyond the usual expense, time or annoyance in defending a lawsuit. Cult Awareness Network v. Church of Scientology International, 177 Ill. 2d 267, 272, 226 Ill. Dec. 604, 608-09, 685 N.E.2d 1347,1351-52 (1997).
*1101 At the time the federal court imposed sanctions against plaintiff, Rule 38 of the Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure provided: "If a court of appeals shall determine that an appeal is frivolous, it may award just damages and single and double costs to the appellee." Fed. R.App. P. 38, printed in 28 U.S.C.R. 38 (1988) (amended 1994).
To apply Rule 38, the federal courts make two determinations. First, to establish that the appeal was frivolous, the court must determine whether the result of the appeal was obvious or the appellant's argument is wholly without merit. Spiegel, 790 F.2d at 650. Second, the court must determine whether sanctions are appropriate by looking for "an `indication of the appellant's bad faith suggesting that the appeal was prosecuted with no reasonable expectation of altering the district court's judgment and for purposes of delay or harassment or out of sheer obstinacy.'" Spiegel, 790 F.2d at 650, quoting Reid v. United States, 715 F.2d 1148, 1155 (7th Cir.1983).
To exemplify the elements of Rule 38, plaintiff directs attention to several federal decisions: Munoz v. Strahm Farms, Inc., 69 F.3d 501 (Fed.Cir.1995) (sanctions imposed because the appeal was frivolous as filed and as argued); Leahy v. Board of Trustees of Community College District No. 508, 912 F.2d 917 (7th Cir.1990) (sanctions imposed where the appeal had absolutely no chance of success and was prosecuted out of sheer obstinacy); Ruderer v. Fines, 614 F.2d 1128 (7th Cir.1980) (the court imposed sanctions sua sponte in light of the appellant's entire course of conduct over the years and his litigious proclivities); Ratcliff v. Texas, 714 F.2d 24 (5th Cir.1983) (Rule 38 sanctions were imposed where the appeal was prosecuted for the purpose of harassment or out of sheer obstinacy); Depoister v. Mary M. Holloway Foundation, 36 F.3d 582 (7th Cir. 1994) (no sanctions were imposed where the court found that there was no bad faith in pursuing the appeal). None of these cases, however, address or compare the tort of malicious prosecution and Rule 38 sanctions.
Applying the law of other states, three federal decisions have compared malicious prosecution with other causes of actions, not with Rule 38 sanctions. A claim under a Pennsylvania statute for wrongful use of civil proceedings was covered in an insurance policy that included claims for malicious prosecution in Northwestern National Casualty Co. v. Century III Chevrolet, Inc., 863 F. Supp. 247 (W.D.Pa.1994). The district court in Northwestern National Casualty held that an insurance policy's coverage for claims of malicious prosecution included claims under a Pennsylvania statute for wrongful use of civil proceedings because the statute replaced the common law cause of action for malicious prosecution. Northwestern National Casualty, 863 F.Supp. at 248. In addition, the court reasoned that any ambiguity in the policy language regarding the scope of coverage should be construed against the insurance company. Northwestern National Casualty, 863 F.Supp. at 248. In comparing the common law tort of malicious prosecution with the statute for wrongful use of civil proceedings, the court acknowledged that the two causes of action contained some different elements but the difference was "superficial" and ignored the purpose and effect of the statute. Northwestern National Casualty, 863 F.Supp. at 249-50. Unlike the Pennsylvania law applied in Northwestern National Casualty, Illinois has not replaced the common law tort of malicious prosecution with a statute.
Applying Wisconsin and Mississippi law, a district court in Wisconsin held that the term "malicious prosecution" in an insurance policy included "abuse of process" in Koehring Co. v. American Mutual Liability Insurance Co., 564 F. Supp. 303 (E.D.Wis.1983). However, the same Wisconsin court subsequently applied Wisconsin law and held that a claim for abuse of process did not come within the coverage of a personal liability policy that specifically covered "malicious prosecution" in Heil Co. v. Hartford Accident & Indemnity Co., 937 F. Supp. 1355 (E.D.Wis.1996).
Moreover, the seventh circuit has recognized a distinction between the two causes of action in Smart v. Board of Trustees of University of Illinois, 34 F.3d 432 (7th Cir.1994). "Malicious prosecution" is the bringing of a suit known to be groundless; "abuse of process" is the bringing of a suit that may have *1102 solid grounding in law but that the plaintiff has filed not in order to vindicate his legal rights and obtain judgment but in order to harass defendant. Smart, 34 F.3d at 434.
Illinois law also recognizes and upholds the distinction between the torts of malicious prosecution and abuse of process. Arora v. Chui, 279 Ill.App.3d 321, 216 Ill. Dec. 173, 664 N.E.2d 1101 (1996). In Arora, the court enunciated the distinct elements of each tort and separately addressed each tort. The Arora court held that the plaintiffs failed to establish a prima facie case for malicious prosecution based on their failure to prove that the underlying suit was terminated in their favor (Arora, 279 Ill.App.3d at 330, 216 Ill. Dec. 173, 664 N.E.2d 1101) and failed to assert a cause of action for abuse of process because the filing of a lis pendens notice did not involve the misuse of the process of the court (Arora, 279 Ill.App.3d at 332, 216 Ill. Dec. 173, 664 N.E.2d 1101).
In addition, Illinois law recognizes and upholds the distinction between the tort of malicious prosecution and the remedy of pleading-related sanctions available under Illinois Supreme Court Rule 137 (134 Ill.2d R. 137). Levin v. King, 271 Ill.App.3d 728, 737, 208 Ill. Dec. 186, 648 N.E.2d 1108 (1995). The underlying facts in Levin reveal that the plaintiff initially threatened to pursue litigation to protest a proposed development project in which the defendant land developer had sought financing. In turn, the defendant then filed an action against the plaintiff for tortious interference with advantageous business relationship. After a trial, the circuit court directed a verdict against the defendant. Next, the plaintiff filed a malicious prosecution action against the defendant based on the defendant's tortious interference suit. The trial court granted judgment on the pleadings for the defendant, finding that, as a matter of law, the plaintiff failed to allege the element of special injury necessary to establish a malicious prosecution case. In affirming the trial court's decision, the appellate court specifically declined to depart from the special injury rule in a malicious prosecution action and reasoned, in pertinent part, that Rule 137 was created by our supreme court as a remedy for suits that are not well grounded in fact or law. Levin, 271 Ill. App.3d at 737, 208 Ill. Dec. 186, 648 N.E.2d 1108.
The federal and state courts have clearly adhered to the distinctions between the torts of malicious prosecution and abuse of process. No cases have been advanced by the parties or found in research that equate malicious prosecution and court-imposed sanctions. Moreover, plaintiff does not argue, or even suggest, that the term "malicious prosecution" as stated and used in the insurance policies is ambiguous. Instead, plaintiff seeks to expand the term to graft Rule 38 sanctions onto insurance policies to fit an event that is not mentioned or considered in the policies.
We find that judicially imposed sanctions are not within the ambit of the term "malicious prosecution" in the subject insurance policies. The common law tort of malicious prosecution contains significant strictures and rules. The most recent pronouncement on this tort by the Illinois Supreme Court in Cult Awareness Network does not change the cause of action or its elements. Cult Awareness Network, 177 Ill. 2d 267, 226 Ill. Dec. 604, 685 N.E.2d 1347 (1997).
For the foregoing reasons, we find that a claim of malicious prosecution is not equivalent to sanctions imposed by a court for purposes of insurance coverage, as a matter of law. Accordingly, we affirm the trial court's order of summary judgment in favor of defendants.
Affirmed.
ZWICK and QUINN, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2230054 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:35.236237+00 ===

687 N.E.2d 345 (1997)
Vick L. JOHNSON, Appellant (Defendant Below),
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee (Plaintiff Below).
No. 45S00-9610-CR-656.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
October 29, 1997.
*346 Marce Gonzalez, Jr., Merrillville, for Appellant.
Jeffrey A. Modisett, Attorney General, and Phillip D. Hatfield, Deputy Attorney General, Indianapolis, for appellee.
SHEPARD, Chief Justice.
A jury found appellant Vick L. Johnson guilty of felony murder for killing Cleotha and Anne Smith during the course of a robbery.[1] The trial court sentenced Johnson to two forty-year presumptive sentences, each enhanced by twenty years for aggravating circumstances, and ordered that the sentences be served consecutively. (R. at 92.) Johnson appeals his sentence. We affirm.
I. Facts
The evidence at trial revealed that during February 1995, Johnson and Craig Mahone began discussing robbery as a joint project. By the second week of March, they had formulated a plan to rob Johnson's father-in-law, Cleotha Smith. (R. at 664.) On March 13, they decided to go forward with the plan, deciding that robbing Cleotha at home would be an "easier way." (Id.)
Johnson, his wife Latania, and Latania's three-year-old daughter Victoria lived with Latania's parents, Cleotha and Anne Smith, in a small home in East Chicago, Indiana. (R. at 178-80.) Johnson had lived with the Smiths long enough to know that Cleotha Smith had a habit of keeping several hundred dollars with him in case of emergencies. (R. at 664, 182-184.)
The murders of Anne and Cleotha Smith occurred sometime between 2:15 and 3:15 p.m. on March 13. (R. at 190-92, 138-40.) Latania was at work. Victoria was with her grandparents in the house. (R. at 138.)
Johnson later gave the police varying versions of his own involvement. He first said he was not present when the killings occurred, that his own role had merely been to make sure the Smiths' door was open so Mahone could enter and commit the robbery. (R. at 664.) He later said he was present when Mahone killed Cleotha with what appeared to be a foot long pipe. (Id.) He claimed to have then fled in panic after checking on his daughter, Victoria, to see if she was safe. (Id.) He acknowledged that he did nothing to try to help. (Id.)
The pants Johnson wore on March 13, 1995, were taken into evidence when the police detected blood on them. The Indiana State Police laboratory performed tests on the pants. (R. at 486.) Dried human blood was found. (R. at 487.) Subsequent DNA tests revealed that the blood on Johnson's pants had genetic profiles consistent with the blood of both victims. (R. at 545.)
Cleotha Smith died due to blunt force trauma to his head and face while Anne Smith died from blunt force trauma to her head combined with strangulation of her neck. (R. at 463-67.)
II. Challenges to the Sentence
The Indiana Constitution gives the Supreme Court the power to review and revise criminal sentences. Ind. Const. art. VII, § 4. We exercise restraint in this review, under Indiana Appellate Rule 17(B), by revising only those sentences demonstrated to be "manifestly unreasonable in light of the nature of the offense and the character of the *347 offender." Ind.Appellate Rule (17)(B); Fointno v. State, 487 N.E.2d 140, 145 (Ind. 1986). Sentencing decisions are otherwise left to the sound discretion of the trial court. Hatchett v. State, 503 N.E.2d 398, 405 (Ind. 1987).
In determining Johnson's sentence, the trial court stated:
[The r]eason for the court imposing the maximum terms herein and ordering them to be served consecutively is that: (1) Defendant was on probation from Bell County, Texas for the crime of Delivering Cocaine wherein 10 years imprisonment was imposed & suspended and he was placed on 10 years probation; (2) Victims were both over 65 years of age; (3) They were physically infirm; (4) Victims were in their own home at the time of the murders and the apparent motive for said murder was robbery of approximately $300 to $400; (5) Victim were [sic] bludgeoned to death in as heinous a crime as this court has been involved; (6) Anything less than the maximum consecutive penalties would tend to depreciate the seriousness of these crimes; (7) Defendant is in need of rehabilitative and correctional treatment that can only be provided by long term confinement in a penal facility.
(R. at 92.) The trial court did not list any mitigating circumstances in its sentencing order. (Id.)
A. Whether the Court Used Improper Aggravating Factors
Johnson claims that the trial court's use of aggravating factors (4) and (5) were improper and caused the court to levy a manifestly unreasonable sentence upon him.
Aggravating factor (4) states; "[The v]ictims were in their own home at the time of the murders and the apparent motive for said murders was robbery of approximately $300 to $400." (R. at 92.) Johnson claims this aggravating factor is a simple paraphrasing of the elements of the offense. A factor constituting a material element of a crime cannot be considered an aggravating circumstance in determining sentence. Green v. State, 424 N.E.2d 1014, 1015 (Ind. 1981). However, the murder and robbery statutes under which Johnson was convicted do not provide that proof requires the victims were in their own home as an element of the offenses. Ind.Code Ann. § 35-42-1-1(2) (West Supp.1996); Ind.Code Ann. § 35-42-5-1 (West 1986). We think that invasion of the victims' home, representing as it does a place of security in the minds of most, can plausibly be used by a trial court as an aggravating circumstance. A court is not limited to using only statutory aggravating factors to enhance sentences. Ind.Code Ann. § 35-38-1-7.1(d) (West Supp.1996); Shields v. State, 523 N.E.2d 411, 414 (Ind.1988).
The second portion of aggravator (4) states: "and the apparent motive for said murder was robbery of approximately $300 to $400". (R. at 92.) This is more troubling. To convict Johnson of murder under § 35-42-1-1(2), the jury necessarily had to find Johnson guilty of the elements of robbery. The robbery statute includes "takes property" as one of its elements. Ind.Code Ann. § 35-42-5-1 (West 1986). The fact that Johnson hoped to deprive Anne and Cleotha Smith of their money was thus improperly listed as an aggravating factor.
Aggravator (5) states: "[The v]ictims were bludgeoned to death in as heinous a crime as this court has been involved." (R. at 92.) Johnson claims this aggravator is improper because it does not state with specificity any facts which explain why Johnson's crime was sufficiently heinous to warrant a sentence enhancement. A trial court may not enhance a sentence by declaring a crime "heinous" without further articulating specific facts that suggest heinousness. Edgecomb v. State, 673 N.E.2d 1185, 1199 (Ind.1996), reh'g denied. Unlike the trial court in Edgecomb, however, the court here also noted a specific fact: that the victims were bludgeoned to death. The particular manner in which a crime is committed may serve as an aggravating factor. Widener v. State, 659 N.E.2d 529, 532 (Ind.1995).[2] The question is *348 thus whether the trial court's use of the lone word "bludgeoning" to describe Johnson's crime sufficiently articulates the aggravating aspects of the crime to qualify as a proper aggravating factor.
Some act which causes the death of a victim will always be traceable to the defendant in a murder conviction and, as noted above, the trial court cannot use an element of the crime alone as an aggravating factor. We conclude that the reference to "bludgeoning" is legally sufficient to describe why this crime might warrant more than the standard sentence. Bludgeoning is an especially time-consuming and violent act. In the present case one of the spouses who was eventually beaten to death most likely witnessed the death of the other since two individuals cannot be simultaneously killed in such a manner. The photographic evidence further shows that each victim was brutally struck several times, which indicates a certain type of malicious resolve in the actor which is not existent in some murders. (R. at 656, 657.)
Johnson also urges that the trial court must specifically and separately list the aggravating factors on which it relied to impose consecutive sentences. Here, the trial court did specifically state that it relied upon the factors enumerated in its sentencing order to support both the aggravated sentences and the consecutive sentences it levied upon Johnson. (R. at 92.) There is no constitutional or statutory prohibition against using the same factors both to enhance a sentence and to impose consecutive sentences. Beatty v. State, 567 N.E.2d 1134, 1137 (Ind.1991).
B. Did the Court Improperly Fail to Consider Johnson's Alleged Limited Role?
Johnson bases several claims on his allegation that he was only an accomplice. Johnson first says that Roche v. State, 596 N.E.2d 896, 899 (Ind.1992), requires the trial court to consider that an alleged principal's actions, and not Johnson's, were the source of many of the aggravating factors the court used to enhance Johnson's sentence. At the heart of this claim is the proposition that consecutive, enhanced sentences are manifestly unreasonable when only one of two perpetrators is prosecuted for the crime. Second, Johnson offers several claims of sentencing error which arise from his assertion that an unconvicted accomplice's actions exceeded the scope of his plan to rob Cleotha Smith.
These claims rest on the existence of Mahone. Both parties state in their briefs that Johnson acted in concert with an accomplice, but the record viewed in a manner most favorable to the verdict does not appear to require the trial court to find that Johnson acted with anybody at all. In other words, it appears that the jury and the sentencing judge could have found Johnson guilty of felony murder without using the aiding and abetting statute, Ind.Code § 35-41-2-4, as a mechanism for broadening the base of Johnson's criminal liability.
Several facts in the record would allow a finding that Johnson acted alone. Johnson stated in both his two confessions that he had planned to leave the door to the Smith's home open so that Craig Mahone could enter and rob Cleotha Smith. (R. at 664.) In Johnson's second confession, however, he acknowledged that he was present when Mahone was allegedly beating the Smiths with a lead pipe or another similar instrument. (R. at 666.) This altering admission seems like Johnson's attempt to explain away evidence that put him in close proximity to the actual deaths of Anne and Cleotha Smith. Johnson also stated that the reason he returned to the house after leaving the door unlocked was because he was worried about the safety of his daughter who was in the home. (Id.) However, Johnson's daughter was later discovered still inside the house by the first witness on the scene, Willie Mayfield, and by Officer Clarence R. Anderson, the first policeman to arrive. (R. at 138, 161.) Finally, Johnson changed his story about how he came to have the Smiths' blood on his jeans. He first said the blood was a result of his touching Anne when he found her dead and then wiping his hands on his jeans. (R. at 664.) The next day Johnson stood by this *349 explanation but added that he might also have Cleotha's blood on his clothing since he actually was present when Mahone struck Cleotha. (R. at 666.) The blood of both Cleotha and Anne was found by DNA analysis to be present on Johnson's jeans. (R. at 546.) Given these facts, a jury might well find Johnson guilty of felony murder even if it thought no accomplice existed as a matter of fact.
The trial judge did not make any explicit finding regarding the existence of an accomplice. And, the court did instruct on aiding and abetting. We will thus turn to Johnson's claim.
Johnson urges that because he was a mere "accomplice" our laws provide him with legal protections which might not be available to others who stand alone in their criminal liability. Johnson's claim that our case law regarding accomplice sentencing should cause us to reduce his sentence is unconvincing.
Under the common law, two general classes of criminals, neither of which relate directly to the meaning of the term "accomplice", were used to determine the nature and measure of an individual's culpability. A principal was one who either actually perpetrated the crime or who aided or abetted and was actively or constructively present at the time of the crime. An accessory was one who procured, counseled, commanded or abetted the principal, and who was absent when the latter committed the crime, or who received, relieved, comforted, or assisted the perpetrator after the crime had been committed. A principal could not be convicted as an accessory. 22 C.J.S. Criminal Law § 128 (1989).
The common law of criminal liability has been superseded by statute in Indiana, however, and the legal distinction between a principal and an accessory has ceased to exist. The language of Ind.Code § 35-41-2-4 which states, "[A] person who knowingly or intentionally aids, induces, or causes another person to commit an offense commits that offense ...", has been interpreted by this Court to mean that an actor who would have been considered an accessory under the common law now vicariously commits the actual offense. Fisher v. State, 468 N.E.2d 1365, 1369, (Ind.1984) (emphasis added); Kappos v. State, 465 N.E.2d 1092, 1095 (Ind.1984). These cases show that individuals convicted of felonies in Indiana are considered to have been convicted on the weight of their own actions even if the accomplice liability statute is utilized by the court or jury to determine guilt.
The general standard for reviewing the sentence imposed on an accomplice is thus the same as it is for principals: whether the sentence is "manifestly unreasonable in light of the nature of the offense and character of the offender." (App.R. (17)(B)). The standard provides no categorical benefit to an actor by virtue of his having been charged as an accomplice. Each actor is assessed on the facts available.
Johnson cites Roche v. State, 596 N.E.2d 896, 899 (Ind.1992), for the proposition that consecutive sentences upon one perpetrator may be manifestly unreasonable where the actual crime exceeds the scope of his original plan due to the actions of an uncharged accomplice. The holding and application in Roche, however, is actually detrimental to Johnson's argument. In Roche, the Court agreed that imposition of the same penalty upon a principal and accomplice may not be appropriate but then found that the jury was in the best position to weigh the evidence and assess the degree of culpability of the co-defendants
Johnson also claims his sentence is manifestly unreasonable because the trial court did not consider that the scope of his original plan was exceeded by the acts of an accomplice. Reading the facts of the case most favorably to the verdict and even assuming the trial judge believed that an accomplice committed the actual killing, we are still unable to find Johnson could not have reasonably foreseen the violence that eventually occurred.
The criminal liability of an accomplice is not negated by the principal's commission of an offense greater in severity than the offense originally planned if the resulting offense is a probable and natural *350 consequence of the planned offense. Tynes v. State, 650 N.E.2d 685, 687 (Ind.1995). Johnson admitted that he was the instigator of the planned robbery and that he left the door to the Smiths' home unlocked with the intent that his accomplice would enter and rob the Smiths. (R. at 664.) Additionally, a day after Johnson's first confession in which he claimed to have not been present at the time the Smiths were killed, he admitted that he was present at the time of the murders and that he did nothing to help the Smiths as they were being beaten to death. (R. at 666.) The police also identified the Smiths' blood on Johnson's pants and shoes. (R. at 545.) Given this evidence, the trial judge was not compelled to find that Johnson was merely an accomplice who unwittingly became involved in actions beyond his control. Planning a robbery of a person in that person's own home is bound to create a risk that violence may ensue when the homeowner predictably attempts to protect himself and his family.
Johnson claims the fact that his alleged accomplice remains uncharged renders the imposition of consecutive sentences erroneous. Our law is otherwise. An accomplice may be tried and convicted when the proof of the underlying crime is sufficient despite the fact that the other actor is not prosecuted, not convicted, or even acquitted. Ind.Code Ann. § 35-41-2-4 (West 1986). It is not error for the State to try an accessory before trying the party who actually committed the crime. Schmidt v. State, 265 N.E.2d 219, 226, 255 Ind. 443, 455 (1970).
Johnson asserts that the recent case of Edgecomb v. State, 673 N.E.2d 1185 (Ind. 1996) stands for the proposition that an aggravated felony murder sentence is inappropriate where the appellant did not anticipate or encourage her accomplice to exceed the scope of the original plan. This misstates Edgecomb. The Edgecomb analysis was not categorical, i.e., all enhanced sentences ordered upon unwitting accomplices convicted of felony murder are presumed to be manifestly unreasonable. Rather, we performed the normal "manifestly unreasonable" balancing test required by Appellate Rule (17)(B) and found the trial court's sentence was manifestly unreasonable given the specific facts of Edgecomb, 673 N.E.2d at 1199.
C. The Nature of the Offense and the Character of the Offender
Finally, Johnson claims the imposition of two consecutive, enhanced sentences is manifestly unreasonable in light of the nature of his offense and character. We conclude otherwise. The trial court found seven aggravating circumstances. They are nearly all supportable. Johnson alleges no mitigating factors. In Johnson's case, a 120-year sentence is not manifestly unreasonable.
III. Conclusion
We affirm the judgment of the trial court.
DICKSON, SULLIVAN, SELBY and BOEHM, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Ind.Code Ann. § 35-42-1-1(2) (West Supp. 1996).
[2]  In Widener, we held that the trial court's use of the fact that "defendant shot victim once, victim stopped resisting, and defendant smashed the gun and his hand through the car window and shot her again" was a sufficiently particularized account of the reasons why defendant's act supported a sentence enhancement. 659 N.E.2d at 532.

=== CASE 9742154 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:07:41.219026+00 ===

OPINION
SULLIVAN, Judge.
Appellant, Deborah Reed (Reed), appeals her conviction' for robbery and carrying a handgun without a license.
We affirm.
Reed presents three issues for review, which we restate as follows:
1) Whether the trial court erred in denying Reed’s discovery requests to have access to and question Officer Humbles about a second photo array not used in the investigation.1
2) Whether the trial court erred in denying Reed public funds to hire an expert witness.
3) Whether a jury instruction .was erroneously given.
On February 3, 1995, a Village Pantry convenience store was robbed in Indianapolis. Ruth Hineman was working at the store. Someone entered the store wearing a long coat and a stocking hat pulled over .the hair, ears and forehead. The person, standing about three feet, from Hineman, demanded money. Hineman complied. .The' robber then left the store and drove off in a red car.
Hineman drew the picture of robber later that evening and about six weeks later identified Reed from a set of six photographs presented to her by Sergeant Herman Humbles. She subsequently picked Reed out of a lineup.
Second Photo Array
As mentioned, Reed’s subpoena duces tecum requested Humbles to bring with him to the deposition “any and all note's, reports, summaries, or other documentation, including any and all photos, pictures, or photo arrays, used or prepared by him in the investigation of the robbery.” Record at 43. The State filed a motion to quash the subpoena and requested a protective order preventing Reed from “examining, reviewing, or inquiring into the contents of [the file].” Record at 44. The trial court granted the State’s motions. Reed also filed an emergency motion for an order to produce evidence, claiming that Humbles had a second photo array given to him by another detective.2 The motion was granted.
At trial, and out of the presence of the jury, counsel for Reed requested permission of the court to ask questions of Humbles regarding the second photo array. The court denied the request. Still out of the presence of the jury, Reed’s counsel made an offer of proof and engaged Humbles in a line of questioning regarding the second photo ar*211ray. During this questioning, Humbles indicated that the photo array that he used was the one that he had put together using the “X-Image” machine. He claimed that the other photo array must have been given to him by another detective who did his own photo array on the “X-Image” machine. Regardless, he only used the photo array that he created and never used the second photo array.3
We note that the trial court has wide latitude with regard to discovery matters. Nettles v. State (1991) Ind., 565 N.E.2d 1064. And, the trial court need allow the defendant access to evidence only if such evidence is material to the defense. Jorgensen v. State (1991) Ind., 574 N.E.2d 915. Reed’s offer of proof did nothing but show that the second photo array had nothing to do with the case. In fact, it seems not to be a part of Humbles’ “investigative tools.” Apparently, Reed wanted access to information about all robberies in which Reed has possibly been considered the perpetrator in order to find if another suspect fit her description. Apparently, Reed seeks to somehow draw Hine-man’s identification into question by this extraneous consideration. Such may be the paradigm of a party engaged in a “fishing expedition.” There was nothing “material” about the second photo array. The discussion with Humbles indicates that the second group of photos was nothing more than the photograph of Reed as used in his photo array but with different alternative choices. It was not used in the investigation and was in no way exculpatory. The trial court did not err in preventing Reed to question Humbles about the array in the presence of the jury.
Eyewitness Identification Expert
Reed asserts that the trial court erred because it failed to grant funds in order to allow Reed to hire an eyewitness identification expert. Reed concedes that the decision to do so rests within the sound discretion of the trial court. Hough v. State (1990) Ind., 560 N.E.2d 511. Reed asserts that her eyewitness expert would have testified as to the broad implications of eyewitness identification and the fact that “particularly in cross-racial identifications ... eyewitness error is the single largest factor leading to false convictions.” Appellant’s Br. at 10-11.
The trial court’s decision whether to provide an expert at public expense will not be overturned absent an abuse of discretion. Jones v. State (1988) Ind., 524 N.E.2d 1284. The burden is upon the defendant to demonstrate the need for an expert. Kennedy v. State (1991) Ind., 578 N.E.2d 633, cert. denied (1992) 503 U.S. 921, 112 S.Ct. 1299, 117 L.Ed.2d 521. The determination as to whether an expert is necessary is to be made on a case by case basis. Schultz v. State (1986) Ind., 497 N.E.2d 531.
It is important to note at the outset that an indigent defendant has no constitutional right to a publicly-funded expert. See James v. State (1993) Ind., 613 N.E.2d 15, 21. However, a criminal defendant is entitled to an adequate defense; therefore, an expert must be provided when those services are necessary to such a defense and when the defendant specifies precisely how she will benefit from those requested services. Scott v. State (1992) Ind., 593 N.E.2d 198, 200. In Scott, our Supreme Court attempted to aid trial courts in determining what expert assistance would be “necessary” for an adequate defense:
Asking whether a particular service is “necessary” to assure an adequate defense begs the question. In attempting to decide what is necessary, a trial court should determine whether the proposed expert’s services would bear on an issue which is generally regarded to be within the common experience of the average person, or on one for which expert opinion would be necessary. If the requested services could be performed by counsel, an expert need not be provided. An expert need not be *212appointed if it is improbable that the proposed expert could demonstrate that which the defendant desires. The appointing of an expert is not necessary when the purpose of the expert appears to be exploratory only.
Another consideration for the trial court is whether the expert services will go toward answering a substantial question or simply an ancillary one. For example, if the State’s principal evidence linking the defendant to the crime is sufficiently technical that it is commonly the subject of expert testimony, the trial court should strongly consider providing an expert.
Id. at 200 (citations omitted). The court went on to note that the trial court could consider the cost of the expert, the complexity of the case and whether the'State provided an expert, among other factors.
As the State points out, this was a remarkably simple case. The entire conviction revolved around Hineman’s identification. The simplicity of this case, though, tends to indicate that an expert would be extremely helpful to the defense. An expert could testify as to the heart of the matter — what factors could have contributed to Hineman’s identification being faulty. However, Reed fails to show, nor are we able to .discover, a single case in which a trial court has been required to provide an eyewitness expert at public expense.
To the contrary, we note the overwhelming number of decisions of both state and federal courts, including Indiana; hold that trial courts do not err in not providing funds for such expert assistance or appointing such an expert (and in some cases eyewitness identification expert testimony is not even permitted) See Utley v. State (1992) Ind., 589 N.E.2d 282, cert. denied (1993) 506 U.S. 1058, 113 S.Ct. 991, 122 L.Ed.2d 142; Hopkins v. State (1991) Ind., 582 N.E.2d 345, reh’g denied; United States v. Labansat (1996) 9th Cir., 94 F.3d 527, cert. denied (1997) — U.S. -, 117 S.Ct. 1013, 136 L.Ed.2d 890; United States v. Daniels (1995) 7th Cir., 64 F.3d 311, cert. denied (1996) — U.S. -, 116 S.Ct. 745, 133 L.Ed.2d 693; Jackson v. Ylst (1990) 9th Cir., 921 F.2d 882; Moore v. Tate (1989) 6th Cir., 882 F.2d 1107, reh’g denied; United States v. Brewer (1986) 9th Cir., 783 F.2d 841, cert. denied (1986) 479 U.S. 831, 107 S.Ct. 118, 93 L.Ed.2d 64; Holland v. State (1994) Ala.Crim.App., 654 So.2d 77, cert. denied; Garth v. State (1988) Ala.Cr.App., 536 So.2d 173; People v. Gaglione (1994) 26 Cal.App.4th 1291, 32 Cal.Rptr.2d 169, review denied, overruled on other grounds, People v. Martinez (1995) 11 Cal.4th 434, 45 Cal.Rptr.2d 905, 903 P.2d 1037; People v. Kemp (1994) Colo.Ct.App., 885 P.2d 260, cert. denied; State v. Sellars (1981) 52 N.C.App. 380, 278 S.E.2d 907, review denied; Commonwealth v. Abdul-Salaam (1996) 544 Pa. 514, 678 A.2d 342, cert. denied (1997) — U.S. -, 117 S.Ct. 1337, 137 L.Ed.2d 496.
These decisions have been influenced by various factors. In Hopkins, supra, 582 N.E.2d at 353, our Supreme Court noted that the abundance of additional evidence against the defendant rendered the failure to provide him with funds “not so prejudicial as to require reversal.” Id. Likewise in Utley, supra 589 N.E.2d at 238-39, the Indiana Supreme Court refused to reverse in light of the fact that several "witnesses testified that they saw the defendant and there was other evidence which linked the defendant to the crimes. It appears that this is a ease of first impression in Indiana — whether an indigent defendant is entitled to funds for an expert concerning eyewitness identification when she is convicted solely upon the testimony of one witnéss.
In Hopkins, supra, 582 N.E.2d at 353, the Indiana Supreme Court recognized the trend of cases recognizing the “built-in potential for error in eyewitness cases.” Id. (citation omitted). The court also noted that the admissibility of such expert testimony is favored by the weight of authority. Judge Posner, in Krist v. Eli Lilly & Co. (1990) 7th Cir., 897 F.2d 293 pointed out some problems inherent in witness testimony. “An important body of psychological research undermines the lay intuition that confident memories of salient experiences ... are accurate and dó not fade with time unless a person’s memory has some pathological impairment.” Id. at 296.
*213Although not taking issue with the contention that eyewitness accounts are less reliable than once thought, the Seventh Circuit, perhaps too sweepingly, noted in United States v. Larkin (1992) 7th Cir., 978 F.2d 964, 971, cert. denied (1993) 507 U.S. 935, 113 S.Ct. 1323, 122 L.Ed.2d 709:
“[E]xpert testimony regarding the potential hazards of eyewitness identification — regardless of its reliability — ‘will not aid the jmy because it addresses an issue of which the jury already generally is aware, and it will not contribute to their understanding’ of the particular factual issues posed, (citations. omitted). These hazards are well within the ken of most lay jurors, and [defendant’s] counsel was granted ample opportunity to discuss those hazards and east doubt upon the witnesses’ eyewitness identification of his client.”
The holding indicates the view that “experts” do nothing more than highlight the fact that witnesses often misidentify individuals, a concept well within the realm of understanding of the average juror.
The Alabama Court of Appeals noted that an expert was unnecessary because the “[defense counsel ... was able to cross-examine the victims extensively on the issue of identification and their ability to distinguish one black person from another.” Garth, supra, 536 So.2d at 177. Similarly, the court in Jackson v. Ylst, supra, 921 F.2d at 886 felt that failure to provide an eyewitness identification expert did not violate the fundamental fairness of the trial because “cross-examination effectively exposes erroneous eyewitness identifications.” Id.; see also Moore v. Tate, supra, 882 F.2d at 1110-11 (failure to provide an indigent defendant with funds for such an expert was not constitutional error because examination and cross-examination at trial afford the jury adequate opportunity to judge the witness’ credibility.)
Finally, the North Carolina Court of Appeals addressed the necessity of providing funds for an eyewitness identification expert in Sellars, supra, 52 N.C.App. 380, 278 S.E.2d 907. The court noted that the defendant had made no showing that the expert’s testimony would be helpful. The purpose of the testimony:
“was to lay a basis for defendant’s argument that it was possible that the prosecuting witness made a mistake in her identification of defendant. We do not believe the state is required to pay for expert witnesses whose testimony amounts to generalities and to speculation as to whether those generalities apply to a specific case.” Id., 278 S.E.2d at 915.
We are not thoroughly convinced that the average juror is conversant with the likelihood or frequency with which misidentifica-tions are made by seemingly unequivocal eyewitnesses. As observed in Gaglione, supra, 32 Cal.Rptr.2d at 174:
“It is undisputed that expert testimony on the psychological factors affecting the reliability of eyewitness testimony is admissible in a criminal case, (citation omitted). The Supreme Court reasoned-that information now available about these factors is beyond the common knowledge of the jurors: ‘It is doubtless true that from personal experience and intuition all jurors know that an eyewitness identification can be mistaken, and also know the more obvious factors that can affect its accuracy, such as lighting, distance, and duration. It appears from the professional literature, however, that other factors bearing on eyewitness identification may be known only to some jurors, or may be imperfectly understood by many, or may be contrary to the intuitive beliefs of most.’” 32 Cal.Rptr.2d at 174.
Accordingly, we suggest that trial courts might be well advised to permit such expert testimony in order to assist the jury in its evaluation of the evidence. Nevertheless we are reminded that, at least with regard to experts paid from public funds, defendant has the burden of demonstrating that “the services [requested] are necessary to assure an adequate defense.” Scott, supra, 593 N.E.2d at 200. (emphasis supplied). While expert testimony is surely helpful in many cases, it will be truly necessary in far fewer instances. The concept that eyewitness identification is flawed or subject to serious question in a particular instance may be placed within the jury’s realm of understanding by *214careful cross-examination and by counsels argument to the jury.4
Jury Instruction
Reed asserts that the trial court erred by giving the following jury instruction: “A conviction may be sustained by the uncorroborated testimony of a single eyewitness.” Record at 399. However, the instruction has been held to be a correct statement of the law, and our Supreme Court has upheld similar jury instructions. Madden v. State (1990) Ind., 549 N.E.2d 1030 (DeBruler, J., dissenting); Criss v. State (1987) Ind., 512 N.E.2d 858.
Reed further contends that the trial court erred in not modifying the instruction to read: “That a conviction may be sustained by the uncorroborated testimony of a single eyewitness, if there is sufficient evidence of probative value to support the determination of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.” Record at 401. However, defendant’s jury instruction No. Two, which was given, included the language that “the state has the burden of disproving [the defense of alibi] beyond a reasonable doubt.” Record at 122. The jury was thus aware that their responsibility was to determine guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. The trial court did not err in refusing to give Reed’s modified instruction. Criss, supra, 512 N.E.2d at 860.
The judgment is affirmed.
FRIEDLANDER, J., concurs.
STATON, J., concurs with separate opinion.
. Reed’s original subpoena duces tecum requested the investigating officer bring with him to a deposition all "notes, reports, summaries, or other documentation, including any and all photos, pictures, or photo arrays, used or prepared by him in the investigation of the robbery.” Record at 43. However, in appellant’s brief, although the summary of her argument complains that the officer’s investigative tools should have .been made available to her, the actual argument limits itself to a discussion about the fact that "Reed wanted access to and the ability to question Officer Humbles [about] the second photo array." Appellant's Br. at 9. In her reply brief, Reed makes an eloquent seven-page argument about numerous evidentiary rulings. Reply Br. at 1-9. By not including her challenge to the trial court’s various evidentiary rulings in her original brief, Reed has waived these issues on appeal. We will therefore address only whether Reed was improperly denied the ability, at trial, to question the officer concerning the second photo array.
. In another motion, Reed requested ”[a]ll videotapes, films, or still photographs ... of any and all suspects in any cases of robbery in which Deborah Reed was or is a suspect” and ”[a]ny photo arrays, whether including the Defendant’s picture or not, that have been shown to any witnesses in any of the above-mentioned robberies." Record at 59.
. This discussion, in combination with the fact that the trial court granted Reed's emergency motion for an order to produce evidence, indicates that Reed did have access to the second photo array, therefore narrowing the issue even further. Reed only really complains that she was not allowed the ability to question Humbles about the second photo array in the presence of the jury.
. During the hearing on Reed’s motion for funds the trial court asked one of the witnesses:
Q: Mr. Margerum when you say absolutely essential, what is an eyewitness identification expert ... when you talk about identification being fraught with problems, isn’t that something that you as an attorney would argue to the jury?
A: You would certainly argue it to a jury and uh ... I certainly have on many occasions. However, an eyewitness expert can testify as to case studies they’ve performed, tests that they’ve run. They are qualified certainly as experts in this area. And uh ... they can testify as to the whole psychology of how people go about making misidentifications.
S. Record at 355. Clearly, this is simply the “evening clothes” placed upon a subject within the ken of the jury.