=== CASE 9740928 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:45:10.358073+00 ===

JUSTICE RIZZI delivered the opinion of the court: Plaintiff, David Smith, filed an action against defendant, the Chicago Park District, to recover damages for injuries he sustained when he dove into Lake Michigan and struck his head on a submerged object. Defendant filed a motion for summary judgment which was granted, and plaintiff has appealed. We reverse and remand. There are three issues presented: (1) whether the trial court erred in striking the two affidavits of plaintiff’s expert witness; (2) whether the alleged facts are sufficient to establish a duty to warn plaintiff of an unreasonable risk of harm; and (3) whether the alleged facts are sufficient to establish that defendant breached its duty to warn. In his second amended complaint, plaintiff alleged that on August 3,1985, he was injured when he dove into the lake from a rock formation bordering the lake at the Foster Avenue Beach in Chicago, Illinois. He also alleged that defendant committed one or more of the following wilful and wanton acts: (a) Maintained said swimming area with utter indifference to, or conscious disregard for, the safety of the plaintiff; (b) Supervised said swimming area with utter indifference to or conscious disregard for the safety of the plaintiff; (c) Did not warn of a dangerous condition, to wit, that it was not safe to dive into the water off of the rocky steps approximately 15 to 20 feet north of the sandy portion of the beach with utter indifference to, or conscious disregard for, the safety of the plaintiff; (d) Did not correct or remove the dangerous condition when they knew of its danger to persons in the swimming area with utter indifference to, or conscious disregard for, the safety of the plaintiff. During a deposition, plaintiff testified that on August 3, 1985, he and a friend went to the Foster Avenue Beach around 10 a.m. Plaintiff stated that when he and his friend arrived at the beach, they stopped near some large rock formations that bordered the lake about 50 feet north of the sandy part of the beach. There were about 20 other people frolicking on the rock formations, and many of them were jumping and diving into the lake. Also, there was a metal ladder built into one of the rocks, which enabled people to climb out of the water and back onto the top of the rock. Plaintiff testified that after he dove into the water, he struck his head on a submerged object and suffered severe injuries. Plaintiff also testified that he had not checked the depth of the water prior to his dive. He merely looked at the surface of the water and believed that the water was deep enough for safe diving. Plaintiff previously dove into the water from this same location without incident. Also, prior to diving, plaintiff had seen someone else diving into the water at this location, without incident. In addition, plaintiff testified that although there were two lifeguards on the sandy part of the beach, there were no lifeguards near the rock formations. He also testified that there were not any "No Diving” notices stenciled on the rocks or posted signs near the rocks. Defendant, however, maintained that there were warning signs stenciled on the rocks and warning signs posted on poles which warned the public of the dangers of diving into the water around the rock formations. After the plaintiff’s deposition was taken, defendant filed a motion for summary judgment. Plaintiff submitted Dr. Alan Caskey’s affidavit in opposition to the motion. Dr. Caskey has a Ph.D. in recreation and park administration, and has expertise in the design and maintenance of lakefront recreational areas of the kind that is at issue in this case. Defendant filed a motion to strike Dr. Caskey’s affidavit. The trial court granted the motion, and plaintiff filed a supplemental affidavit by Dr. Caskey. Defendant then filed a motion to strike Dr. Caskey’s supplemental affidavit. The trial court ruled that there was virtually no difference between Dr. Caskey’s original and supplemental affidavits, and granted defendant’s motion to strike the supplemental affidavit. The trial court then granted defendant’s motion for summary judgment on the basis that defendant did not owe plaintiff a duty to warn. We first address whether the trial court erred in striking the affidavits of Dr. Caskey. In his original affidavit, Dr. Caskey made the following statements: "5. That based on my review of plaintiff’s deposition, and my knowledge and experience concerning the area in question, it is my opinion that the plaintiff struck a submerged object and not the natural bottom of the lake. 6. That there are nationally recognized standards in the operation of recreational areas such as the area at issue. 7. That based on said standards, a park district that has developed a lakeshore for recreational purposes, that maintains an area with a sandy beach and lifeguards, and also maintains an adjacent area consisting of a paved, rocky wall with ladders along said wall, must either survey the area where the diving occurs to determine that there are no submerged hazards, or must effectively prohibit diving. 8. That an adult of reasonable intelligence, seeing the beach, the lifeguards, the rocky wall, the ladders along the wall, with knowledge that the lake is very deep at this location, and with knowledge of a long history of diving off said wall, would not expect there to be submerged rocks that would pose a serious risk of serious personal injury. 9. That I make this affidavit based on personal knowledge, expertise, and/or materials that are reasonably relied on by experts in my field.” Dr. Caskey’s supplemental affidavit was similar to his original affidavit. In the supplemental affidavit, however, Dr. Caskey stated that he based some of his opinions upon facts testified to by plaintiff in his deposition, including the following: (1) that plaintiff had been swimming at the Foster Avenue Beach since he was 10 years of age; (2) that plaintiff usually entered the lake by diving off of the rocks located near Hollywood Avenue, approximately 50 feet away from the beach; and (3) that plaintiff had been diving in the area in question approximately one week before his accident, whereupon he observed that the water was 12 to 15 feet deep. In his supplemental affidavit, Dr. Caskey also stated: "5. That based on my review of the plaintiff’s deposition, and my knowledge and experience concerning the area in question, it is my opinion that the plaintiff struck a submerged object and not the natural bottom of the lake. 7. That I have been to the site personally on occasions prior to the date of the accident and know that the area had been used for diving and swimming for many years and diving was commonplace. 8. That I am personally familiar with the area and the water is very deep that when the plaintiff did a flat dive, on the date of the accident, he did not strike the bottom but instead struck a submerged object. 9. That there existed ladders on the wall, on the date of the accident, for which people used to climb back onto the rocks to dive. 10. That the defendants in response to a request to admit; admitted that they maintained the area that the lifeguards patrolled— the sandy portions of the beach. 11. That there are nationally recognized standards in the operation of recreational areas such as the area at issue. The national standards are as follows: National Water Safety Congress and Life Saving Manual by U.S. Life Saving Association. 12. That based on said standards, a park district that has developed a lake shore for recreational purposes, that maintaining an area with a sandy beach and lifeguards, and also maintains an adjacent area consisting of a paved rocky wall with ladders along the wall coming out of the water, and where diving is commonplace off of said wall must either survey the area where the diving occurs to determine that there are no submerged hazards, or must effectively prohibit diving. 13. That an adult of reasonable intelligence, seeing the beach, the lifeguards, the rocky wall, the ladders along the wall, with knowledge that the lake is very deep at this location, and with knowledge of a long history of diving off said wall, would not expect there to be submerged rocks that would pose a serious risk of serious personal injury. 14. That I make this affidavit based on personal knowledge, expertise, and/or materials that are reasonably relied on by experts in my field.” Affidavits in opposition to motions for summary judgments are governed by Supreme Court Rule 191. (134 Il1. 2d R. 191.) Supreme Court Rule 191 provides that affidavits in opposition to a motion for summary judgment shall be made on the personal knowledge of the affiant; shall set forth with particularity the facts upon which the claim is based; shall not consist of conclusions but of facts admissible in evidence; and shall affirmatively show that the affiant, if sworn as a witness, can competently testify thereto. In addition, the failure of an expert witness to state the specific facts which form the bases of his opinions renders the expert witness’ affidavit deficient. See Hagy v. McHenry County Conservation District (1989), 190 Ill. App. 3d 833, 841, 546 N.E.2d 77, 83; J. Roth Builders, Inc. v. Aetna Life & Casualty Co. (1987), 151 Ill. App. 3d 572, 573, 503 N.E.2d 782, 783.  In the present case, although there is not a wealth of specific facts forming the bases for the opinions in Dr. Caskey’s affidavits, there are nevertheless sufficient facts stated. The scant specific facts is a matter that goes to the weight and not to the admissibility of Dr. Caskey’s opinions. Thus, the believability of Dr. Caskey’s opinions is for a trier of fact to resolve rather than a judge or judges. The trial court therefore erred in striking the affidavits. Moreover, if an affidavit contains some admissible statements, only those statements that are inadmissible should be stricken, but the rest of the affidavit remains. (Murphy v. Urso (1982), 88 Ill. 2d 444, 462-63, 430 N.E.2d 1079, 1088; Nardi, Pain & Podolsky, Inc. v. Vignola Furniture Co. (1967), 80 Ill. App. 2d 220, 227, 224 N.E.2d 649, 653-54.) Here, rather than striking whatever statements the trial court felt were inadmissible, the trial court struck the entire affidavits. The striking of the affidavits was therefore plainly erroneous. We next address whether the trial court erred in ruling that summary judgment was proper because defendant did not owe plaintiff a duty to warn. More specifically, the trial court agreed with defendant’s contention that defendant owed no duty to warn plaintiff because the danger was open and obvious. The trial court erred. The open and obvious doctrine is not to be slavishly applied any longer as a per se rule to deny liability. Rather, a defendant’s duty to exercise reasonable care under all the circumstances of a case remains intact despite the existence of an open and obvious condition. (Deibert v. Bauer Brothers Construction Co. (1990), 141 Ill. 2d 430, 566 N.E.2d 239; Ward v. K mart Corp. (1990), 136 Ill. 2d 132, 146, 554 N.E.2d 223, 229; Bucheleres v. Chicago Park District (1994), 269 Ill. App. 3d 791; Pullia v. Builders Square, Inc. (1994), 265 Ill. App. 3d 933, 638 N.E.2d 688.) Moreover, the scope of a defendant’s duty is not defined in reference to a plaintiff’s negligence or lack of negligence. Instead, the focus must be on the defendant. (Ward, 136 Ill. 2d at 148, 554 N.E.2d at 230.) In Ward, the court held that a defendant’s duty to invitees in Illinois is tantamount to the liability of possessors of land to invitees as provided in the Restatement (Second) of Torts § 343 (1965). Section 343 is set forth in Ward: " 'A possessor of land is subject to liability for physical harm caused to his invitees by a condition on the land if, but only if, he (a) knows or by the exercise of reasonable care would discover the condition, and should realize that it involves an unreasonable risk of harm to such invitees, and (b) should expect that they will not discover or realize the danger, or will fail to protect themselves against it, and (c) fails to exercise reasonable care to protect them against the danger.’ ” Ward, 136 Ill. 2d at 146, 554 N.E.2d at 229, quoting Restatement (Second) of Torts § 343 (1965). It is therefore clear that the duty of a possessor of land is to exercise reasonable care to invitees and its duty is no longer nullified ipso facto by the so-called open and obvious doctrine. (See Deibert v. Bauer Brothers Construction Co., 141 Ill. 2d 430, 566 N.E.2d 239; Pullia v. Builders Square, Inc., 265 Ill. App. 3d 933, 638 N.E.2d 688.) But, that does not lessen the obligation of the plaintiff in the present case to set out facts necessary for the existence of a duty that was owed by the defendant to him and which was breached. Generally, since defendant is a local public entity and liability is based on the existence of a condition of public property intended to be used for recreational purposes, defendant owed plaintiff a duty to refrain from wilful and wanton conduct rather than a duty to exercise reasonable care. (See 745 ILCS 10/3 — 106 (West 1992).) The gist of the present case, however, involves a more specific duty. Plaintiff maintains that defendant had a duty to warn him if it knew or should have known of an unreasonable risk of harm if he dove into the water from the rock formations. The linchpin of plaintiff’s contention is whether defendant’s failure to have adequately warned him would constitute wilful and wanton conduct. See 745 ILCS 10IS- — 106 (West 1992). Wilful and wanton conduct as it relates to civil cases may be either intentional or reckless. Wilful and wanton conduct that is reckless includes acts that exhibit a reckless disregard for the safety of others, such as (1) a failure, after knowledge of impending danger, to exercise ordinary care to prevent it or . (2) a failure to discover the danger through recklessness or carelessness when it could have been discovered by the exercise of ordinary care. (See Ziarko v. Soo Line R.R. Co. (1994), 161 Ill. 2d 267, 273, 641 N.E.2d 402, 405.) Moreover, wilful and wanton conduct that is reckless is sufficient to sustain a cause of action against a local public entity, such as defendant in the present case. See 745 ILCS 10/1 — 210, 3 — 106 (West 1992). Here, the following salient facts can be culled from the record. Plaintiff dove into water adjacent to public beach property which was developed by defendant for recreational purposes. The recreational area included rock formations which abutted the water, and defendant provided a ladder attached to one of the rocks, which clearly invited swimmers to dive into the water and use the ladder to climb back ashore. When plaintiff dove into the water, he struck his head on a submerged object and was seriously injured. The plaintiff alleges that no warnings were marked or posted in the area where the incident occurred.  Plainly, the submerged object constituted an unreasonable risk of harm to the plaintiff. It follows that if defendant knew of the submerged object or failed to discover it through recklessness or carelessness when it could have been discovered by the exercise of ordinary care, and defendant did not adequately warn plaintiff of the danger, then defendant would be guilty of wilful and wanton conduct. Thus, assuming that the facts alleged are true, defendant had a duty to adequately warn plaintiff of the danger. Whether defendant knew of the danger or failed to discover it through recklessness or carelessness when it could have been discovered by the exercise of ordinary care is a factual question to be decided by the trier of fact. Likewise, whether defendant breached its duty is a factual question. Accordingly, the orders striking the affidavits of Dr. Caskey are reversed and the summary judgment is reversed. The case is remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. Reversed and remanded. TULLY, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9740929 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:45:10.36333+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE GREIMAN, dissenting: I must respectfully dissent for several reasons although the opinion is thoughtfully crafted and persuasive. I believe that the doctrine of open and obvious still controls in cases where an adult plaintiff dives into a natural body of water and is thereby injured when he hits bottom. The majority correctly observes that the open and obvious doctrine has exceptions and ought not to be slavishly applied. Ward v. K mart Corp. (1990), 136 Ill. 2d 132, 554 N.E.2d 223; but see Mount Zion State Bank & Trust v. Consolidated Communications, Inc. (1994), 267 Ill. App. 3d 402, 641 N.E.2d 1228 (questioned the continued validity of the doctrine of open and obvious). However, it is precisely this genre of cases to which it is still applicable. Dowen v. Hall (1989), 191 Ill. App. 3d 903, 548 N.E.2d 346, sets forth the law in Illinois with respect to adult plaintiffs injured during a dive into a body of water. In the instant case, the majority rests its decision upon the fact that the dive is from rocks along the Lake Michigan shore and that there is a ladder attached to the rocks which perhaps is an invitation to dive off the rocks into unknown waters. The majority concludes that the ladder is so inviting that an exception is created to the open and obvious doctrine. To support such a conclusion, the majority relies upon Deibert v. Bauer Brothers Construction Co. (1990), 141 Ill. 2d 430, 566 N.E.2d 239, Ward (136 Ill. 2d 132, 554 N.E.2d 223), Bucheleres v. Chicago Park District (1994), 269 Ill. App. 3d 791 (a companion case filed on this day), and Pullia v. Builders Square, Inc. (1994), 265 Ill. App. 3d 933, 638 N.E.2d 688. Deibert and Ward both acknowledge that although the duty of care does not extend to known or obvious conditions unless harm can be anticipated despite the obviousness, there can be an exception to this rule where an invitee’s attention can reasonably be expected to be distracted. The existence of a ladder is neither the kind of condition that is likely to distract the plaintiff so that he dives off the rocks nor should it diminish the all too apparent risk to be anticipated by a dive into unknown waters. A closer case is Pullia, where the plaintiff caught his jewelry on the defendant’s display rack when he stepped upon the rack to reach merchandise on a top shelf. The Pullia court reasoned that summary judgment was precluded because whether the rack was an open and obvious danger was a question of fact for the jury. In contrast to Pullia, I need not devote much space to the proposition that a dive into a body of water of unknown depth and character is an open and obvious danger. Having made that observation, I would have been willing to return this matter to the circuit court for a determination of the facts by a jury if defendant was not a unit of local government sued for its maintenance of recreational facilities. In 1986, the Illinois General Assembly amended the Illinois Local Governmental and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity Act (Act) to provide: "Neither a local public entity nor a public employee is liable for an injury where the liability is based on the existence of a condition of any public property intended or permitted to be used for recreational purposes, including but not limited to parks, playgrounds, open areas, buildings or other enclosed recreational facilities, unless such local entity or public employee is guilty of willful and wanton conduct proximately causing such injury.” 745 ILCS 10/3 — 106 (West 1992). The Act defines wilful and wanton conduct as "a course of action which shows an actual or deliberate intention to cause harm or which, if not intentional, shows an utter indifference to or conscious disregard for the safety of others.” 745 ILCS 10/1 — 210 (West 1992). It is difficult to imagine that the conduct alleged by plaintiff, i.e., placing a ladder on the rocks, is so egregious as to fall within the penumbra of wilful and wanton. Even if the placement of the ladder was negligence on the part of defendant, the law recognizes a clear distinction between negligence and wilful and wanton conduct. (Ziarko v. Soo Line R.R. Co. (1994), 161 Ill. 2d 267, 641 N.E.2d 402; Burke v. 12 Rothschild’s Liquor Mart, Inc. (1992), 148 Ill. 2d 429, 593 N.E.2d 522.) Thus, even if I were to concede that the defendant failed to act with reasonable care, the facts do not establish the kind of ill will, intention to cause harm or conscious indifference to the safety of plaintiff to establish a factual basis for wilful and wanton conduct. Generally, this determination is reserved for the trier of fact. (E.g., Brown v. Chicago Park District (1991), 220 Ill. App. 3d 940, 581 N.E.2d 355.) However, based upon the present record, there are no questions of fact which, if resolved in plaintiff’s favor, would sustain a jury’s determination of wilful and wanton. See Castaneda v. Community Unit School District No. 200 (1994), 268 Ill. App. 3d 99 (affirmed summary judgment to defendants, finding that the uncontested facts were insufficient as a matter of law to constitute wilful and wanton conduct). For these reasons, I must respectfully dissent.

=== CASE 2225419 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:46.400851+00 ===

84 N.Y.2d 967 (1994)
646 N.E.2d 795
622 N.Y.S.2d 493
Helen Piacquadio et al., Respondents,
v.
Recine Realty Corp. et al., Appellants.
Court of Appeals of the State of New York.
Argued October 26, 1994.
Decided December 13, 1994.
Kelly Flanagan Hodukavich & Goldberg, New York City (William G. Kelly and Carol R. Finocchio of counsel), for appellants.
Profeta & Eisenstein, New York City (Fred R. Profeta, Jr., Michael J. Orlofsky and Robert G. Spevack of counsel), for respondents.
Chief Judge KAYE and Judges SIMONS, TITONE, BELLACOSA, SMITH, LEVINE and CIPARICK concur in memorandum.
*969MEMORANDUM.
The order of the Appellate Division should be reversed, with costs, and the complaint dismissed.
Plaintiff Helen Piacquadio slipped and fell in defendants' restaurant on a terrazzo stair where liquid had accumulated to cover an area approximately 10 inches by 6 inches in size. Nothing in the record establishes that the terrazzo was otherwise dangerous or negligently maintained (see, Kline v Abraham, 178 N.Y. 377). Because a "general awareness" that a dangerous condition may be present is legally insufficient to constitute notice of the particular condition that caused plaintiff's fall (see, Gordon v American Museum of Natural History, 67 N.Y.2d 836, 838; see also, Madrid v City of New York, 42 N.Y.2d 1039), liability could be predicated only on failure of defendants to remedy the danger presented by the liquid after actual or constructive notice of the condition.
The evidence does not establish that defendants had either actual or constructive notice of the hazardous condition that caused plaintiff to slip and fall, and accordingly the complaint should be dismissed.
Order reversed, etc.

=== CASE 9740930 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:45:13.403918+00 ===

SAWYER, J.
This trio of cases provides us with the opportunity to determine the scope of the applicability of this Court’s recent decision in Kidder v Ptacin,1 which held that relief from a judgment was not appropriate where the case had been dismissed in accordance with a directive of this Court and the appellate process had been concluded. Although originally submitted as three separate cases, because of the common issue presented in light of Kidder, on our own motion we consolidated these cases for purposes of argument and decision. In these appeals, we hold that the Kidder principle also applies where the trial court had previously dismissed a case and no appeal had been taken and where the trial court had not yet complied with this Court’s earlier directive.
Our decision in Kidder considered the application of the Supreme Court’s decision in Mullins v St Joseph *5Mercy Hosp2 to cases that had been previously decided by this Court under Waltz v Wyse3 resulting in summary dispositions in favor of the defendants in certain medical malpractice actions. The Supreme Court’s order in Mullins had reversed this Court’s holding that Waltz was to be given full retroactive effect. The Supreme Court’s order in Mullins4 held that Waltz was not to be applied to any action filed after the decision in Omelenchuk v City of Warren5 in which the saving period had expired within 182 days after the decision in Waltz. In Kidder, this Court, in a prior unpublished opinion per curiam issued before the Supreme Court’s order in Mullins, applied the decision in Waltz, concluding that the plaintiffs suit was not timely, and reversed and remanded the matter to the trial court with instructions to grant summary disposition to the defendants.6 The trial court complied with this Court’s directions and dismissed the case.7 Thereafter, the Supreme Court entered its order in Mullins. Because the plaintiff in Kidder would have prevailed under the Mullins holding, the plaintiff in Kidder moved for relief from judgment, which the trial court granted and reinstated the plaintiffs case.8
The defendants appealed, arguing that, under the law of the case doctrine, the trial court was obliged to follow this Court’s previous directions to dismiss the case. This Court agreed and again ordered the trial court to grant summary disposition in favor of the defendants.9
*6The three cases before us present a variation on the facts of Kidder. In each case, we conclude that Kidder either directly controls the outcome of the case or that at least the reasoning in Kidder applies and judgment for defendants is appropriate.
Of the three cases, perhaps the easiest to resolve is Wren (Docket Nos. 283726 and 283727), because the procedural facts are essentially identical to Kidder. In both Wren and Kidder, this Court issued an opinion before the Supreme Court’s order in Mullins, which applied Waltz retroactively and concluded that the cases were untimely filed.10 Thus, both cases were concluded at the time the Supreme Court entered its order in Mullins, and the plaintiffs in both cases sought to have their cases reinstated in light of Mullins. In both cases, the trial court ultimately granted relief from judgment in light of Mullins and ordered the cases reinstated.11 Given that Wren is in the same procedural posture as Kidder, Kidder directly controls the outcome of Wren. Therefore, we conclude that, in light of Kidder, the trial court erred by reinstating plaintiffs cause of action. We vacate the trial court’s order in Wren reinstating this matter.
The situation in Ellis (Docket No. 284319) is somewhat different from Kidder, but we nonetheless believe that Kidder directs us to the same result. The difference *7in Ellis is that plaintiffs never sought to appeal the trial court’s original decision to dismiss the case in light of the retroactive application of Waltz. That is, the procedural posture of Ellis at the time that the Supreme Court entered its order in Mullins was that the trial court had granted defendants’ motion and dismissed the case, with plaintiffs not taking an appeal from that decision. The Supreme Court issued its decision in Mullins nearly a year later, prompting plaintiffs to file their motion to reinstate the case, which the trial court granted.
Technically speaking, the law of the case doctrine does not apply here because there is not a decision of a higher court that is now binding on the lower court.12 Despite that fact, however, it is not tenable that plaintiffs in this case should prevail while the plaintiffs in Wren and Ellis lose. In Kidder,13 we made the following observation:
MCR 2.612(C)(1)(f) is likewise inapplicable. Just as “equity aids the vigilant, not those who sleep on their rights,” Falk v State Bar of Michigan, 411 Mich 63, 113 n 27; 305 NW2d 201 (1981) (RYAN, J, joined by MOODY and Fitzgerald, JJ.) (quotation marks and citations omitted), so does the appellate process. See Lothian v Detroit, 414 Mich 160,175; 324 NW2d 9 (1982) (denying relief to an appellant who, “wholly apprised of the facts which constituted his cause of action, chose to sleep on his rights until a subsequent appellate court decision roused him to action”). The instant defendants were neither parties to Mullins nor among those similarly situated parties whose cases were pending in the appellate process. Instead, as earlier indicated, the dismissal of plaintiffs case had become final (an effective judgment). The interests of justice truly militate *8against allowing a defeated party’s action to spring back to life because others have availed themselves of the appellate process.
If relief from judgment should not be granted under MCR 2.612(C)(1)(f) where a party sleeps on their appellate rights by failing to seek leave to appeal in the Supreme Court from an adverse ruling in this Court, then certainly relief from judgment is not appropriate where the party never even pursues an appeal from the trial court’s ruling to this Court. To hold otherwise would allow plaintiffs’ “action to spring back to life because others have availed themselves of the appellate process.”14
We hold that relief from judgment under MCR 2.612(C)(1)(f) is inappropriate where a party has not sought appellate review of a trial court’s final order and the basis for relief from judgment is a subsequent appellate decision in a different case. Accordingly, the trial court in Ellis erred by granting plaintiffs relief from judgment and reinstating their cause of action. We vacate that order and reinstate the trial court’s original order dismissing the case with prejudice.
We finally turn to Farley (Docket Nos. 283405, 283418, and 284681), which presents the most distinct set of facts of this trio of cases. In Farley, there are two significant procedural differences from Kidder and Wren. First, in Farley, plaintiff did not sit on her appellate rights. After the adverse decision in this Court, she sought leave to appeal in the Supreme Court, which denied leave.15 Second, the trial court never complied with this Court’s directions on remand. That is, in our prior opinion, we directed the trial court to *9enter an order granting defendants summary disposition.16 The trial court never complied with that directive. Thus, the trial court never granted plaintiff relief from judgment after the Supreme Court’s decision in Mullins because there was no trial court judgment to grant relief from.
We do not believe that either of these distinctions, however, requires a different result. The fact that the Supreme Court denied leave to appeal means that our earlier decision is now the final adjudication in this case and may be enforced according to its terms.17 Furthermore, we cannot endorse a process by which relief can be obtained because the lower court chose to simply ignore the clear directive of the appellate court, allowing the case to languish until there is a change in law to justify the result that the lower court would like to apply.18
Simply put, the trial court had no alternative in this case other than to comply with the direction of this Court in our previous opinion. And once the trial court so complies, as discussed above, it is precluded from granting relief from judgment under the law of the case doctrine.
The orders of the trial courts reinstating these cases are vacated. The matters are remanded to the respective trial courts with direction to enter orders of summary disposition in favor of defendants. We do not retain jurisdiction. Costs to defendants.
*10SAAD, C.J., concurred.
284 Mich App 166; 771 NW2d 806 (2009).
480 Mich 948 (2007).
469 Mich 642; 677 NW2d 813 (2004).
Mullins, supra at 948.
461 Mich 667; 609 NW2d 177 (2000).
Kidder, supra at 168-169.
Id. at 169.
Id.
Id. at 171.
There is one distinction between Wren and Kidder in this regard: in Kidder, the trial court had ruled in the plaintiffs favor and the prior appeal was an interlocutory appeal by the defendants seeking to have the case dismissed, while in Wren the trial court had dismissed the case and plaintiff appealed to this Court in the prior appeal. But we see no meaningful distinction in this slightly different procedural posture in the prior appeals.
Another similarity of both Kidder and Wren is that in neither case did the plaintiffs seek leave to appeal in the Supreme Court after losing in this Court.
See Kidder, supra at 170.
Id. at 171.
Kidder, supra at 171.
Farley v Advanced Cardiovascular Health Specialists, PC, 474 Mich 1020 (2006).
Farley v Advanced Cardiovascular Health Specialists, PC, 266 Mich App 566, 568-570; 703 NW2d 115 (2005).
Detroit v Gen Motors Corp, 233 Mich App 132, 140; 592 NW2d 732 (1998).
See Cox v Flint Bd of Hosp Managers (On Remand), 243 Mich App 72, 93; 620 NW2d 859 (2000), and Sumner v Gen Motors Corp (On Remand), 245 Mich App 653; 633 NW2d 1 (2001) (discussing the need for finality in this Court’s judgments).

=== CASE 9740931 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:45:13.408122+00 ===

BORRELLO, J.
(dissenting). I respectfully dissent from the majority’s opinion in these consolidated cases. While I agree with the majority that we are bound by MCR 7.215(J)(1) to follow Kidder v Ptacin, 284 Mich App 166; 771 NW2d 806 (2009), in Wren (Docket Nos. 283726 and 283727) and Ellis (Docket No. 284319), because I am of the opinion that Kidder was wrongly decided, I would declare a conflict under MCR 7.215(J)(2). Furthermore, I disagree with the majority that Kidder controls the outcome in Farley (Docket Nos. 283405, 283418, and 284681) because Farley is factually distinguishable from Kidder. Contrary to the result reached by the majority, I would conclude that the trial court did not abuse its discretion by reinstating plaintiffs case in Farley.
I believe that the majority’s reliance on Kidder in Farley is misplaced because the facts in Farley are distinguishable from the facts in Kidder. MCR 2.612(C)(1)(f) authorizes relief from judgment for “[a]ny other reason justifying relief from the operation of the judgment.” In Kidder, this Court ruled that MCR 2.612(C)(1)(f) was inapplicable because the plaintiff in that case failed to appeal the judgment of this Court. Kidder, supra at 169, 171. In declining to apply MCR 2.612(C)(1)(f), this Court stated:
Just as “equity aids the vigilant, not those who sleep on their rights,” Falk v State Bar of Michigan, 411 Mich 63, 113 n 27; 305 NW2d 201 (1981) (Ryan, J., joined by Moody and Fitzgerald, JJ.) (quotation marks and citations omitted), so does the appellate process. See Lothian v Detroit, 414 Mich 160, 175; 324 NW2d 9 (1982) (denying relief to an appellant who, “wholly apprised of the facts which constituted his cause of action, chose to sleep on his rights until a subsequent appellate court decision roused him to action”). ... The interests of justice truly militate against *11allowing a defeated party’s action to spring back to life because others have availed themselves of the appellate process. [Kidder, supra at 171.]
As the majority notes, plaintiff in Farley did not sleep or sit on her appellate rights like the plaintiff in Kidder. To the contrary, plaintiff in Farley moved for reconsideration in this Court1 and appealed this Court’s decision to the Supreme Court, which denied leave to appeal.2 Because plaintiff availed herself of the appellate process in Farley, Kidder’s reasoning for declining to apply MCR 2.612(C)(1)(f) is inapplicable here, and the interests of justice do not militate against allowing plaintiff to pursue her case. Rather, the interests of justice dictate a contrary result from that reached by my colleagues in the majority. Based on my review of the proceedings in the trial court, any reliance on Kidder to reverse the trial court’s reinstatement of plaintiffs case in Farley is improper and unjust.
Although plaintiffs motion following the Supreme Court’s decision in Mullins v St Joseph Mercy Hosp, 480 Mich 948(2007), was technically a motion to lift a stay rather than a motion to reinstate the case, the trial court noted on the record that it had not imposed a stay and treated plaintiffs motion as a motion to reinstate the case. “ ‘This Court reviews for abuse of discretion a trial court’s decision concerning a motion to reinstate an action.’ ” Kidder, supra at 170, quoting Wickings v Arctic Enterprises, Inc, 244 Mich App 125, 138; 624 NW2d 197 (2000). The abuse of discretion standard recognizes “ ‘that there will be circumstances in which there will be no single correct outcome; rather, there *12will be more than one reasonable and principled outcome.’ ” Maldonado v Ford Motor Co, 476 Mich 372, 388; 719 NW2d 809 (2006), quoting People v Babcock, 469 Mich 247, 269; 666 NW2d 231 (2003). “An abuse of discretion occurs when the decision results in an outcome falling outside the principled range of outcomes.” Woodard v Custer, 476 Mich 545, 557; 719 NW2d 842 (2006).
Unlike the majority, I would conclude that the trial court’s reinstatement of plaintiffs case in Farley was not an abuse of discretion. Given the trial court’s authority to relieve a party from a judgment under MCR 2.612(C)(1)(f) and the fact that plaintiff in Farley availed herself of the appellate process, I would conclude that Kidder is distinguishable and hold that the trial court’s reinstatement of plaintiffs case in Farley did not fall outside the principled range of outcomes.
Farley v Carp, unpublished order of the Court of Appeals, entered July 22, 2005 (Docket Nos. 256776, 256799, and 257988).
Farley v Advanced Cardiovascular Health Specialists, PC, 474 Mich 1020 (2006).

=== CASE 9740932 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:45:15.049697+00 ===

*711OPINION OF THE COURT
Ciparick, J.
May defendant’s previous conviction of a felony in Maryland when he was 15 years old constitute cross-examination material at his New York murder and robbery trial even though the Maryland conviction would have resulted in a juvenile delinquency adjudication in New York? We hold that the trial courts’ traditional, broad Sandoval discretion controls this question and decline to adopt a per se rule automatically excluding the out-of-State conviction.
Around 2:30 a.m. on July 12, 1990, a police officer discovered the body of Harry Rhodes slumped over the steering wheel of his truck parked outside a beer distributor’s warehouse in upper Manhattan. Rhodes had been shot to death. The door at the rear of the truck was open and the driver’s side window was broken. Inside, the glove compartment was open and papers were strewn across the floor of the cab and the passenger seat. A wallet and personal documents belonging to Rhodes were found under the stairwell of a nearby building.
The following day, defendant and five others were arrested in connection with the murder and robbery. Defendant gave a written statement to a detective and made a second, videotaped statement to an Assistant District Attorney. In both statements defendant admitted to participating in the robbery of Rhodes.
Defendant made a pretrial Sandoval motion to preclude the People from using his prior convictions to impeach his credibility in the event he testified in his own behalf (see, People v Sandoval, 34 NY2d 371). The motion was addressed to a 1990 misdemeanor conviction in New York for criminal trespass and a 1989 Maryland felony conviction for cocaine trafficking when defendant was 15 years old. The trial court denied the motion in its entirety.* Defendant did not testify at trial and was convicted of murder in the second degree, two counts of burglary in the second degree, and criminal possession of a weapon in the second degree. The Appellate Division affirmed.
On this appeal, defendant argues that the Legislature has *712evinced a strong policy in favor of protecting youths under 16 from acquiring criminal status for nonviolent crimes and that deference to that policy requires elimination of the trial court’s traditional Sandoval discretion in favor of a per se rule precluding use of prior criminal convictions from foreign jurisdictions where, as here, the underlying acts would not be adjudicated crimes if committed in this State.
A criminal defendant who chooses to testify may be cross-examined concerning prior criminal, vicious or immoral acts that bear logically on that individual’s credibility as a witness (see, People v Sandoval, 34 NY2d 371, 374, supra). Use of prior criminal convictions and bad acts to impeach a testifying defendant "is largely, if not completely, a matter of discretion which rests with the trial courts and fact-reviewing intermediate appellate courts” (People v Shields, 46 NY2d 764, 765). It is, however, impermissible to use a youthful offender or juvenile delinquency adjudication as an impeachment weapon, because "these adjudications are not convictions of a crime” (Richardson, Evidence § 506, at 494 [Prince 10th ed]; see, Family Ct Act § 301.2 [1]; Penal Law § 30.00). Nevertheless, the cross-examiner may bring out "the illegal or immoral acts underlying such adjudications” (People v Greer, 42 NY2d 170, 176).
Recently, we stated of the admissibility of prior convictions, that "[o]ur law does not require 'the application of any particular balancing process’ in Sandoval determinations * * * and there are no per se rules requiring preclusion because of the age, nature and number of a defendant’s prior crimes” (People v Walker, 83 NY2d 455, 459, quoting People v Pollock, 50 NY2d 547, 550; see, People v Mattiace, 77 NY2d 269, 275). "Because the trial courts have inherent power to control the scope of cross-examination and the use of prior bad acts is a genetically accepted practice in that context, this Court will intervene only where 'the trial court ha[s] either abused its discretion or exercised none at all’ ” (People v Walker, 83 NY2d 455, 459, supra, quoting People v Williams, 56 NY2d 236, 238).
Indeed, in People v Mackey (49 NY2d 274, 281), we declined to hold that the trial court abused its discretion in permitting cross-examination of the defendant on petit larceny and disorderly conduct convictions that occurred when the defendant was 13 years old. As defendant candidly concedes, the convictions in Mackey must necessarily have been foreign since they *713postdated the Family Court Act. In People v Peele (12 NY2d 890, 891), we held that the trial court did not commit reversible error when it permitted the prosecutor to question the defendant concerning a Virginia juvenile delinquency adjudication, “since the prosecutor in good faith believed that there had been a criminal conviction.” A criminal conviction in a foreign jurisdiction may be used against a defendant testifying in this State if the act or acts constituted a crime in that jurisdiction (see, People v Rivera, 100 AD2d 914, 915; People v Brown, 2 AD2d 202, 203-204).
Defendant is correct in arguing that the Legislature has sought to protect young persons who have violated the criminal statutes of this State from acquiring the stigma that accompanies a criminal conviction (see, Family Ct Act § 381.2 et seq.). However, New York’s governmental interest in the adjudication of criminal acts which take place outside the State is much less compelling and hardly requires the automatic override of another jurisdiction’s treatment of the problem of youth crime or elimination of our well-established, workable Sandoval rules.
In People v Kuey (83 NY2d 278), we considered a similar problem in the context of enhanced sentencing. We held that New York courts may defer to the policies of the jurisdiction in which the misconduct occurred, and use Florida youthful offender convictions as a predicate for enhanced sentencing purposes even though New York would expunge such convictions and prohibit their use as predicates in sentencing. Having determined in Kuey that New York courts "may give equal force” to Florida’s "significantly different” treatment of youthful offenders — even though less protective than our own —we discern no compelling reason to adopt a different rule here, where the foreign conviction is being used solely for impeachment rather than enhanced punishment (id., at 285 [emphasis added]). Indeed, in this State, inquiry into the actual nature of the acts constituting the basis for the youthful offender or juvenile delinquency adjudication is permitted, and a defendant can even be impeached with prior bad acts that did not result in a criminal charge (see, Sandoval, 34 NY2d, at 374, supra).
This is not to say that in every case involving an out-of-State criminal conviction there must be deference to the foreign jurisdiction’s juvenile justice policies. We hold only that the matter remains within the sound discretion of the *714hearing court, which should be sensitive to the differences between the juvenile justice policies of this State and the foreign State.
In conclusion, we find the rationale of the defendant and concurring opinion unpersuasive and decline to adopt a per se rule automatically excluding as cross-examination material any and all foreign criminal convictions involving acts that, if committed in this State, would result in youthful offender or juvenile delinquency treatment. The use of prior convictions for impeachment purposes is a matter resting "largely, if not completely”, within the sound discretion of the trial courts (Shields, 46 NY2d, at 765, supra). We find no abuse of such discretion here as a matter of law.
We have considered defendant’s remaining contention and find that it is without merit.
Accordingly, the order of the Appellate Division should be affirmed.
Although the Appellate Division concluded that "the court did not permit use of the [Maryland] conviction itself for purposes of impeachment” (198 AD2d 3, 4), examination of the record indicates that the trial court later made a clarification of its original ambiguous Sandoval ruling, stating: "It’s the conviction and underlying circumstances with regard to the Baltimore felony.”

=== CASE 9740933 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:45:15.053878+00 ===

Levine, J.
(concurring). Since 1909, the undeviating law and policy of this State has been to protect youths under the age of 16 who commit nonviolent acts from acquiring criminal status and its accompanying disabilities* — including impeachment on credibility in subsequent proceedings based upon juvenile delinquency adjudications arising from those acts. Despite the broad discretion which we have accorded trial courts in Sandoval determinations generally, it is absolutely clear that if defendant had committed in New York the act which gave rise to his criminal conviction in Maryland, it would have been error as a matter of law for the trial court to have exercised its "discretion” to permit cross-examination of defendant on the adjudication of juvenile delinquency that may have resulted. In my view, appropriate deference to this long-standing policy and due regard for fairness and consistency in the administration of the law mandates also precluding, as a matter of law, impeachment of a testifying defendant on the basis of a sister State conviction premised upon a *715youthful act which, had it occurred in New York, could not have been the basis of a criminal conviction nor the subject of credibility impeachment in this State.
There is no dispute here concerning the controlling law if defendant had committed in New York at age 15 the nonviolent act underlying the Maryland conviction sought to be utilized for impeachment here. Under New York law, defendant’s commission of the subject drug offense would have fallen within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Family Court (Family Ct Act § 301.2 [1]), and would have exposed him, at worst, to a finding of juvenile delinquency (Family Ct Act § 352.1 [1]). It is further uncontestable that defendant could not have acquired a criminal record as a result of that adjudication, as the governing statute makes perfectly clear that "[n]o adjudication under this article may be denominated a conviction and no person adjudicated a juvenile delinquent shall be denominated a criminal by reason of such adjudication” (Family Ct Act § 380.1 [1]).
In addition to the fact that the status of a criminal conviction would not have attached to the adjudication, Family Court Act § 381.2 (1) further provides that:
"Neither the fact that a person was before the family court under this article for a hearing nor any confession, admission or statement made by him to the court or to any officer thereof in any stage of the proceeding is admissible as evidence against him or his interests in any other court.”
Accordingly, as the majority acknowledges, it is settled that a juvenile delinquency adjudication itself may under no circumstances be utilized to impeach a testifying defendant’s credibility in a subsequent criminal proceeding (see, People v Greer, 42 NY2d 170, 176; Richardson, Evidence § 506, at 494 [Prince 10th ed]).
The policy underlying the foregoing is not difficult to discern. "The historic purpose of the juvenile justice system has been the rehabilitation of children” (Sobie, Practice Commentary, McKinney’s Cons Laws of NY, Book 29A, Family Ct Act § 301.1, at 263; see also, 1 Kerschensteiner, Callaghan’s Family Court Law and Practice in New York § 9:01, at 6 ["treatment and rehabilitation (are) the ultimate goals” of juvenile delinquency proceedings]). The statutory scheme clearly reflects the Legislature’s considered judgment that children are not fully responsible for every antisocial act they commit, and that it is *716counterproductive to their development as responsible citizens to attach a criminal conviction, with its attendant stigma and practical consequences, to nonviolent acts which may result in many cases solely from immaturity or environment.
The issue before this Court then, is whether the result should be different because of the fortuity that defendant’s prior act was committed in a State which treats youths in a more draconian fashion than in New York. To be sure, the New York Legislature has not expressly barred cross-examinatian on such an extraterritorial conviction, as it has for New York Family Court adjudications. Nevertheless, we are not operating in a vacuum; the Legislature has spoken on the collateral effects of juvenile delinquency determinations in our State and has proscribed their use in subsequent proceedings. As we have stated:
"The public policy of the State is what the Legislature says it is, where the Legislature has spoken, and a policy so declared sometimes has to be followed by the courts in areas beyond the express reach of the statute for the sake of consistency in the administration of the law” (Matter of Steinberg v Steinberg, 18 NY2d 492, 497).
In accord with this principle, I conclude that, informed by the discernable policy determinations of our Legislature on this issue, barring cross-examination here is necessary "for the sake of consistency in the administration of [Sandoval] law” (id.).
The practical application of the majority’s holding today introduces a regrettable inconsistency into the Sandoval doctrine. Thus, two different defendants choosing to testify in a New York State criminal court may be subject to differing impeachment regarding adjudications arising from youthful acts, dependent solely on the locality where the prior act was committed. Surely, the probative and prejudicial natures of the adjudications, the traditional inquiries under Sandoval, do not usually differ because of the locus of the underlying act. Yet, as a result of this decision, a defendant who happened to commit the act as a youth in New York will be shielded as matter of law from impeachment, but the defendant who committed the act without the State may not. Such potential for disparate results is not jurisprudentially sound. Far from *717advocating the "automatic overriding] of another jurisdiction’s treatment of the problem of youth crime or elimination of our well-established, workable Sandoval rules” (majority opn, at 713), I would merely rule for consistency in an area where the Legislature and this Court have already overridden use of certain adjudications for impeachment.
Furthermore, nothing in People v Kuey (83 NY2d 278) compels the majority’s result in the instant case. In Kuey, this Court held that it was proper to utilize a Florida youthful offender conviction as a predicate felony in New York — where Florida allowed its youthful offender convictions to serve as predicate offenses in its enhanced sentencing scheme — notwithstanding that defendant might have been granted youthful offender status had he committed the act in New York, in which case the conviction could not be so used. Because the decision to grant youthful offender status was discretionary in both States (id., at 284), the use of the conviction as a predicate did not impinge on any policy of this State. Kuey did not deal with an analogous situation to the instant case, for instance, if a sister State allowed for use as a predicate offense a conviction based on conduct that could only have been the basis for a juvenile delinquency adjudication in New York. I do not believe that any reading of Kuey would support the use of such a conviction as a predicate offense in this State.
Thus, the trial court erred as a matter of law in its Sandoval ruling. This Court has previously held, however, that errors in Sandoval determinations are subject to harmless error analysis, and I conclude that the error must be deemed harmless on this record (see, People v Shields, 46 NY2d 764, 765; see also, People v Williams, 56 NY2d 236, 240-241). The evidence against defendant, including his written and videotaped confessions to police, was overwhelming and there is no significant probability that he would have been acquitted if the error had not occurred and defendant had consequently chosen to testify (People v Crimmins, 36 NY2d 230, 242).
Chief Judge Kaye and Judges Simons and Smith concur with Judge Ciparick; Judge Levine concurs in result in a separate opinion in which Judges Titone and Bellacosa concur.
Order affirmed.
Chapter 478 of the Laws of 1909, amending former Penal Law § 2186, provided: "A child of more than seven and less than sixteen years of age, who shall commit any act or omission which, if committed by an adult, would be a crime not punishable by death or life imprisonment, shall not be deemed guilty of any crime, but of juvenile delinquency only”.
The present Penal Law provides, for nonviolent offenses, that "a person less than sixteen years old is not criminally responsible for conduct” (Penal Law § 30.00 [1]).

=== CASE 9740946 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:45:31.755094+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE DEMPSEY delivered the opinion of the court. This is an interlocutory appeal by the defendants from an order denying their motion to dissolve a temporary injunction. The single question to be determined is the propriety of issuing the injunction without notice. The motion for the restraining order was accompanied by the complaint and three supporting affidavits. The complaint stated that the plaintiff was a subdivider and a builder of homes in the Village of Stream-wood, Cook County. It charged that the defendants, all residents of the village, had entered into a conspiracy in August 1959, to coerce the plaintiff to build schools in the village, which the plaintiff was under no legal obligation to do; that on two Sundays, September 13th and 20th, 1959, the defendants, in furtherance of the conspiracy, had prevented the sale of the homes by parading around the sales area, by invading the plaintiff’s office and model homes, and by interrupting conversations between salesmen and prospective purchasers. It was further alleged that the defendants had threatened to repeat the demonstrations on Saturday and Sunday, September 26th and 27th. One affidavit was by the plaintiff’s supervisor of sales. He stated he had received information Wednesday evening, September 23rd, that the defendants would cause similar disturbances the following weekend. He also swore that $18,000 had been spent in advertising the homes for sale on the same weekend. Another affidavit was by the general counsel for the plaintiff. He said that he had been retained to prosecute the complaint on September 24th; that he and an associate worked on the pleadings until 10:30 Thursday night and, with the aid of two more associates, continued the work throughout the next day until 3:30 p. m. The suit was filed thereafter, late in the afternoon of Friday, September 25,1959, and was assigned to the chancellor. He enjoined the defendants from instigating or participating in activities which would interfere with the plaintiff’s sales efforts. His order further stated: “. . . this injunction should issue without notice it appearing from the record that in view of the imminence of the threat that there was insufficient time to give notice.” The latter part of the order spotlights the problem confronting us. The facts alleged in the pleadings made out an excellent prima facie case for an injunction, and for the issuance of an injunction prior to the threatened repetition of the defendants’ demonstration, but no facts were pleaded which showed that the plaintiff would be prejudiced by informing the defendants of the motion; nothing was said about the waiver of notice, and there was no prayer for such relief. Under these circumstances should notice have been waived? Should notice have been given during the preparation of the case in anticipation of the subsequent shortage of time? The defendants maintain that notice should and could have been given because the plaintiff, according to its own affidavits, knew for at least two days that an injunction was to be requested; that its sole objective was to obtain the writ before Saturday, and that it therefore knew the application would be made sometime on Friday. They point out that the complaint shows that the plaintiff has an office, staffed with employees, in the village where the defendants reside, and that a telephone call to this office would have resulted in the personnel alerting at least some of the defendants. And they add that, under our decisions, all that was required was some kind of notice, either oral or written. The plaintiff explains that it had no intention of seeking an injunction without notice and for that reason the subject was not mentioned in its pleadings, but when the pleadings were completed, there remained only a few minutes before the end of the afternoon on the last day of court before the impending act sought to be enjoined. It takes the position that notice of the time and place of its application could not be given until the case was filed and assigned to a particular judge, and that when this was done it was too late to inform the defendants who lived at the extreme edge of the county, many miles from the court house.  An injunction is an extraordinary remedy; one without notice is considered most drastic and should be granted only under extreme circumstances. Sprague v. Monarch Book Co., 105 Ill. App. 530; Brin v. Craig, 135 Ill. App. 301; Crown Bldg. Corp. v. Monroe Amusement Corp., 326 Ill. App. 430. The circumstances countenanced by the courts have been in very restricted areas, such as where the facts of the case, or the history of the parties, disclosed that the giving of notice would result in accelerating the very act sought to be enjoined, or where the act to be enjoined was either taking place or would be undertaken or completed in the time required for notice. A. Daigger & Co. v. Kraft, 281 Ill. App. 548; Mitchell v. Mitchell, 10 Ill.App.2d 437; Atkinson Trust & Sav. Bank v. DeRoo, 332 Ill.App.251; 21 I.L.P., Injunctions, sec. 123, et seq.  Notice to an adversary is elemental in our system of justice. Our courts of review have insisted upon chancery courts scrupulously observing the fundamental right of a party to be informed of the injunction proposed against him so that he may be present, if he wishes, to defend himself. Skarpinski v. Veterans of Foreign Wars of United States, 343 Ill. App. 271; Goldberg v. Laughlin, 137 Ill. App. 283. It has been held some notice is better than none, and if a complainant is unable to comply with the court rules in reference to giving notice and serving copies of the pertinent pleadings (Uniform Rules of the Circuit Courts of Illinois, sec. 302.1, ch. 110, Ill. Rev. Stat. 1959) he can show his good faith by giving some sort of notice to the opposite party. In Skarpinski v. Veterans of Foreign Wars, supra, an injunction without notice was issued the day after the complaint was filed. This court stated that there was no genuine emergency shown by the complaint and added: “It appears from the record that plaintiff knew who was defendant’s attorney and telephone communication with him should have been easy and practicable. Even a telephone call from the courtroom to defendant or counsel can produce an appearance within a few minutes. While we do not suggest this as a substitute for formal notice, it is at least a desirable alternative to no notice at all.” We must distinguish between a case, such as Skarpinski, where the defendant or his attorney is readily accessible, and the instant case where the defendants had no centrally located address or no known attorney. A late notice in this case would have been futile; it is reasonable to suppose that none of the defendants could have responded in the brief interval between the completion of the necessary documents and the adjournment of court for the weekend. The only satisfactory notice, under the prevailing circumstances, would have been one served several hours before the filing of the suit. The defendants say this should have been done, and this is the heart of their argument. It seems to us, if this argument were carried to its logical conclusion, a plaintiff upon arriving at his decision to seek an injunction, or his attorney upon being consulted for this purpose, would have to inform the defendant that an injunction was contemplated, and that on some future day, at some time as yet undetermined, they would appear before some chancellor in either the Circuit or Superior Court. They would have to do this to safeguard themselves in the event that later there was inadequate time for a better notice. What other defense would they have to a charge that they could have given an earlier notice if they had sincerely tried? No case has been called to our attention where it has been suggested that a notice prior to instituting litigation is either required or is advisable. A somewhat analogous contention was rejected in O’Beirne v. City of Elgin, 187 Ill. App. 581, where an injunction was granted without notice, under a statute substantially the same as the present one, restraining the city from considering bids and making contracts for a municipal lighting plant. The bids were to be opened at 2 p. m. on the day the injunction was issued. The bonds for the plant had been approved by the voters months earlier, and it was urged that the complaint could have been filed in ample time for notice to have been given. The court said: “It is argued that appellee might have filed his bill earlier and thus had time to give notice of his application. This may be true, but we know of no law that forbids the issuing of an injunction without notice on the ground that the complainant might have commenced his proceeding earlier and given notice. We are aware of no requirement that it should appear to the court granting the temporary injunction, not only that damage would result if the injunction is not issued •without notice, but also that the complainant is guilty of no negligence in failing to file his bill at an earlier period.” A further result would flow from formulating a rule along the line of the defendants’ argument. Notice could be excused only in those cases where the giving of notice might bring on an act sought to be enjoined, such as a defendant leaving the state, withdrawing or spending funds and the like. In other cases there would be no reason for dispensing with notice. No emergency no matter how urgent, no impending damage no matter how great, would justify the injunction because it would be a rare case indeed, under our practice of informal notification, where some notice could not be given. Such a rule would be in contravention of the statute which imposes no such limitation. The statute says that an injunction may issue without notice if it appears from the complaint or the affidavit that “the rights of the plaintiff will be unduly prejudiced if the injunction is not issued immediately or without notice.” Chapter 69, sec. 3, Ill. Rev. Stat. 1959. The chancellor was faced with three alternatives: (1) he could have refused the injunction; (2) he could have compelled notice and continued the hearing for this purpose until a later hour on Friday or an early hour on Saturday, or (3) he could have issued the injunction. Let us examine each of these to see if he abused the discretion which was his.  (1) If he refused the injunction he would be risking grave injury to the plaintiff. Unlike the Skarpinski ease where this court found that “The threat alleged . . . had not taken tangible form . . . ,” here the defendants had definitely threatened to repeat, within the next 24 hours, the demonstration which had so greatly damaged the plaintiff just five days before. And again, unlike the Skarpinski case, where this court said that the acts which were feared “. . . were not contemplated . . . before the opening of court the following morning. . . . ,” here the acts were indeed contemplated and reasonably to be expected before the opening of court on the next court day, which was the following Monday morning. (2) It would have been the best solution if the chancellor had been able to postpone the hearing until a later hour so that the defendants could have had the opportunity of appearing. But we cannot criticise him for not doing so. There was no obligation upon him to hold court on Friday night or on Saturday, although judges often do. We do not know if it would have been possible for him to have done so; he alone knows what his commitments or plans were for those times. (3) The chancellor knew when he considered the application that there was inadequate time for future notice, and he had before him an affidavit by an officer of his court which established that there had been no time for prior notice and no purposeful procrastination just to create the appearance of urgency. The factual allegations of the complaint showed the necessity for an injunction; and, although there was no prayer for waiver of notice nor any averment that the giving of notice would be prejudicial, these were unnecessary since the court could conclude from the facts which were alleged, that the plaintiff would suffer irreparable and substantial injury if the injunction were delayed until notice could be given. Sprague v. Monarch Book Co., supra. Issuing the injunction apparently would not injure the defendants who, according to the sworn complaint, had been committing several illegal acts. Certainly no harm could come their way comparable to that confronting the plaintiff if the injunction were refused.  In choosing the third alternative the chancellor was well within his discretion. It was his responsibility to determine if the application had been presented in good faith or if it had been delayed until the eleventh hour for the purpose of simulating an emergency. Where the exigency is genuine and not feigned, the danger imminent and not remote, the injury real and not imaginary, an injunction may issue without notice. Every case must rest upon its own facts, and if the chancellor’s discretion is reasonably exercised it will not be interfered with by a court of review. The order of the Circuit Court is affirmed. Affirmed.

=== CASE 9740948 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:45:31.762217+00 ===

SCHWARTZ, J., dissenting: The issues are so fully and fairly set forth in the opinion of the court, it is unnecessary for me to supplement them in any way. I disagree with my colleagues on the vital question in the case. The court refers to Skarpinski v. Veterans of Foreign Wars of United States, 343 Ill. App. 271, 98 N.E.2d 858, where it was said that a telephone call from the courtroom can produce an appearance, and while that was not suggested as a substitute for formal notice, it was at least a desirable alternative to no notice at all. I construe this to mean that if precise notice of time and place could not be given, the next best method should be used to get notice to an adversary of the imminent application for an injunction. In other words, I would answer in the affirmative the question propounded by the court — should notice have been given during the preparation of the case in anticipation of the subsequent shortage of time? In the instant case, plaintiff knew that the acts it was seeking to enjoin had occurred on prior occasions. Accepting as true the averments of the complaint, that plaintiff was not warned of the possibility of a renewal until the Wednesday preceding the Friday when the complaint was filed, and then for the first time thought of procuring an injunction, the thing that should have occurred to plaintiff or its lawyers at once was how to get some form of notice to defendants. At some point in its preparation of the case plaintiff should have recognized its inability to give the customary formal notice and have made bona fide efforts by telephone or otherwise for the next best alternative. I cannot agree with my colleagues that plaintiff had the right to wait until the complaint was filed and the suit assigned. That would leave it in the hands of plaintiff to create the emergency. As a practical matter, fixing a time and place for meeting and going from there to the assigned court is not uncommon. It would have been easy and simple for plaintiff to get notice to defendants because it had an office in the town where defendants lived. True, as stated in the opinion of the court, the statute provides that an injunction may issue without notice where the rights of the plaintiff will be unduly prejudiced if an injunction is not issued immediately or without notice. But that does not command the issuance of an injunction. It merely provides the basic generalized requirements without which an injunction may not issue without notice. The discretion of the court still is to be invoked. The temptation to proceed without an adversary is very great when an emergency such as the one here involved arises. Therefore, not only should it be incumbent upon lawyers to make an effort to get some kind of notice to defendants, but in my opinion it is an abuse of discretion for the court not to require it, save in such exceptional instances as are referred to in the Skarpinski and other cases cited in the opinion of the court. The case of O’Beirne v. City of Elgin, 187 Ill. App. 581, appears to support the conclusions of my colleagues. That case arose in 1914 and involved an injunction restraining a special election to determine the acquisition of a public utility by the City of Elgin — a municipal ownership question which in those days aroused bitter controversy. No notice was given to any official of the City of Elgin. With respect to the argument that the complainant might have filed his bill earlier and thus have had time to give notice of his application, the court said it knew of no law which forbade the issuance of an injunction without notice, on the ground that the complainant may have commenced his proceeding earlier and given notice. It seems to me the court overlooked the fact that the matter was addressed to the discretion of the chancellor, and that he should have taken into account the size of the city, the ease with which it could have been notified, and the fact that the complainant might have delayed the filing of suit in order to fit the cause within the requirements of an emergency. A court’s failure to do so might be an abuse of discretion, as I think it was in the instant case. So far as I can find, only twice has the O’Beirne case been cited, and then on the proposition that the irregularity of failure to give notice was waived by the filing of a motion to dissolve, which was also a ground on which the case was decided (Schaumburg v. Lindsay, 329 Ill. App. 190, 67 N.E.2d 409; Decker v. West, 273 Ill. App. 532). It is out of keeping with the many decisions which have been handed down since then and which reveal the concern of the courts for the abuse of proceedings for the issuance of injunctions without notice. The courts obviously came to realize the nature of the abuse and in no uncertain terms frequently expressed their disapproval. I feel that in the instant case, adequate steps were not taken to give notice to defendants. I must register my dissent.

=== CASE 2225487 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:48.432163+00 ===

782 N.W.2d 780 (2010)
MOSSING
v.
DEMLOW PRODUCTS, INC.
Docket No. 287643.
Court of Appeals of Michigan.
Submitted December 9, 2009, at Detroit.
Decided January 7, 2010, at 9:05 a.m.
*781 Garan Lucow Miller, P.C. (by Robert D. Goldstein and Thomas R. Paxton), Detroit, for plaintiff.
Philip M. Moilanen, P.C. (by Philip M. Moilanen), Jackson, for defendants.
Before: DONOFRIO, P.J., and SAWYER and OWENS, JJ.
PER CURIAM.
Although the primary issue raised in this appeal is a rather straightforward application of the principle of accord and satisfaction, the cross-appeal raises an interesting jurisdictional question regarding whether a challenge to a post-judgment order denying attorney fees may be raised as part of a cross-appeal from the original judgment itself. We hold that where the cross-appeal from the original judgment was filed in this Court before the trial court entered the order denying an award of attorney fees and costs, a separate appeal must be taken from the post-judgment order denying fees and costs.
Plaintiff is an independent manufacturer's representative for suppliers of automobile parts. Defendant Demlow Products, Inc., is a manufacturer of wire forms that are used to build seats for automobiles. Plaintiff and defendants entered into a business relationship in 1991 and continued until June 2006. On June 21, 2006, defendants sent plaintiff a correspondence informing plaintiff that they were terminating their contract and stating that plaintiff would receive her commissions through June 30, 2006. Included with the correspondence was a check for $7,364.94, and on the comment line was written, "JUNE 2006 FINAL PMT." Plaintiff's attorney responded and explained that plaintiff would be cashing the check for $7,364.94 with the understanding that the future commissions were still in dispute, *782 and therefore the check would not be considered as a final payment.
When further payments were not forthcoming, plaintiff filed the instant action alleging breach of contract, conversion, and a violation of MCL 600.2961. Defendants filed a counterclaim, as well as raised various affirmative defenses, including accord and satisfaction. Ultimately, the trial court granted summary disposition in favor of defendants, concluding that there was no genuine issue of material fact on the issue of accord and satisfaction and that this issue disposed of all the claims and counterclaims. The trial court, however, separately considered the issue of defendants' request for an award of attorney fees and costs. Plaintiff filed a claim of appeal, and defendants filed a claim of cross-appeal, from the order granting summary disposition. Thereafter, the trial court entered its post-judgment order denying defendants' request for attorney fees and costs. Although this is considered a final order under MCR 7.202(6)(a)(iv) and may be appealed as of right, defendants did not file a separate appeal and merely raised their challenge to the denial of fees and costs as part of their cross-appeal.
We turn first to plaintiff's argument on appeal that there has been no accord and satisfaction of her claims because the notation on the check sent to plaintiff was insufficient to put her on notice that defendants intended a discharge of any and all claims. We disagree.
The trial court granted defendants' motion for summary disposition as to plaintiff's complaint on the basis of MCR 2.116(C)(10), no genuine issue as to any material fact. This Court reviews de novo the granting of such a motion.[1]
In considering a motion pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(10), a court considers affidavits, pleadings, depositions, admissions, and other evidence submitted by the parties in a light most favorable to the nonmoving party.[2] Where proffered evidence fails to establish a genuine issue of material fact, the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.[3] A litigant's mere pledge to establish at trial that a genuine issue of material fact exists is not sufficient to overcome summary disposition.[4]
MCL 440.3311, not the common law, applies to an accord and satisfaction involving a negotiable instrument such as a check.[5] MCL 440.3311(4) states:
A claim is discharged if the person against whom the claim is asserted proves that within a reasonable time before collection of the instrument was initiated, the claimant, or an agent of the claimant having direct responsibility with respect to the disputed obligation, knew that the instrument was tendered in full satisfaction of the claim.
Not only did defendants send a check containing the words "JUNE 2006 FINAL PMT." on the memo line, but it also was sent with correspondence indicating defendants' intention to terminate the contract. Upon receiving this check and correspondence, plaintiff's attorney sent a responding correspondence stating:
My client ... received a check of $7364.94, representing a payment for June. The memo on the check also indicated that it was a final payment. As *783 you know, the issue of future payment is in dispute in this matter and therefore, the check is being cashed with the understanding that it is not, in fact, a final payment....
Plaintiff fully understood that the check was tendered for final payment. Not only did plaintiff acknowledge in this correspondence that it was for final payment, she cashed the check knowing that the check was intended to be for final payment. This was proper accord and satisfaction according to MCL 440.3311(4), and the trial court did not err by granting summary disposition on this issue.
Our resolution of the accord and satisfaction issue renders plaintiff's second issue on appeal and defendants' first and second issues on cross-appeal moot.
But defendants also argue on their cross-appeal a third and final issue concerning attorney fees and costs, which is not resolved by resolution of the accord and satisfaction issue. Defendants argue that the trial court erred by denying attorney fees and costs to defendants. Plaintiff responds that this Court lacks jurisdiction to consider this issue because defendants did not claim an appeal from the order denying fees and costs. We agree.
A postjudgment order awarding or denying attorney fees and costs is a "final order" under MCR 7.202(6)(a)(iv) that may be appealed as of right. But it is less than clear whether such an order must be separately appealed, or whether an issue involving the awarding or denying of fees and costs that is covered in a post-judgment order may be raised as part of an appeal, or in this case, cross-appeal, from an actual final judgment itself.
Plaintiff does not refer us to any controlling precedent on this issue, nor were we able to find any. The closest case on point, Costa v. Community Emergency Med. Services, Inc.,[6] is not directly relevant. In Costa, the defendants appealed as of right an order denying their motion for summary disposition based upon governmental immunity. MCR 7.202(6)(a)(v) provides that an order denying summary disposition based upon governmental immunity is a final order and therefore immediately appealable as of right. The plaintiffs filed a cross-appeal, challenging the circuit court's denial of their motion for summary disposition based upon an argument that two of the defendants had failed to file an affidavit of meritorious defense as required by statute. Those defendants argued that this Court lacked jurisdiction to consider the cross-appeal because it went outside the limited scope of the appeal itself. This Court disagreed.
This Court acknowledged that the scope of the appeal as of right under MCR 7.202(6)(a)(v) was limited in that case to issues related to the denial of summary disposition based upon governmental immunity.[7] But, this Court went on to conclude that a cross-appeal is not so limited. Citing MCR 7.207(A)(1), the Costa Court concluded that there is a general right to claim a cross-appeal and that the court rules do not limit the scope of that cross-appeal.[8] Indeed, the Court[9] noted that "MCR 7.207 does not restrict a cross-appellant from challenging whatever legal rulings or other perceived improprieties during the trial court proceedings." The Court went on to note that, even if the initial appeal is abandoned, the cross-appeal continues.
But Costa is hardly controlling on the issue before us. Not only does it deal with a different sub-rule of MCR 7.202(6), it *784 also involved an order (denial of summary disposition) that is inherently interlocutory other than the fact that the court rule defines it as being a final order, while our case involves a postjudgment order. This leads to another difference in that the case at bar involves an order denying fees and costs that had not even been entered in the trial court until after the claims of appeal and cross-appeal were filed in this case. That is, defendants challenge on their cross-appeal an order that did not even exist at the time they filed the cross-appeal. Although the time line in Costa is unclear, presumably the order challenged in the cross-appeal had been entered (or certainly could have been entered) before the appeal and cross-appeal were filed.
The broad language in Costa might support the proposition that a postjudgment order denying fees and costs can be challenged as part of the appeal from the final judgment itself because it is part of "whatever legal rulings or other perceived improprieties occurred during the trial court proceedings."[10] But we conclude that it would be reading Costa and the court rules too broadly to conclude that a claim of cross-appeal invokes this Court's jurisdiction to challenge an order entered in the trial court after the claim of cross-appeal was filed with this Court.
Because we need not decide in this case whether a postjudgment order granting or denying an award of attorney fees and costs that is entered before a claim of cross-appeal is filed in this Court must nevertheless be separately appealed, we decline to do so. Rather, we only hold in this case that a separate appeal from such a postjudgment order must be filed when that order is entered in the trial court after the claim of cross-appeal is filed in this Court.
We recognize that failing to address the merits of this issue does a certain injustice in this case because defendants would very likely prevail on the merits given the mandatory, rather than discretionary, nature of the award of attorney fees and costs under MCL 600.2961(6) and that the trial court most likely erred by denying an award as to the claim raised under that statute. Nonetheless, we believe that we have no choice but to conclude that this Court's jurisdiction has not been properly invoked to allow us to review that order. Defendants had to have filed a claim of appeal from the order denying an award of fees and costs or, having failed to do that in a timely manner, filed an application for leave to appeal that order.
Affirmed. No costs, neither party having prevailed in full.
NOTES
[1]  Roberts v. Mecosta Co. Gen. Hosp., 466 Mich. 57, 62, 642 N.W.2d 663 (2002).
[2]  Maiden v. Rozwood, 461 Mich. 109, 119-120, 597 N.W.2d 817 (1999).
[3]  Id. at 120, 597 N.W.2d 817.
[4]  Id. at 121, 597 N.W.2d 817.
[5]  Hoerstman Gen. Contracting, Inc. v. Hahn, 474 Mich. 66, 75-76, 711 N.W.2d 340 (2006).
[6]  263 Mich.App. 572, 689 N.W.2d 712 (2004).
[7]  Costa, supra at 583, 689 N.W.2d 712.
[8]  Costa, supra at 583-584, 689 N.W.2d 712.
[9]  Id. at 584, 689 N.W.2d 712.
[10]  Costa, supra at 584, 689 N.W.2d 712.

=== CASE 2225438 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:46.899007+00 ===

84 N.Y.2d 989 (1994)
646 N.E.2d 803
622 N.Y.S.2d 501
The People of the State of New York, Respondent,
v.
Bruce Ortlieb, Appellant.
Court of Appeals of the State of New York.
Argued November 29, 1994.
Decided December 22, 1994.
John A. Cirando, Syracuse, Patrick J. Haber and Ivette Iza Zenner for appellant.
James P. O'Rourke, District Attorney of Lewis County, Lowville, for respondent.
Chief Judge KAYE and Judges SIMONS, TITONE, BELLACOSA, SMITH, LEVINE and CIPARICK concur.
MEMORANDUM.
The order of the Appellate Division should be affirmed.
On March 29, 1992, at approximately 7:00 A.M., defendant was arrested in connection with the stabbing death of his former girlfriend. Defendant was advised of his Miranda rights upon arrest and again at the station house. At 9:30, defendant agreed to talk to the officers without an attorney present and, at 12:15 P.M., signed a written statement confessing to the crime. Defendant was arraigned at 1:00 P.M. At the Huntley hearing, one of the interrogating officers testified that the reason defendant was not taken for arraignment at 9:30 *990 was that the police "wanted to talk to him." County Court found that defendant competently and voluntarily waived his Miranda rights and accordingly denied suppression of the statement. Defendant pleaded guilty to second degree murder, and the Appellate Division affirmed.
Defendant contends that he was entitled to suppression on the ground that arraignment was postponed for the sole purpose of depriving him of the right to counsel, a contention not supported by the record. We therefore conclude that there was no "unnecessary delay" (CPL 140.20 [1]), and thus suppression was properly denied (see, People v Wilson, 56 N.Y.2d 692, 694; see also, Preiser, Practice Commentaries, McKinney's Cons Laws of NY, Book 11A, CPL 140.20, at 540).
Order affirmed in a memorandum.

=== CASE 2225440 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:46.926686+00 ===

84 N.Y.2d 985 (1994)
646 N.E.2d 802
622 N.Y.S.2d 500
The People of the State of New York, Respondent,
v.
Donovan Anthony Alvaranga, Appellant.
Court of Appeals of the State of New York.
Argued November 30, 1994.
Decided December 21, 1994.
David Goodman, Public Defender of Dutchess County, Poughkeepsie (David Steinberg of counsel), for appellant.
William V. Grady, District Attorney of Dutchess County, Poughkeepsie (Bridget Rahilly Steller of counsel), for respondent.
Chief Judge KAYE and Judges SIMONS, TITONE, BELLACOSA, SMITH, LEVINE and CIPARICK concur.
*986MEMORANDUM.
The order of the Appellate Division should be affirmed.
Acting on a confirmed tip from a reliable informant that defendant would be going to New York City to buy drugs and returning to Poughkeepsie by train, police investigators entered a train at the Beacon train station when they saw defendant, seated next to an orange bag with the word "Nike" written on it. A police investigator identified himself, and asked the defendant for identification. Defendant identified himself, and then, when asked what was in the bag, disclaimed ownership of the bag. In response to the investigator's question whether defendant would be willing to get off the train with the officers, defendant stood up, picked up the bag, and exited the train with the officers. Once on the platform, defendant continued to deny ownership of the bag. When asked if the investigator could look in the bag, defendant handed it over and said, "Go ahead." Among other things, the officer found a shoe-box-sized gift-wrapped package in the bag, which defendant said he was carrying for someone in New York to someone in Poughkeepsie, and that he did not know the contents of the box. The officer opened the box and found what appeared to be cocaine. Defendant was subsequently convicted on a guilty plea of criminal possession of a controlled substance in the second degree (Penal Law § 220.18).
In view of our limited power to review mixed questions of law and fact (see, People v Karabinas, 63 N.Y.2d 871, 872; People v Harrison, 57 N.Y.2d 470, 477-478), we find no basis for setting aside the suppression court's decision that the evidence seized during the search of defendant's bag was admissible. There is evidence in the record to support that court's undisturbed findings that the police inquiry was supported by an adequate factual predicate, and that defendant was not in custody at the time of the search. Moreover, assuming without deciding that defendant had standing to object to the search of the bag, there is evidence to support the lower court's finding that defendant voluntarily consented to the search. Thus we cannot overturn the hearing court's denial of the motion to suppress.
Order affirmed in a memorandum.

=== CASE 9740934 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:45:18.074721+00 ===

OPINMON
CHEZEM, Judge. Case Summary
Defendant-Appellant, Janet Muche ("Janet"), appeals from her conviction of Neglect of a Dependent, a class D felony. We affirm.
Issues
Janet presents three issues for our review, which we consolidate and restate as follows: Whether there was sufficient evidence to find Muche guilty of Neglect of a Dependent.
Facts and Procedural History
The facts most favorable to the judgment indicate Janet was aware or should have been aware that her husband, Richard Mueche ("Richard"), molested and had sexual intercourse with their 14 year-old daughter, N.M. Richard had been previously convicted of fondling N.M. Moreover, Richard gave a written statement to police that he had sexual relations with his daughter and that he informed Janet of such. Richard continued to have sexual relations with his daughter after Janet was made aware of the situation. Janet gave a signed statement to police in which she stated the following:
Weeks ago, I'm not for sure, my husband and I discussed he and [N.M.] having sex. I remember we talked in little bits and pieces. He probably came out and told me, but I don't remember for sure....
Janet argues that Richard's written statement was improperly admitted into evidence and may not be considered as substantive evidence, that the state failed to prove a corpus delicti sufficient to justify admission of her written statement to police into evidence against her, and that there was not adequate evidence to show her guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
Discussion and Decision
It is not necessary for us to determine whether Richard's written statement was properly admitted into evidence for purposes of use as substantive evidence. Janet argues the statement was improperly admitted for purposes of consideration as substantive evidence. To the contrary, the transcript of Richard's testimony indicates that his prior written statement was admitted solely for the purpose of impeachment when Richard contradicted under oath his prior written statement to the police.
Indiana Code § 84-1-14-15 governs the impeachment of a party's own witness:
The party producing a witness shall not be allowed to impeach his credit by evidence of bad character, unless it was indispensable that the party should produce him, or in case of manifest surprise, then the party shall have this right; but he may, in all cases, contradict him by other evidence, and by showing that he had made statements different from his present testimony.
As a witness for the prosecution, Richard was fully expected to comply with the written statement given by him to the police. When he contradicted his prior statement, the prosecution had no alternative but to impeach Richard with that prior statement. Richard's written statement was not therefore needed to prove the substantive fact that Janet had knowledge because Richard testified under oath to such during his impeachment by the prosecution.
We must next determine whether the state proved a corpus delicti sufficient to justify admission into evidence of Janet's written statement to the police. Each element of the crime need not be proved beyond a reasonable doubt to establish the corpus delicti; independent evidence from which an inference may be drawn that a crime was committed is sufficient. Regan v. State (1992), Ind.App., 590 N.E.2d 640, 644. There *983must be "some evidence of probative value aside from the confession" that tends to prove the commission of the crime. Parker v. State (1949), 228 Ind. 1, 88 N.E.2d 556, 558.
Janet was convicted of Neglect of a Dependent, I.C. § 85-46-1-4(a)(1); "A person having the care of a dependent ... who knowingly or intentionally: (1) places the dependent in a situation that may endanger his life or health ... commits neglect of a dependent, a class D felony." Janet argues first that she did not knowingly or intention, ally place NM. in a situation that would endanger her life or health, that it was Richard who did so. However, a person knowingly commits neglect of a child when she is subjectively aware of a high probability that she placed the child in a dangerous situation. Hill v. State (1989), Ind.App., 535 N.E.2d 153.
This is not a situation where Richard's abuse of N.M. was a startling surprise. Janet gave a written statement to the police that she and Richard had discussed "he and N.M. having sex." Additionally and independent of Janet's and Richard's statements to police, the following facts were available to the court to reach its decision: (1) Janet was aware that Richard had been previously convicted of fondling their daughter; (2) Richard testified at the trial, independent of his written statement, that he discussed his sexual feelings for N.M. with Janet; (8) Janet was aware that the family was no longer involved in professional counseling; (4) the family of four lived in a very small house and thus the proximity of the events to Janet should have placed her on notice of Richard's behavior, and; (5) the record is replete with suggestions that NM. had developed behavioral problems to the point of running away from home.
It is not necessary for the State to have proved Janet's actual knowledge of Richard's abuse of N.M. in order to meet the corpus delicti requirement. - Rather, we may infer from the circumstances Janet's knowledge. Moreover, the nature of the peril to which N.M. had been exposed was such that Janet should have been aware of Richard's conduct. Given these facts alone, Janet had an obligation as N.M.'s parent, to remove N.M. from the situation and to prevent Richard from spending time alone with N.M. Her failure to do so placed N.M. in a situation that would endanger her life or health.
Janet argues that because Richard was her husband and part-custodial parent of N.M., she had ro right to prevent his access to N.M. or to place restrictions upon their relationship. However, Janet was aware that there was a high probability that she placed N.M. in a dangerous situation. The situation in their household would be no different than if Richard were physically beating N.M. Under such circumstance, Janet would have a clear duty to remove N.M. from the situation in order to avoid injury, or at the very least, to report her suspicions to the proper authorities.
In a worse case scenario for Janet, she would have had to defend herself against Richard for refusing to allow him access to N.M. Should her allegations of child molest have been found to be untrue, Richard's access to N.M. would have been restored. The concept that Janet was powerless to prevent Richard's continuing abuse of N.M. would create an absolute defense to this crime in a situation where a child is abused by one parent and the other parent fails to act in prevention of the abuse. Even had the family not been intact and Richard had court-approved visitation with N.M., Janet, as the responsible parent, would have had a duty to report the suspected activity to authorities and to do whatever was in her power to prevent Richard from continuing the abuse. In such a situation, it would certainly be within Janet's power to legally challenge the court-approved visitation. The nature of the acts by Richard could, for example, have been grounds for an emergency injunction against visitation, and even a restraining order keeping him from the child until such facts had been resolved properly and to the satisfaction of proper authorities.
A parent's failure to take appropriate steps to protect his or her child from the abuse of the other parent is tantamount to neglect of that child, not to mention moral complicity with the base crime being perpe*984trated upon the child by the other parent. In a situation where it is the other parent perpetuating the abuse upon the child, the nonabusing parent is under an even greater duty to takes steps necessary to prevent the abuse. First, the parent has a higher probability of knowing about the abuse because she lives with both the victim and the abuser. Second, the relationship of the child-victim to the parent-abuser presents additional problems that do not arise when the abuser is a stranger. Due to the added problems inherent in a parent-child abuse situation, the nonabusing parent, as the only advocate for the child, has a greater responsibility to prevent such abuse when it becomes or should have become evident to that parent.
Finally, we must determine whether there was sufficient evidence to support Janet's conviction. In reviewing a challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence, we will neither reweigh the evidence nor judge the witnesses' credibility. Jones v. State (1992), Ind., 589 N.E.2d 241, 242. Janet argues that she had no power to keep Richard "out." To the contrary, Janet had many alternatives: counseling, separation, divorcee, and/or contacting the proper authorities to name a few. Nonetheless, Richard's culpability stands independent of Janet's. As previously mentioned, Janet had a statutory and parental duty to protect N.M. from the sexual advances of Richard. We will not reweigh the evidence regarding her failure to carry out that duty.
Affirmed.
DARDEN, J., concurring.
RILEY, J., dissenting with opinion.

=== CASE 9740935 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:45:18.078938+00 ===

RILEY, Judge.
I respectfully dissent. Ind.Evidence Rule 80l(d)(1)(A) provides for admissibility, as substantive evidence, of a prior statement that (a) is inconsistent with the declarant's testimony and (b) was given under oath subject to the penalty of perjury at a trial, hearing, or other proceeding, or in a deposition.. - Richard Muehe's "prior statement" was inconsistent with his in-court testimony. However, inconsistency alone is not sufficient to render a prior statement admissible as substantive evidence. Miller, 13 Indiana Evidence § 801.4004 (1994 Supplement). The statement also must have been made under oath "at a trial, hearing, or other proceeding, or in a deposition.1 Evid.R. 801(d)(1)(A).
The prior statement given to the Elkhart Police by Richard Muche was not given under oath or under the penalties of perjury. The statement was given orally by Richard Muche and then was typewritten by the Elk-hart Police Department on a form provided by them. The statement began and ended as follows:
My name is Richard Muche and I am at the Elkhart Police Department talking to Det. Posthuma and Lt. Converse. Det. Posthuma has read me my Civil Rights and I have waived these rights and agreed to make this Statement. I am telling the Detective about what has been going on with my daughter (N.M.) ...
This is a true and correct statement to the best of my knowledge and ability.
This statement was not made under oath nor was it made at a trial, hearing, or other proceeding. It is simply inadmissible hearsay under the rules of evidence and should not have been admitted for any purpose.
Richard Muche at trial testified that he did not tell the defendant that he had sexual relations with N.M.
After the alleged sexual conduct with N.M. was over, totally over, I had told Janet ... I didn't tell her that I had sexual relationship with her [N.M.], I didn't tell her that I had intercourse, I told her something had happened and I didn't want any more of it, I wanted to seek counseling. Ah-seek any way out of the situation out of what was happening because I could see what was coming.
I didn't tell Janet we had intercourse. I told Janet that I had feelings, I told Janet that I was getting tired of alot (sic) of *985things, and a lot of it was the abuse of [N.M.].
Record at 117-121.
Therefore, the only evidence that is left to convict the defendant of "knowingly" placing her child in a situation that endangered her life and health is the defendant's confession. Her "confession" was also typewritten by a person from the Elkhart Police Department on a form provided for that purpose. Detective Westlake was asked if "the wording in the statement (was) Janet's herself?"
The wording in the statement is a mixture of our conversation and then before I typed each sentence a discussion was held between us so I understood what she said, and I told her what I was going to type and then I typed it.
Record 139.
However, before the defendant's confession can be admitted, the state must establish the corpus delicti or the fact that the specific crime charged has actually been committed by someone. Swafford v. State (1981), Ind., 421 N.E.2d 596, 604.
Therefore, because Richard's prior statement is inadmissible and his in court testimony failed to corroborate that defendant "knowingly" neglected N.M., the corpus de-lieti has not been proven and the confession of the defendant should not have been admitted into evidence.
There was insufficient evidence to convict the defendant of knowingly placing her child in a situation that endangered her life and health by failing to take steps to cause her husband to cease having sexual intercourse with NM.
. Modesitt v. State (1991), Ind., 578 N.E.2d 649, 653-654, decided September 26, 1991, in which the Indiana Supreme Court adopted Federal Rule 801(d)(1) for use in Indiana courts.

=== CASE 2225445 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:47.048064+00 ===

646 N.E.2d 972 (1995)
Charles A. TUCKER, Sr., Appellant-Defendant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee-Plaintiff.
No. 70A05-9402-CR-62.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, Fifth District.
February 13, 1995.
*974 Susan K. Carpenter, Public Defender, J. Michael Sauer, Deputy Public Defender, Indianapolis, for appellant.
Pamela Carter, Atty. Gen., Cynthia L. Ploughe, Deputy Atty. Gen., Indianapolis, for appellee.
OPINION
BARTEAU, Judge.
Charles A. Tucker appeals his conviction of home improvement fraud, a Class C felony, raising five issues:
1. Whether spraying for termites is a "home improvement" under the home improvement fraud statute;
2. Whether Tucker caused the victim to enter into a contract;
3. Whether there was evidence of two contracts;
4. Whether there was evidence that both houses owned by the victim were residential property; and
5. Whether Tucker was denied a fair trial by prosecutorial misconduct.
FACTS
Viewed most favorably to the State, the evidence shows that Tucker went to the home of Eva Robinson, an eighty-two-year old woman, and told her that he was there to check for termites. When Robinson told Tucker that a company in Shelbyville always performed that task, Tucker replied, "We bought them out," and Robinson allowed Tucker to inspect for termites. Tucker showed Robinson a piece of wood with a bug crawling on it and told Robinson that her house had termites. Tucker was at Robinson's house for thirty to forty-five minutes and then told Robinson that she owed him $2400. Meanwhile, a visiting friend of Robinson's, Mildred Rogers, noticed another man across the street at a rental house owned by Robinson. The man was carrying what looked like a bug spray tank and seemed to be spraying around the house. It is not clear from the record whether Tucker sprayed Robinson's home or did anything else to exterminate the termites. Robinson gave Tucker a check for $2400 and left the "pay to the order of" line blank for Tucker to fill in. The check was later made out to Angela Beasley. Tucker returned to Robinson's home the next day and told her that she owed him $96 for her rental property across the street. Robinson gave him a check for $96, again with the payable to line left blank. When the check was cashed, it was made out to Angela Beasley in the amount of $9600.
HOME IMPROVEMENT FRAUD
Tucker was charged with home improvement fraud as a class C felony. Pursuant to Ind. Code 35-43-6-12(a)(4), Tucker was charged with entering into a home improvement contract and knowingly using or employing any deception, false pretense, or false promise to cause a consumer to enter into a home improvement contract. The offense was enhanced to a class C felony because Robinson is at least sixty years old and the State alleged that two or more home improvement contracts exceeding an aggregate amount of $1000 had been entered into in furtherance of a common fraudulent scheme, design, or intention. See I.C. XX-XX-X-XX(c)(2).
*975 Indiana Code 35-43-6-4 defines a "home improvement contract" as an oral or written agreement to make a home improvement and for which the contract price exceeds $150. A "home improvement" is defined as: "any alteration, repair, or other modification of residential property." I.C. XX-XX-X-X.
HOME IMPROVEMENT
Tucker argues that there is no evidence of an agreement between Tucker and Robinson to make a "home improvement" because spraying for termites does not constitute an alteration, repair, or other modification of residential property. This presents a question of first impression in Indiana and our research has not uncovered any other state that has addressed the issue whether spraying for termites is an alteration, repair or modification of residential property. Thus, we turn to rules of statutory construction for guidance.
We begin by noting that penal statutes must be construed strictly against the State and may not be enlarged beyond the fair meaning of the language used to include offenses other than those clearly defined. Bond v. State (1987), Ind., 515 N.E.2d 856, 858. At the same time, penal statutes should not be overly narrowed so as to exclude cases they fairly cover. Barger v. State (1992), Ind., 587 N.E.2d 1304, 1306, reh'g denied. "If possible, they should be allowed to perform their intended mission as shown by the existing evils intended to be remedied." Id. (quoting Morris v. State (1949), 227 Ind. 630, 632, 88 N.E.2d 328, 329). On the other hand, penal statutes cannot be construed to include anything beyond their letter, though within their spirit. Gore v. State (1983), Ind. App., 456 N.E.2d 1030, 1033. When the legislature defines a word, this Court is bound by that definition in construing the statute, even though the definition may conflict with the common meaning of the word. Consolidation Coal Co. v. Indiana Dep't of State Revenue (1991), Ind., 583 N.E.2d 1199, 1201; Spaulding v. International Bakers Services (1990), Ind., 550 N.E.2d 307. Where the legislature has not defined a word, we must attribute common and ordinary meaning to the word. Consolidation Coal Co., 583 N.E.2d at 1201. Further, where the statute is clear and unambiguous on its face, we cannot interpret the statute, but must simply give the statute its apparent or obvious meaning. Matter of Grissom (1992), Ind., 587 N.E.2d 114, 116.
Applying these principles, we conclude that the legislature's definition of "home improvement" does include spraying for termites. "Home improvement" is defined as any alteration, repair or other modification of residential property. I.C. XX-XX-X-X. Black's Law Dictionary defines "alteration" as "variation; changing; making different." It defines "repair" as "to mend, remedy, restore, renovate." "Modification" is defined as "a change." The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language defines "alteration" as "1. The act or procedure of altering. 2. The condition resulting from altering; a modification; change." "Repair" is defined as "1. To restore to sound condition after damage or injury; fix." "Modification" is defined as "a small alteration, adjustment, or limitation."
It is clear that these words express the notion of doing something to the property, including remedying a problem. Certainly, spraying for termites will remedy the infestation of termites. Also relevant in determining whether spraying for termites is a home improvement is the evil the legislature was attempting to remedy by enacting the home improvement fraud statute. Barger, 587 N.E.2d at 1306. It is clear from the statute that the legislature's goal was to protect people, and particularly people at least sixty years of age, from being taken advantage of by persons performing or offering to perform work on the home. Certainly, misrepresenting that a home is infested with termites and then offering to spray the house for an exorbitant price is within the scope of the evil sought to be remedied by the home improvement fraud statute.
Therefore, we conclude that spraying for termites is a home improvement under the home improvement fraud statute.
*976 HOME IMPROVEMENT CONTRACT
Tucker next argues that there is no evidence that he caused Robinson to enter into a home improvement contract because Robinson had an existing termite control protection agreement with an extermination company, and Tucker merely misrepresented that he was doing the work pursuant to the existing contract. However, the existing agreement Robinson had with her exterminating company was for yearly termite inspections. There is no evidence that Robinson had an existing contract to actually exterminate termites. The evidence shows that Tucker caused Robinson to enter into a contract with him to actually spray for termites he told her he found in the house. The evidence supports the finding that Tucker caused Robinson to enter into a home improvement fraud contract.
TWO CONTRACTS
Tucker next argues that the evidence does not support his conviction because there is no evidence that Robinson entered into two contracts. Tucker was charged with a Class C felony because the victim was more than sixty years of age and because more than one contract was entered into. See I.C. XX-XX-X-XX(c)(2). Tucker argues that there is only evidence of one contract and that the one contract covered extermination services for both of Robinson's houses. Tucker points to I.C. XX-XX-X-X to support his argument there is only one contract: "Multiple contracts entered into by a home improvement supplier with a consumer are considered a home improvement contract for the purposes of this chapter if the multiple contracts arise from the same transaction." Tucker interprets this statute to mean that as long as the home improvement contracts arise out of the same transaction, there can only be one home improvement contract. We disagree.
The statute defines "home improvement contract" as an agreement to make a home improvement and for which the contract price exceeds $150. The statute does not say that multiple "home improvement contracts" arising out of the same transaction are to be treated as one home improvement contract. The statute says that multiple "contracts" arising from the same transaction are considered a "home improvement contract." In other words, several contracts that standing alone do not constitute a "home improvement contract," perhaps because the contract price is not enough, together may constitute a "home improvement contract" if they all arose from the same transaction. That is not the situation we have here. Here, each contract for Robinson's two houses meet the definition of a "home improvement contract." One contract was for improvements to Robinson's home with a price of $2400. The other contract was for improvements to Robinson's rental house, for which Tucker charged her $9600. See I.C. XX-XX-X-X ("`home improvement contract price' means the amount actually charged for the services"). The evidence supports Tucker's conviction for home improvement fraud as a Class C felony.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY
Tucker next argues that the evidence does not support his conviction because there is no evidence that both contracts covered residential property. Specifically, Tucker argues there is no evidence that Robinson's rental property was residential property. The evidence presented at trial showed that Robinson owned the home she lived in and also owned the house across the street, which she rented. Robinson's friend referred to the house across the street as the "tenant house." While scant, this was sufficient evidence for the jury to infer that the rental house across the street was residential property.
PROSECUTORIAL MISCONDUCT
Tucker next argues that several acts of misconduct by the prosecutor had the cumulative effect of depriving him of due process and a fair trial. Specifically, Tucker points to:
1. The prosecutor's remark during opening argument that Tucker had recently been convicted of child molesting;
2. The prosecutor repeatedly referred to the victim as an "82-year old widow, mother, grandmother, great-grandmother" and *977 the evidence did not support that characterization;
3. On cross-examination of a defense witness, the prosecutor asked, "Do you know what perjury is?" and,
4. One of the State's witnesses referred to Tucker's "mug shot."
Because Tucker's trial counsel did not adequately object to each instance, Tucker also argues that the misconduct cumulatively amounts to fundamental error and also argues that his trial counsel was ineffective for failing to make proper objections. We need not discuss each instance of claimed misconduct because we find that the reference to Tucker's conviction of child molesting and his "mug shot" together prejudiced him and deprived him of a fair trial.
During the prosecutor's opening statement, the following occurred:
[Prosecutor]: Why? Why did this happen? Well, ladies and gentleman, for the truth we have to back up a little bit. You see, on March 11th, 1991, the defendant, Charles Tucker, Sr., was convicted in Shelby Court ...
[Defense Counsel]: Objection, ...
[Prosecutor]: ... of child ...
[Defense Counsel]: ... Your Honor.
[Prosecutor]: ... molestation.
R. 350. After argument, the trial court sustained the objection. Defense counsel did not ask for the comment to be stricken or for the jury to be admonished, and the court did neither.
Later, during the State's direct examination of the investigating police officer, the following occurred:
Q. Did you interview Mildred Rogers?
A. Yes, I did.
Q. And did you show her any photos?
A. Yes. At the time uh, I think when I originally interviewed Eva and Mildred, I just had the one mug shot of Charles Tucker, Sr. I didn't have the photo line-up. And at the time I interviewed both the ladies, both of them said that was definitely the person, but that wasn't an actual photo line-up at the time.
R. 467. Defense counsel did not object to the reference to Tucker's mug shot and did not move to strike or to admonish the jury.
In determining whether trial counsel was ineffective for failing to object or move to strike and to admonish the jury, we must determine (1) whether trial counsel performed deficiently, and (2), whether counsel's deficient performance prejudiced Tucker. Clark v. State (1990), Ind., 561 N.E.2d 759, 762. To prevail on a claim that counsel was ineffective for failing to make a proper objection, it must be shown that a proper objection would have been sustained by the trial court. Id. at 763. Defense counsel's failure to prevent admission of inadmissible, prejudicial evidence demonstrates deficient performance. Messer v. State (1987), Ind. App., 509 N.E.2d 249, 251, trans. denied. Also, failure of defense counsel to object, including having the jury admonished, to prejudicial argument is deficient. Id. at 253.
Here, defense counsel objected to the prosecutor's comment that Tucker had been convicted of child molesting, but did not move to have the comment stricken from the record or to have the jury admonished. The trial court sustained Tucker's objection because the evidence of Tucker's child molesting conviction was irrelevant and prejudicial. See James v. State (1993), Ind., 613 N.E.2d 15, 22 (evidence of defendant's prior criminal history is highly prejudicial and should not be admitted). If counsel had moved to strike and to admonish the jury to disregard the comment, the trial court should have done so.
Additionally, references to police mug shots by the State is improper and in some instances highly prejudicial because of the tendency to cause jurors to suspect that the defendant has a criminal history. Fox v. State (1980), Ind. App., 399 N.E.2d 827, 830. Striking the reference and admonishing the jury is often an adequate cure. Id. Here, defense counsel did not object to the reference to Tucker's mug shot nor did he move to have the comment stricken and the jury admonished. If counsel had done so, the trial court should properly have stricken the comment and admonished the jury.
*978 Tucker has shown that his counsel was deficient with respect to the prosecutor's reference to Tucker's prior conviction and the reference to Tucker's mug shot. He has also shown that he was prejudiced by his counsel's deficiency. The evidence against Tucker was not overwhelming and the identification evidence was especially tenuous. We cannot say that the references to Tucker's criminal history did not impact the jury's decision. Tucker has shown that his counsel was ineffective. He is entitled to a new trial. Because we found the evidence was sufficient to sustain the conviction, double jeopardy principles do not prohibit a new trial.
REVERSED AND REMANDED FOR A NEW TRIAL.
RUCKER, J., concurs in result.
KIRSCH, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9740936 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:45:19.36644+00 ===

VOGEL, P.J.
Debra Cooper appeals from the district court’s ruling on judicial review affirming the workers’ compensation commissioner’s decision. On appeal, Cooper’s employer, Kirkwood Community College, and its insurance carrier, IMP AC, assert the district court did not have subject matter jurisdiction over Cooper’s petition for judicial review and hence the appeal should be dismissed. We find Cooper’s petition for judicial review was not filed according to the requirements of Iowa Code chapter 17A (2005). Therefore, subject matter jurisdiction was lacking. We reverse and remand for order of dismissal by the district court.
I. BACKGROUND FACTS AND PROCEEDINGS.
As the deputy commissioner detailed, Cooper has had a variety of health problems beginning in 1987. In 1992, Cooper began working for Kirkwood Community College (Kirkwood) as a custodian, at which she earned $9.16 per hour. Her job duties required her to dust, empty trash, mop, vacuum, clean blinds, and change light bulbs. Cooper’s last day of work was March 15, 2001.
On March 4, 2003, Cooper filed a petition with the Workers’ Compensation Commissioner alleging she sustained a work-related injury March 18, 2001. On March 18, 2003, Kirkwood filed an answer raising two affirmative defenses — that Cooper’s claims were barred by her failure to comply with Iowa Code section 85.23 (employee must give employer notice of injury within ninety days of occurrence of injury unless employer has actual knowledge of the injury) and Iowa Code section 85.26 (two-year statute of limitations). A hearing was held on February 15, 2005. On March 16, 2005, the deputy eommis-*163sioner filed an arbitration decision, which thoroughly discussed the medical evidence and testimony presented and found that Cooper failed to carry her burden of proof that she sustained an injury to either her knees or right shoulder that arose out of and in the course of her employment. Additionally, no doctor had opined that Cooper’s other health conditions — depression, myofascial pain syndrome, and fibromyal-gia — were caused by or aggravated by Cooper’s work. Therefore, the deputy found it was unnecessary to reach Kirk-wood’s affirmative defenses.
On April 4, 2005, Cooper filed an application for a rehearing. The following day, Kirkwood filed a resistance to Cooper’s application and an application for a rehearing requesting the deputy rule on its affirmative defenses. After granting both parties’ applications for rehearing, the deputy issued a ruling on June 6, 2005. The deputy carefully considered and discussed the parties’ arguments, and ultimately affirmed the decision filed March 16, 2005. On intra-agency appeal on May 16, 2006, the commissioner adopted the deputy’s decision.
On June 5, 2006, Cooper petitioned for judicial review asserting that the agency incorrectly found her injuries were not work related and failed to award her benefits. Kirkwood answered, resisting Cooper’s claims. Both parties briefed their arguments, with Kirkwood reasserting its two affirmative defenses. On November 15, 2006, Cooper filed a motion to dismiss Kirkwood’s affirmative defense arguments. On January 26, 2007, the district court denied Cooper’s motion to dismiss. The district court found that a ruling on Kirk-wood’s affirmative defenses would require certain fact-finding by the agency and remanded the case to the agency for a ruling on Kirkwood’s affirmative defenses.
On remand, the commissioner entered an order stating that the deputy “is delegated authority to take final agency action” and the decision issued by the deputy “will be the final agency decision and will not be subject to intra-agency appeal to the workers’ compensation commissioner.” On August 23, 2007, the deputy entered a remand decision finding that Cooper’s claims were barred by the notice provisions of Iowa Code section 85.23, but were not barred by the two-year period of limitations of Iowa Code section 85.26.
On August 31, 2007, Kirkwood filed an application for rehearing requesting the deputy reconsider its statute of limitations defense. Cooper did not respond to the application, but on September 12, 2007, petitioned for judicial review of the remand decision. On September 14, 2007, the deputy ruled on Kirkwood’s application finding that Cooper’s filing of a petition for judicial review deprived the agency of jurisdiction to rule on Kirkwood’s application for rehearing and therefore, denied Kirk-wood’s application.
On June 5, 2008, the district court issued its ruling. Although Kirkwood had asserted that the district court did not have subject matter jurisdiction because Cooper did not petition for judicial review from a final agency decision, the district court found it did have subject matter jurisdiction to hear Cooper’s petition. Next, the district court found that “the medical records and opinions provided by Dr. Coates, Dr. Bahls, and Dr. Riggins provide substantial evidence” for the agency’s decision that Cooper did not establish she sustained a cumulative injury as a result of her work activities as custodian for Kirkwood on March 18, 2001, and that the agency applied the proper legal standards in reaching this decision. Additionally, the district court affirmed the agency’s decision that Cooper’s claims were barred by her failure *164to comply with section 85.23, but that Cooper’s claims were not barred by the statute of limitations. Cooper appeals.
II. SUBJECT MATTER JURISDICTION.
Kirkwood first argues that because Cooper did not petition for judicial review from a final agency action as required by Iowa Code chapter 17A.19, the district court lacked subject matter jurisdiction over the petition. “A court has inherent power to determine whether it has jurisdiction over the subject matter of the proceedings before it.” Klinge v. Bentien, 725 N.W.2d 13, 15 (Iowa 2006) (citations and internal quotations omitted). We review rulings on subject matter jurisdiction for correction of errors at law. Id.
Subject matter jurisdiction is the power of a court to hear and determine cases of the general class [that] the proceedings in question belong, not merely the particular case then occupying the court’s attention. Subject matter jurisdiction is conferred by constitutional or statutory power. The parties themselves cannot confer subject matter jurisdiction on a court by an act or procedure. Unlike personal jurisdiction, a party cannot waive or vest by consent subject matter jurisdiction.
Id. (internal citations and quotations omitted).
A lack of subject matter jurisdiction can be raised at any stage in the proceedings. Id.; Lloyd v. State, 251 N.W.2d 551, 556 (Iowa 1977). “It is elementary that the court’s first duty is to determine its jurisdiction to entertain and decide a case on its merits.” Lloyd, 251 N.W.2d at 558. Once a court determines that it lacks subject matter jurisdiction over a claim, it has no power to enter a judgment on the merits and must dismiss the action. Id. “If a court enters a judgment without jurisdiction over the subject matter, the judgment is void and subject to collateral attack.” Klinge, 725 N.W.2d at 15.1
The issue in the present case is whether Cooper properly sought judicial review of an agency decision as procedurally required by Iowa Code chapter 17A. The judicial review provisions of chapter 17A are the “exclusive means [that] a person or party who is aggrieved or adversely affected by agency action may seek judicial review of such agency action.” Iowa Code § 17A.19. A party must file a petition for judicial review according to the requirements of section 17A.19 in order for the district court to have jurisdiction to hear *165the petition. See Sharp v. Iowa Dep’t of Job Serv., 492 N.W.2d 668, 669 (Iowa 1992) (“A timely petition for judicial review to the district court is a jurisdictional prerequisite for review of final agency action.”); Ford Motor Co. v. Iowa Dep’t. of Transp. Regulations Bd., 282 N.W.2d 701 (Iowa 1979) (discussing that the procedure prescribed by section 17A.19 must be followed and failure to follow the procedure results in a jurisdictional defect).
A party is only entitled to judicial review when the party “has exhausted all adequate administrative remedies” and “is aggrieved or adversely affected by [a] final agency action.” Iowa Code § 17A.19(1) (emphasis added). Section 17A.19 sets the time requirements for filing a petition for judicial review:
If a party files an application under section 17A.16, subsection 2, for rehearing with the agency, the petition for judicial review must be filed within thirty days after that application has been denied or deemed denied. If a party does not file an application under section 17A.16, subsection 2, for rehearing, the petition must be filed within thirty days after the issuance of the agency’s final decision in that contested case. If an application for rehearing is granted, the petition for review must be filed within thirty days after the issuance of the agency’s final decision on rehearing....
Id. § 17A.19(3).
In the present case, after the district court remanded the case to the agency, the commissioner entered an order delegating authority to the deputy to issue the final agency decision and specified that the deputy’s decision would not be subject to in-tra-agency appeal. See id. § 86.3 (providing the commission may delegate authority to a deputy to issue a final agency decision). Subsequently, the deputy issued a final decision and Kirkwood filed a timely application for rehearing. See id. § 17A.16(2) (providing any party may file an application for rehearing “within twenty days after the date of the issuance of any final decision by the agency in a contested case”). While Kirkwood’s application for rehearing was pending, Cooper filed her petition for judicial review. As a result, the deputy did not rule on the merits of Kirk-wood’s application for rehearing because he concluded the agency was divested of jurisdiction. See McCormick v. N. Star Foods, Inc., 533 N.W.2d 196, 199 (Iowa 1995) (discussing that where claimant filed a motion pursuant to Iowa Rule of Civil Procedure 1.904 and then the employer filed a petition for judicial review prior to the motion being ruled upon, the commissioner did not have jurisdiction to rule on the rule 1.904 motion); see also Wolf v. City of Ely, 493 N.W.2d 846, 848 (Iowa 1992) (discussing that in an original-jurisdiction district court case, a notice of appeal confers jurisdiction on the appellate court and divests the district court of jurisdiction to rule upon pending posttrial motions).
We find that under the present circumstances, Cooper’s petition for judicial review was not filed according to the requirements of section 17A.19 and therefore, the district court did not have subject matter jurisdiction over the petition. First, we find that Cooper did not appeal from a final agency decision as required by section 17A.19. Following a final agency decision, a party may file an application for rehearing pursuant to section 17A.16(2). While the application for rehearing is pending, the final agency decision becomes in effect provisional or conditional until the application is ruled upon. See IBP, Inc. v. Al-Gharib, 604 N.W.2d 621, 628 (Iowa 2000) (stating that in an original-jurisdiction district court case, when a posttrial motion is pending before an appeal is tak*166en, the decision to which the motion is addressed is interlocutory until motion is ruled upon); Wolf, 493 N.W.2d at 848 (stating that when a posttrial motion is “pending prior to the taking of an appeal, the decree to which the motion is addressed becomes in effect interlocutory until the court rules upon the motion”). As a result, there is no final agency decision to seek judicial review of until the application for rehearing is ruled upon or deem denied if not ruled upon within twenty days after its filing. See IBP, Inc., 604 N.W.2d at 628 (stating that if a nonmoving party appeals while a posttrial motion is pending, the appeal is not taken from a final judgment). When an application for rehearing is pending and the nonmoving party petitions for judicial review, the district court is without jurisdiction to hear the appeal and must therefore dismiss the petition for judicial review as not complying with section 17A.19. See id. That is the situation in the present case — Kirkwood’s application for rehearing was pending when Cooper petitioned for judicial review.
In several cases, our supreme court has examined the same issue in the context of an appeal from an original jurisdiction district court case. See e.g., IBP, Inc., 604 N.W.2d at 628; Recker v. Gustafson, 271 N.W.2d 738, 739 (Iowa 1978). If a posttrial motion is pending when an appeal is taken by the nonmoving party, the decision or judgment to which the motion is addressed is an interlocutory decision (until ruled upon by the district court) and the appeal is not from a final judgment. IBP, Inc., 604 N.W.2d at 628. “In this situation, this court is without jurisdiction to hear the case and must therefore dismiss the appeal.” Id. (citing In re Marriage of Graziano, 573 N.W.2d 598, 599 (Iowa 1998)); Recker, 271 N.W.2d at 739. However, the supreme court discussed in IBP, Inc. that the appellate rules have been amended to no longer require dismissal of improvidently filed appeals and to essentially include a savings clause. Currently, the rules of appellate procedure provide for the review of interlocutory orders and if an appeal is improvidently taken from an interlocutory order, it may be treated as an interlocutory appeal. Iowa Rs. App. P. 6.104, 6.108; IBP, Inc., 604 N.W.2d at 628.
Conversely, chapter 17A only allows for judicial review of a final agency action. Chapter 17A does not include a savings clause — there are no exceptions for petitions for judicial review prematurely filed while an application for rehearing is pending. Iowa Code § 17A.19. This chapter is the exclusive means a party may seek judicial review of an agency action. Id. “Judicial review of administrative agency action is a special proceeding [and] is in all respects dependent upon the statutes [that] authorize its pursuit.” Anderson v. W. Hodgeman & Sons, Inc., 524 N.W.2d 418, 420 n. 1 (Iowa 1994). Finally, the Rules of Appellate Procedure do not apply to cure a litigant’s failure to comply with chapter 17A. See Sharp, 492 N.W.2d at 669-70 (discussing that the Iowa Rules of Civil Procedure did not apply to cure a party’s failure to timely appeal an agency action according to chapter 17A); Iowa Pub. Serv. Co. v. Iowa State Commerce Comm’n, 263 N.W.2d 766, 769 (Iowa 1978) (discussing that a district court’s review of an administrative agency may be had only upon compliance with the conditions imposed by chapter 17A and not general rules). Therefore, we find Cooper’s petition for judicial review was not from a final agency action as required by section 17A.19 and the district court did not have jurisdiction to rule on the appeal.
Next, section 17A.19(3) explicitly requires that the agency rule on an application for rehearing prior to a party filing a petition for judicial review. According to *167this section, if the agency files a final decision and neither party applies for rehearing, the parties have thirty days to file a petition for judicial review. However, this thirty-day filing deadline is only applicable where “a party does not file an application [for rehearing].” Iowa Code § 17A.19(3). As discussed above, the “final decision” becomes interlocutory and as a result there is no final decision from which to petition for judicial review. Section 17A.19 provides for a different time-line once a petition for rehearing is filed. It states that a “petition for judicial review must be filed within thirty days after that application has been denied or deemed denied” or if the application is granted, “within thirty days after the issuance of the agency’s final decision on rehearing.” Iowa Code § 17A.19(3) (emphasis added); see Boehme v. Fareway Stores, Inc., 762 N.W.2d 142, 145 (Iowa 2009) (“When the language of a statute is plain and its meaning clear, the rules of statutory construction do not permit us to search for meaning beyond the statute’s express terms.”). We find the statutory language clearly requires a party to wait until the application has been resolved by the agency before filing for judicial review. As a result, Cooper’s petition was not timely as required by section 17A.19 and therefore, the district court did not have jurisdiction over the petition. See Cerro Gordo County Care Facility v. Iowa Dep’t of Job Service., 374 N.W.2d 673 (Iowa 1995) (“[T]he district court did not acquire jurisdiction because the petitioner did not file a timely petition for judicial review.”).
Cooper replies that she should not have to wait until the agency has ruled on Kirk-wood’s application for rehearing before she petitions for judicial review.2 We believe the opposite is true. If a nonmoving party was not required to wait until the agency ruled on the pending application for rehearing, the nonmoving party could thwart a potential adverse ruling by filing a petition for judicial review. Once that party petitions for judicial review, the agency may conclude that it is deprived of jurisdiction to resolve the application for rehearing. See, e.g., McCormick, 533 N.W.2d at 199. Thus, a party seeking to prevent the agency ruling on the application for rehearing could employ a strategy of petitioning for judicial review prior to the agency ruling.
We find that Cooper’s petition for judicial review was not filed according to the requirements of Iowa Code chapter 17A. As a result, the district court lacked sub*168ject matter jurisdiction to consider the petition and we in turn have no jurisdiction to consider the merits of the appeal. Therefore, we reverse and remand for the district court to enter an order of dismissal.
REVERSED AND REMANDED FOR ORDER OF DISMISSAL.
EISENHAUER, J., concurs.
VAITHESWARAN, J., dissents.
. Our supreme court has distinguished between subject matter jurisdiction and authority to hear a particular case. See Klinge, 725 N.W.2d at 16. A court may have subject matter jurisdiction, but lack authority to hear that particular case. Id. The distinction is significant because a lack of subject matter jurisdiction cannot be waived, whereas a lack of authority may be waived. Id. The present case concerns subject matter jurisdiction, and not authority. This is due to the nature of the case before the district court. ''[W]e have distinguished cases involving a district court's appellate jurisdiction [of administrative proceedings] from those invoking its original jurisdiction.” Anderson v. W. Hodgeman & Sons, Inc., 524 N.W.2d 418, 420-21 (Iowa 1994). On a petition for judicial review of an administrative agency decision "the district court does not exercise original jurisdiction vested in it by the constitution. It exercises appellate jurisdiction conferred upon it by statute.” Iowa Pub. Serv. Co. v. Iowa State Commerce Comm'n, 263 N.W.2d 766, 769 (Iowa 1978). “Where a party attempts to invoke the district court's appellate jurisdiction [of administrative proceedings], compliance with statutory conditions is required for the court to acquire jurisdiction.” Anderson, 524 N.W.2d at 420-21. Our supreme court has specifically held that a party's failure to comply with the requirements of section 17A. 19 results in a jurisdictional defect, and is not an issue of authority. See id. at 421 n. 2.
. Cooper cites McCormick v. North Star Foods, Inc., 533 N.W.2d 196, 199 (Iowa 1995) in support of her argument. In McCormick, the commissioner issued a ruling, after which the claimant filed a motion to amend or enlarge pursuant to Iowa Rule of Civil Procedure 1.904(2) requesting the commissioner enlarge certain factual findings to determine the period of the claimant's benefits. While this motion was pending the employer's insurance carrier filed a petition for judicial review. On appeal of the district court’s decision on judicial review, our supreme court examined the case on its merits. It also discussed that once the appeal was filed, the commissioner lost jurisdiction to rule on the motion to amend or enlarge. However, this case involved a motion to enlarge pursuant to Iowa Rule of Civil Procedure 1.904(2), rather than an application for rehearing as provided for by section 17A.16. See Sharp, 492 N.W.2d at 669-70 (discussing that the rules of civil procedure did not apply to cure a party's failure to timely appeal an agency action according to chapter 17A); see also Cerro Gordo County Care Facility, 374 N.W.2d at 673 (holding that where the employer’s application for rehearing was void, and the employer’s petition for judicial review was filed within thirty days of the initial agency decision, the district court acquired jurisdiction to review that agency decision). Most importantly, it does not appear that either party in McCormick raised subject matter jurisdiction as an issue.

=== CASE 9740937 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:45:19.372483+00 ===

VAITHESWARAN, J.,
(dissenting).
I respectfully dissent. The majority concludes that the district court lacked subject matter jurisdiction to consider Cooper’s petition for judicial review, which was filed within thirty days of the agency’s final decision on remand but before the agency ruled on the employer’s petition for rehearing. In concluding that Cooper’s timely-filed petition must be dismissed, the majority relies on the language of section 17A.19(3) and precedent addressing untimely-filed petitions. I would reach a contrary conclusion.
Iowa Code section 17A.19(3) grants parties an extension of time to file a petition for judicial review in the event a petition for rehearing is filed. This provision affords a benefit to both parties. See Fee v. Employment Appeal Bd., 463 N.W.2d 20, 22 (Iowa 1990). Although the provision uses the directory term “must,” I believe that word, when read in context, simply prescribes the outer limits for filing a judicial review petition. A contrary reading could require a party to wait until the fortieth day after the agency’s final decision before filing a petition for judicial review. See Iowa Code § 17A.16(2) (noting petition for rehearing must be filed within twenty days of final agency decision and is deemed denied twenty days after filing). This would eviscerate the prescribed thirty-day filing deadline identified in the same provision. Such a reading would also place the aggrieved party in the untenable position of having to rely on the other party’s proper filing of a rehearing petition to trigger the time for filing its own judicial review petition. If the rehearing petition is later deemed improperly filed, the aggrieved party’s petition for judicial review could be deemed untimely. In this scenario, a judicial review petitioner could be denied access to the court because of a byzantine timeline dictated by the other party. I am not convinced the legislature “intended ... such a trap.” Fee, 463 N.W.2d at 22.
The majority also notes that a party cannot resort to other statutes or rules to extend the time for filing a petition for judicial review. I agree, but Cooper did not attempt to do so. See Sharp v. Iowa Dep’t of Job Serv., 492 N.W.2d 668, 670 (Iowa 1992) (“We hold that Iowa Rule of Civil Procedure 82(d) is inapplicable to expand the district court’s judicial review jurisdiction by permitting an appeal of an Employment Appeal Board decision beyond the time limit specified for that purpose by the legislature.” (emphasis added)). She filed her petition for judicial review within thirty days of the final remand decision. See id. at 669 (“A timely petition for judicial review to the district court is a jurisdictional prerequisite for review of final agency action.” (emphasis added)). That fact, in my view, distinguishes this case from the precedent cited by the majority.
I would conclude that Cooper’s petition for judicial review was timely and satisfied the procedural prerequisites of Iowa Code section 17A.19. Accordingly, I would reach the merits.

=== CASE 9740938 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:45:22.282813+00 ===

OPINION
ROBERTSON, Judge.
The Noblesville Redevelopment Commission appeals the judgment on the pleadings entered in favor of the Noblesville Development Company and the Mercantile Bank of St. Louis (collectively referred to as the NDC unless a distinction is warranted) on count II of the Commission's complaint by which the Commission had sought to foreclose a lien upon real estate owned by the Noblesville Development Company. The NDC had argued, in its motion for judgment on the pleadings, that the guaranty attached to the complaint did not create a lien upon the real estate in which the NDC holds an interest and, without a lien, the Commission was not entitled to a sale of the real estate to satisfy the personal obligation of the guarantors. The trial court agreed and entered a judgment on the pleadings in favor of the NDC.
In its motion to correct error, the Commission conceded, apparently in reference to the complaint, that "there is insufficient language to foreclose a 'Lien,'" but submitted that *367"the incumbrance or covenant created by Section 2.3 of the Guaranty is sufficiently stated and pled to entitle the Plaintiff to proceed to Trial against all Defendants and to introduce ... evidence as to the effect of such covenant or encumbrance." In this appeal, the Commission argues that, whether or not it is labeled as a lien, the guaranty does contain what is in substance a covenant which runs with the land and that the allegations of the complaint permit relief upon this theory. We agree with the Commission that NDC's motion for judgment on the pleadings should not have been granted because, upon the well-pleaded facts, the Commission may be entitled to equitable relief. Accordingly, we reverse.
An Ind.Trial Rule 12(C) motion for judgment on the pleadings properly may be granted where there are no genuine issues of material fact. Gregory and Appel, Inc. v. Duck (1984), Ind.App., 459 N.E.2d 46, 49. A party moving for judgment on the pleadings admits the truth of the factual allegations contained in the non-moving party's pleading for purposes of the motion, and asserts that he is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law. Id.
When presented with a TR. 12(C) motion, we accept as true, for purposes of review, the well-pleaded material facts alleged in the complaint Culver-Union Township Ambulance Service v. Steindler (1994), Ind., 629 N.E.2d 1231, 1235; Gregory and Appel, 459 N.E.2d at 50. Since the trial rules require the pleader to attach to its complaint the written document upon which its action is premised, see T.R. 9.2(A), we may look to both the complaint and the attached contract for purposes of determining the appropriateness of the court's ruling on the motion for judgment on the pleadings. The attachment of the contract does not convert the motion to one for summary judgment. Gregory and Appel, 459 N.E.2d at 51.
As a general rule, the construction or legal effect of a contract is a question of law to be determined by the court. It is not a question of fact. Id.
We have derived these well-pleaded facts from the complaint and attached guaranty agreement. In December, 1989, the Commission, along with the Noblesville Redevelopment Authority (NRA), instituted a project to finance the acquisition and redevelopment of a designated redevelopment area, referred to in the parties' agreement as the allocation area. The project incorporated the construction of an extension of Logan Street through the City of Noblesville, Indiana. The NRA financed the costs of property acquisition and redevelopment in the allocation area by using the proceeds from the sale of bonds and repaid the bonds by using payments from a lease with the Commission. The Commission in turn made its lease payments from taxes on the real property and from the sale or lease of property in the allocation area.
Noblesville Associates Limited Partnership, Noblesville Associates Limited Partnership's general partner, and the individuals Von Blankenbaker and Joe Faulkner agreed to secure the Commission's lease payments in consideration for the NRA's issuance of the bonds, and on December 6, 1989, entered into a written guaranty agreement which was recorded on May 1, 1990. Under the terms of the agreement, the guarantors promised that if the tax increment generated from the described real estate did not equal at least $93,500.00 in 1992, the guarantors would make a supplemental payment to the Commission in the amount of the deficiency.
Attached to the agreement is the legal description of real estate referred to in the guaranty agreement as the Nationwise parcel, a part of which the NRA intended to acquire for roadway purposes. The guaranty agreement contemplates a reduction in payment by the guarantors should they not acquire the remainder of the Nationwise parcel. The relationship of the parties with respect to the parcels identified in the attached Schedule C, the parcels upon which the covenants are to run, is not described in either the complaint or the guaranty agreement.
There was no tax increment in 1992. Therefore, the guarantors owed the Commission a supplemental payment in the amount of $93,500.00. The guarantors made no payment, despite a written demand by the Commission, and stated that they did not have *368the present ability to pay the guaranty payments.
Noblesville Development Company, an Indiana General Partnership, admits that it is the fee simple owner of the real estate described in Schedule C of the guaranty agreement. Mercantile Bank is the first lienholder against the real estate by virtue of a mortgage dated July 9, 1991, as described in rhetorical paragraph 7 of the complaint. According to the complaint, both defendants had actual knowledge of the existence of the guaranty before they acquired their respective interests in the real estate.
"Running" real covenants have the incident of being enforceable in suits at law by or against those who have succeeded to an estate in real property. Under Indiana real property law, the burden of making payment may "run" with the ownership of land. See e.g. Conduitt v. Ross (1885), 102 Ind. 166, 26 N.E. 198; Fair Building Co. v. Wineman Realty Co. (1927), 87 Ind.App. 520, 156 N.E. 433.
Analysis of a real covenant involves two inquiries: (1) is the covenant one which, under any cireumstances, may run with the land; and (2) was it the intention of the parties as expressed in the agreement that it should run. Ross, 102 Ind. at 168, 26 N.E. 198. "A covenant may contain apt words to make it a continuing covenant; yet, if its nature or the subject-matter of it is such that it does not concern some interest or estate in land, either existing or created by it, it cannot run with the land." Id. at 169, 26 N.E. 198. Running covenants are contracts but they are also, or at least operate as, either a conveyance or grant or as a reservation of title. B. Gavit, Covenants Running with the Land, 5 Ind.L.J. 482 (1929-1980). Traditionally, a covenant imposing an affirmative burden is said to run with the land if the cove-nantors intend it to run; the covenant touches and concerns the land; and there is privity of estate. See generally, Moseley v. Bishop (1984), Ind.App., 470 N.E.2d 773, 776.
We agree with the parties that the contract at issue here is not ambiguous on the matter of the parties' intent. The covenanting parties objectively intended the burden to pay the tax increment to be enforceable against remote grantees. A continuing covenant may exist without the words "assigns" or "grantees" but when these or equivalent words are used, they become persuasive of the intent of the parties. Conduitt v. Ross (1885), 102 Ind. 166, 170-1, 26 N.E. 198. Cf Restatement of Property § 531 ert. c (1944) (If promise purports to bind by use of such words as "successors" or "assigns" little question can arise as to the existence of the necessary intention). Section 2.4 of the guaranty agreement provides that the "Guaranty shall be binding upon any successor in interest to the Guarantor particularly in regard to the following described real estate: (See Schedule C)." Section 4.1 reads:
The obligations of the Guarantor under this Guaranty Agreement shall arise abso-Tutely and unconditionally when the Bonds shall have been issued, sold and delivered by the Authority. This Guaranty Agreement shall bind the successors, assigns and legal representatives of the Guarantor.
The express language of the agreement is persuasive of the parties' intent.
Notwithstanding this language, the NDC argues that, because the covenant expressly states that it binds "successor[s] in interest" and neither appellee-defendant precisely meets the legal definition of successor in interest, the parties did not intend to bind NDC, a remote grantee of the original cove-nantor. The terms "successors in interest" and "successors to the estate" appear throughout the cases and treatises which deal with real covenants. This is so because the basis of transfer of a real covenant is succession to a particular estate in land. See e.g. C. Clark, Real Covenants and Other Interests Which "Run With Land" 98, 112 (2d 3d. 1947) (Grantor and grantee are in successive relationship of estate). See also, Restatement of Property § 580 emt. b (word "successors" used broadly to mean all who succeed to the position of a predecessor with respect to the land in question; succession with which promise can "run" limited to a succession in interest).
*369Adult Group Properties, Ltd. v. Imler (1987), Ind.App., 505 N.E.2d 459, 465-6, trans. denied, stands for the proposition that the language of a real covenant must be read in an ordinary or popular sense and not in a legal or technical sense, since the goal of contract interpretation is to effectuate the parties' intent. No particular language is required to demonstrate an intent to run with the land. Thus, the guaranty agreement unambiguously demonstrates an intent to run with the land and, applying the plain and ordinary meaning of the term "successors," binds those persons who ultimately succeed to title or estate.
The NDC also argues that the guaranty agreement does not touch and concern the land, but contains rather a mere personal obligation. Neither Indiana case law nor the secondary authorities which report upon the subject state any absolute test for the requirement that a covenant "touch and concern" the land1 See C. Clark, Real Covenants and Other Interests Which "Run With Land" 96 (2d ed. 1947). The touch and concern requirement is in essence a public policy limitation on the type of obligation that may become a running covenant; if the touch and concern element is found to be lacking, the requirement effectively overrides the parties' intent to create a running covenant. Id.
In our view, the covenant at issue touches and concerns the land because it furthers society's goals of land utilization and free alienability. See Restatement of Property § 537 emt. a (1944). When one examines the transaction of which the guaranty agreement and the covenant at issue are a part, it becomes apparent that the covenanting parties fully contemplated the benefit of obtaining the fullest use of the land to be burdened by the covenant and did not perceive the possible burden of paying the tax increment to be a disincentive. Indeed, by creating an allocation area and structuring the payment of the improvements intended to enhance the burdened property through tax increment financing, a method provided by the legislature for achieving the "maximum opportunity for rehabilitation or redevelopment of the allocation area," see generally I.C. 36-7-14, the covenanting parties enabled the NDC's remote grantor to realize a substantial enhancement in the economic value of its property. Cf. Baldwin v. Moroney (1910), 173 Ind. 574, 579, 91 N.E. 3 (Road or street improved is in a sense an appurtenance of the land which increases its value; whoever holds an interest in the land profits by the appurtenance, and ought, "in justice," be subjected to the lien which secures the assessment). Here, the transaction of which the guaranty and covenant are a part transformed the burdened property from a "blighted area" with an impaired value, in which normal development and occupancy were undesirable or impossible, 1.C. 86-7-1-3, to a revenue-producing shopping center. *370The burden on the property plainly bears a logical or reasonable relationship to the enhancement in value enjoyed by the NDC; the change in physical use of the land came about because the property owner was willing to burden its property.
In Indiana, however, the concepts of touch and concern and privity are not analytically distinct.2 A covenant which may run with the land must have relation to the interest or estate granted, and the act to be done must concern the interest created or conveyed. Indiana Natural Gas & Oil Co. v. Hinton (1902), 159 Ind. 398, 402, 64 N.E. 224; Scott v. Stetler (1891), 128 Ind. 385, 27 N.E. 721; Indianapolis Water Co. v. Nulte (1890), 126 Ind. 373, 377, 26 N.E. 72; Wells v. Benton (1886), 108 Ind. 585, 592, 8 N.E. 444, reh'g denied by 108 Ind. 585, 9 N.E. 601. If no estate is created by the contract, there is none to which a burden can attach. Nulte, 126 Ind. at 377, 26 N.E. 72; Evansville & Southern Indiana Traction Co. v. Evansville Belt Railway Co. (1909), 44 Ind.App. 155, 164-5, 87 N.E. 21. In law, the agreement simply creates a mere personal obligation on the part of the covenantor for breach of which he is personally liable. Nulte, 126 Ind. at 377, 26 N.E. 72.
Historically, if a covenant has been deemed a personal one and held not to run at law, it has been because no estate or interest to which a covenant could attach has been conveyed or transferred. See e.g. Bloch v. Isham (1867), 28 Ind. 37 (No actual conveyance of mutual easements; parties not tenants in common of party wall); The Junction Railroad Co. v. Sayers (1867), 28 Ind 318 (Verbal agreement regarding modification of channel not annexed to an easement); Nulte, (1890), 126 Ind. 373, 26 N.E. 72 (No estate transferred between parties to agreement); Lennerts v. Yohn (1948), 118 Ind.App. 443, 451; 79 N.E.2d 414 (In absence of reservation, condition or restriction in deed or assignment or transfer, agreement personal in character); Evansville & Southern Indiana Traction Co., 44 Ind.App. 155, 87 N.E. 21; Sullivan v. Kohlenberg (1903), 31 Ind.App. 215, 67 N.E. 541 (no privity of estate where agreement to never sell or permit sale of intoxicating liquors not contemporaneous with transfer of interest). For the most part, where privity exists, the covenant has also been held to run and, hence, touch and concern the land. See e.g. Pulos v. James (1973), 261 Ind. 279, 302 N.E.2d 768 (restrictive covenant); Raco Corp. v. Acme-Goodrich, Inc. (1956), 235 Ind. 67, 131 N.E.2d 144; National Manufacturing & Engineering Co. v. Farmers' Trust & Savings Bank (1933), 204 Ind. 535, 185 N.E. 146 (Right of lessor, owner of bunker, to occupy and operate bunker upon failure of lessee, landowner, annexed to estate transferred in lease or to be performed on it); Fair Building Co., 87 Ind.App. 520, 156 N.E. 433 (party wall); Foertsch v. Schaus (1985), Ind.App., 477 N.E.2d 566, trans. denied. (Entirety clause in oil and gas lease which concerned apportionment and payment of rents and royalties covenant running with land); Mosley, 470 N.E.2d at 778 (agreement to maintain drainage tile made in same document and in context of transfer of easement). But cf. Geyer v. Lietzan (1952), 230 Ind. 404, 103 N.E.2d 199 (Right to renew lease personal); Thiebaud v. Union Furniture Co. (1895), 143 Ind. 340, 42 N.E. 741 (Agreement to pay for water pump personal despite fact contained in deed reserving right to water); Wells, 108 *371Ind. 585, 8 N.E. 444 (Agreement to pay judgments, consideration for conveyance, lacking in relation to interest or estate granted, or payment of judgment did not concern the interest created or conveyed); (Graber v. Duncan (1881), 79 Ind. 565 (Agreement to pay taxes on real estate not covenant annexed to or connected with realty in such way as to run with land and be appurtenant to it).
Neither the Commission's complaint nor the attached guaranty indicate that there was any type of conveyance or transfer of interest among the parties to this agreement. The guaranty suggests that a transfer of interest in the Noblesville Associates Limited Partnership's land may have been contemplated as a means of creating the roadway. Nonetheless, the Indiana cases all seem to require that the transfer of interest be contemporaneous. But cf. Restatement of Property $ 584 emt. h (1944) (Interest in land which is part of transaction in which promise respecting use of land made may be created simultaneously or prior to making of promise).
Indiana courts have cireumvented the requirement of privity by enforcing in equity what otherwise might be real covenants as servitudes. Notice of the existence of the servitude substitutes for privity in equity, and binds subsequent purchasers who have acquired the property without the status of a bona fide purchaser for value without notice.
Because equity recognizes that which the law regards as creating no property right nor interest analogous to property but only a mere personal right and obligation, equity supplies the means by which a plaintiff can enforce a defendant's contractual obligation. The remedy of equitable lien operates directly upon the thing with which the covenant deals. See S. Symons, 4 Pomeroy's Equity Jurisprudence § 1234, 695 (5th ed. 1941). In order that a lien may be created by contract, express or implied, it is generally necessary that the language of the contract or the attendant cireumstances clearly indicate an intention of the parties to create a lien upon the specific property. Carmichael v. Arms (1912), 51 Ind.App. 689, 100 N.E. 302, 304. Where the equitable lien depends upon the terms of an executory contract in writing based upon a valuable consideration, the lien may be declared where the intention is clearly indicated to encumber, or appropriate, as security for a debt or other obligation, some particular property therein described. Id. Such a lien may be enforced against the designated property in the hands of the original obligor or his heirs, personal representatives, assigns, or purchasers with notice. Id. Accord Monticello Hydraulic Co. v. Loughry (1880), 72 Ind. 562, 566; Powell v. Totten (1928), 93 Ind.App. 442, 446, 162 N.E. 418; Sawers Grain Co. v. Goodwine (1925), 83 Ind.App. 556, 566, 146 N.E. 837.
Equity also recognizes a lien which is based upon general considerations of justice between the parties to the transaction involved. Bahar v. Tadros (1953), 123 Ind.App. 570, 583, 112 N.E.2d 754. Such a lien may result by implication from a duty resting on the owner of property which is the subject matter of the lien, and the lien is completed by equity in pursuance of the maxim "that is deemed done that ought to be done." Id.
The covenant between the parties to the guaranty agreement lacks the attribute of enforceability against subsequent purchasers only because the covenanting parties failed to follow the formality of exchanging deeds, thereby creating a real property interest to which the covenant could attach. The NDC and its mortgagee had actual notice of the existence of the covenant and the parties' intent to create a binding real covenant before they acquired their legal and equitable interests in the real estate. The guaranty agreement reveals upon its face the parties' intent to encumber the real property de-seribed with legal specificity in schedule C. The defect at law is one for which equity provides a remedy.
The judgment on the pleadings in favor of the NDC is reversed, and the matter may proceed upon the evidence.
Judgment reversed.
BAKER, J., concurs.
NAJAM, J., concurs with separate opinion in which BAKER, J., concurs.
. Indiana case law offers no definition of its own of the touch and concern requirement, while the commentators propose many. It has been said that in order for a covenant to run with the land, its performance or nonperformance must affect the nature, quality or value of the property independent of collateral circumstances, or must affect the mode of enjoyment. 3 H. Tiffany, Real Property § 854 (3d ed. 1939). See eg. Scott v. Stetler (1891), 128 Ind. 385, 27 N.E. 721 (Deed which conveyed mill and all privileges and easements thereto contained implicit covenant that grantors had right to maintain dam and overflow adjacent land at height at time deed made; covenant adds to and is part of the value of property, and is essential part of estate assumed to be conveyed; therefore, covenant necessarily referred to estate itself). Other commentators suggest that the test of whether a covenant touches or concerns the land is whether the legal relationship of the persons as owners of the land is affected by the covenant or whether it relates only to them as persons. See e.g. Thompson on Real Property § 3151, at 73. Professor Bigelow proposes that the courts ascertain the exact effect of the covenant upon the legal relationships of the parties. If the promisor's legal relations in respect to the land in question are lessened-his legal interest as owner rendered less valuable by the promise-the burden of the covenant touches or concerns that land; if the promisee's legal relations in respect to that land are increased-his legal interest as owner rendered more valuable by the promise-the benefit of the covenant touches or concerns that land. Judge Clark has refined the Bigelow test by adding a common sense approach: where the parties, as laypersons and not as lawyers, would naturally regard the covenant as intimately bound up with the land, aiding the promisee as landowner or hampering the promisor in similar capacity, the requirement should be held fulfilled. Clark, Real Covenants 99.
. Conduitt v. Ross, 102 Ind. 166, 26 N.E. 198 describes a running covenant in this way:
When an instrument conveys or grants an interest or right in land, and at the same time contains a covenant in which a right attached to the estate or interest granted is reserved, or when the grantee covenants that he will do some act on the estate, or interest granted, which will be beneficial to the grantor, either as respects his remaining interest in the lands out of which an interest is granted, or lands adjacent thereto, such covenant is one which may become annexed to and run with the land, and bind its owners successively. When such grant is made, and contains a covenant so expressed as to show that it was reasonably the intent that it should be continuing, it will be construed as a covenant running with the land. A covenant which may run with the land must have relation to the interest or estate granted, and the act to be done must concern the interest created or conveyed.... 'When the thing to be done, or omitted to be done, concerns the lands or estate, that is the medium which creates the privity between the plaintiff and defendant.'
102 Ind. at 169, 26 N.E. 198.

=== CASE 9740939 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:45:22.287349+00 ===

*372NAJAM, Judge,
concurring.
I concur but write separately to emphasize the aspect of this case which I believe requires a determination that the guaranty is not a mere personal obligation but a covenant which is ancillary to the transfer of a real property interest and, hence, is annexed to and runs with the land.
As noted by the majority, Section 4.1 provides that the obligations under the guaranty arise when the bonds have been issued, sold and delivered by the Authority. Thus, there is a definite connection between the covenant of the guaranty and the land. The guaranty does not operate independently but only as an integral part of the development plan. The guaranty was issued to further secure payment of the bonds, and the bonds were issued, in part, upon the faith of the guaranty.
In its operation and effect, the economic development mechanism known as tax increment financing (TIF) created the transfer of a real property interest to which the covenant of the guaranty can attach. The interest created is not a traditional common law title or estate conveyed by deed or other instrument from one party to another but an economic property interest, inherent in the statutory scheme, that attached to the allocation area when the real estate was submitted to the TIF regime. As we have noted, under this mechanism, the bond proceeds are invested to enhance the economic value of the allocation area, and the tax increment from real property located within that area is dedicated to repayment of the bonds and related expenses.
NDC contends correctly that for an affirmative covenant to touch and concern the land it must affect the physical use and enjoyment of the land. See Moseley v. Bishop (1984), Ind.App., 470 N.E.2d 773, 777. (for covenant to run with land, grantor's contract must have some logical connection to subsequent purchaser's use and enjoyment of land). However, I cannot agree with NDC's argument that the guaranty here does not meet that requirement. Brief of Appellees at 12. The guaranty affects the physical use and enjoyment of the land because it was, in part, on the faith of the guaranty that the bonds were issued and the infrastructure improvements were made. Those improvements enhanced the economic and asset value of the allocation area, which inured to the benefit of both NDC and Mercantile Bank, its mortgagee. In sum, on these facts, the covenant of the guaranty, as a condition of the TIF development plan, carries with it both benefits and burdens which run with the land.

=== CASE 9740940 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:45:22.563947+00 ===

OPINION OF THE COURT
Levine, J.
On October 17, 1984, respondent Jay Leventhal filed a complaint with the New York City Commission on Human *701Rights alleging that petitioner Louis Harris and Associates, Inc. (Harris) and its personnel director John Holden had discriminated against him on the basis of his blindness in violation of the New York City Human Rights Law (Administrative Code of City of NY § 8-101 et seq.). Leventhal’s complaint arose out of his interview with Harris in August 1984 for a part-time position to conduct public opinion telephone polls during the 1984 presidential race. Although Leventhal had experience in conducting telephone interviews and in writing, coding and editing opinion surveys, and notwithstanding Leventhal’s suggestions at the interview of possible accommodations that Harris could make to enable him to perform the tasks required, approximately four days after the interview Holden informed Leventhal that he could not be offered the position because Harris could not make reasonable accommodations for his disability.
After Harris filed a response to Leventhal’s complaint on or about November 14, 1984, Harris heard nothing from the Commission until February 1988 when it received a letter from the Commission’s Law Enforcement Bureau (Bureau) stating that the investigative stage of the proceeding was substantially complete. In May 1989, Harris was served with a subpoena requesting production of documents and that Holden be produced for questioning. Harris produced the documents and upon informing the Bureau that it no longer employed Holden, the Bureau subpoenaed Holden and ultimately deposed him on February 2,1990.
On September 18, 1990, almost six years after Leventhal’s complaint was initially filed, the Bureau issued a notice of probable cause determination and referred the complaint to the Commission Hearings Division for an evidentiary hearing, which was conducted in March 1991. In a recommended decision and order dated May 23, 1991, the Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) held that Harris had unlawfully discriminated against Leventhal, finding, inter alla, that Harris had failed to meet its burden of showing that it was unable to reasonably accommodate Leventhal or that Leventhal’s proposals for accommodation would impose an undue hardship. The ALJ, however, dismissed the complaint as against Holden on the ground that the record demonstrated that he personally had made a reasonable and good-faith effort to accommodate Leventhal. By decision and order dated December 10, 1991 — a full seven years after the filing of the complaint — the *702Commission adopted the ALJ’s recommended decision and order in all but de minimis part.
Harris commenced this special proceeding pursuant to section 8-123 of the Administrative Code seeking to annul the Commission’s determination arguing, inter alla, that the Commission’s excessive delay in investigating the complaint prejudiced it as a matter of law and fact, and that the ALJ erred in placing the burden on Harris to prove that it was unable to reasonably accommodate Leventhal. Supreme Court dismissed the petition. The Appellate Division affirmed (199 AD2d 78), holding that Harris had failed to establish substantial prejudice due to the delay, and that the burden of proof regarding reasonable accommodation was properly placed on the employer. This Court granted Harris leave to appeal, and we now affirm.
Harris initially argues on this appeal that the Commission’s excessive delay in processing Leventhal’s complaint— almost six years before a probable cause determination was made and over seven years before a final determination was rendered — should be held to have prejudiced it as a matter of law, mandating dismissal of the complaint without any inquiry into actual prejudice resulting therefrom. We, however, have previously rejected the claim that lapse of time in rendering an administrative determination can, standing alone, constitute prejudice as a matter of law (see, Matter of Cortlandt Nursing Home v Axelrod, 66 NY2d 169, 177-178, cert denied 476 US 1115). We have reaffirmed that proposition in our decision today in Matter of Corning Glass Works v Ovsanik (84 NY2d 619 [decided today]; see also, Matter of Sarkisian Bros. v State Div. of Human Rights, 48 NY2d 816, 818 ["While the length of the delay in processing a complaint is certainly relevant to the determination whether a particular respondent has suffered substantial prejudice from that delay, the mere passage of time normally will not constitute substantial prejudice in the absence of some showing of actual injury to the respondent”]).
Harris directs the Court’s attention to Administrative Code former § Bl-8.0 (2), applicable at the time of the filing of the instant complaint, which provided that "[a]fter the filing of any complaint, the commission shall make prompt investigation in connection therewith”,1 and argues that the Commis*703sian’s lack of compliance with this statutory directive is sufficient to justify judicial vacatur of the administrative determination. Its reliance on this provision is unavailing, however. This Court has previously construed identical language pertaining to discrimination complaints under the State Human Rights Law (see, Executive Law §297 [2] [a] ["After the filing of any complaint, the division shall * * * make prompt investigation in connection therewith”]) as being directory only, noncompliance with which being insufficient to terminate the agency’s jurisdiction absent a showing of substantial prejudice (Matter of Sarkisian Bros. v State Div. of Human Rights, supra, at 817-818; Union Free School Dist. No. 6 v New York State Human Rights Appeal Bd., 35 NY2d 371, 380-381; see also, Matter of Cortlandt Nursing Home v Axelrod, supra, at 177 [rejecting similar claim premised upon State Administrative Procedure Act § 301 (1) directing that parties in adjudicatory proceedings be afforded a hearing "within reasonable time”]).
We find nothing in the statutory language of Administrative Code former § Bl-8.0 (2), and petitioner has pointed to no legislative history, which would indicate that the directive was intended to be anything other than "for the benefit of complainants and others benefited and [thus] cannot be held to shelter those charged with violation of the statute” without a showing of substantial prejudice (Union Free School Dist. No. 6 v New York State Human Rights Appeal Bd., supra, at 380-381; see, Matter of Syquia v Board of Educ., 80 NY2d 531, 535-536; see also, McKinney’s Cons Laws of NY, Book 1, Statutes § 172).
In Matter of Cortlandt Nursing Home v Axelrod (supra), we delineated the factors, pertinent here, to be weighed in assessing the reasonableness of administrative delay:
"(1) the nature of the private interest allegedly compromised by the delay; (2) the actual prejudice to the private party; (3) the causal connection between the conduct of the parties and the delay; *704and (4) the underlying public policy advanced by governmental regulation” (id., at 178).
The Cortlandt factors do not weigh in Harris’ favor. The statutorily defined public policy advanced by New York City’s antidiscrimination laws is one of utmost importance, not only to the affected parties but also to all persons and institutions, and the public interest in redressing discriminatory acts is one of great significance (see, Administrative Code § 8-101 ["there is no greater danger to the health, morals, safety and welfare of the city and its inhabitants”]). While the Commission acknowledges that Harris was not responsible in any manner for the administrative delay (see, Matter of Cortlandt Nursing Home v Axelrod, supra, at 182), there is also no evidence here of "repetitive, purposeless and oppressive” action against Harris on the part of the Commission (id., at 181), and "[a] court should be extremely reluctant to hold agency inaction unreasonable where the delay is attributable to a lack of resources” (id., at 181). The only private interest identified by Harris as having been impacted by the delay here is its ability to mount an adequate defense to the discrimination charges. That interest has only been compromised, however, to the extent that Harris has suffered substantial, actual prejudice generated by the protracted delay, the remaining, "critical” (id., at 180) Cortlandt factor to be considered.
We conclude that substantial prejudice to Harris has not been established on this record. Harris’ claim of actual prejudice focuses on its witness Holden’s inability at the hearing to recall certain details of his efforts to investigate means of accommodating Leventhal, including the names of experts with whom he had consulted, as well as the substance of those conversations and others which transpired with Harris personnel. Significantly, though, the Commission’s ultimate finding of discrimination on the part of Harris was not based at all on the inadequacy of Holden’s efforts at pursuing means of accommodation. Rather, it was premised on the conduct of Harris’ former vice-president for operations Stacpole, Harris’ employee with the authority to order that accommodations be made for Leventhal, whom the Commission found made a hasty and unsubstantiated decision not to hire Leventhal without considering or pursuing any accommodation options. The record reflects that Holden, after his consultations, met with Stacpole and outlined and recommended one or more of the options for accommodation which Leventhal had suggested in his interview. Thus, it is entirely speculative for Harris to *705suggest that the experts with whom Holden consulted before recommending such accommodation would have supported Harris’ refusal to make any accommodations for Leventhal. Further, Stacpole was not called as a witness by Harris and there was no showing of her unavailability to testify at the hearing. Thus, similarly, there is no support in the record for Harris to claim that she relied on the same experts in refusing to make any accommodations for Leventhal’s disability.
Moreover, Harris’ claim of prejudice due to Holden’s lack of memory is undermined by the fact that it was put on notice of the substance of Leventhal’s allegations when it received the complaint from the Commission shortly after its decision not to hire Leventhal, and could have taken diligent steps to preserve evidence and testimony (see, Occidental Life Ins. Co. v Equal Empl. Opportunity Commn., 432 US 355, 372; Matter of Elmira Bus. Inst. v New York State Dept. of Educ., 116 AD2d 133,137, affd for reasons stated below 70 NY2d 758). We thus conclude that insufficient proof of substantial prejudice due to the delay exists on this record to justify vacatur of the administrative determination.
In so holding, we must express our serious concern over the inordinate delay which transpired in the administrative process in this matter. Whether caused by inadequate resources or otherwise, the lack of repose in human affairs and disputes affecting the public interest as in this case occasioned by such lengthy delays in the administrative process is disquieting, and should be a matter of grave concern to all branches of government as it may well have become a common phenomenon. Justice long delayed cannot only impair the actual fairness, but also the public perception of the evenhandedness of administrative adjudications. When faced with such excessive delays in the administrative process as occurred in this case, courts should closely scrutinize the record for substantial prejudice to a party due to the delay. Having found no such prejudice here, however, we must decline to invalidate the agency’s determination.
Harris’ final contention on this appeal is that the Commission erred when it placed the burden on Harris to show that it was unable to reasonably accommodate Leventhal or that Leventhal’s proposals for accommodation would impose an undue hardship. At the time pertinent to this complaint, the Administrative Code provided that it was unlawful to refuse to hire an "otherwise qualified person” because of the person’s *706disability (Administrative Code former §§ Bl-7.1, Bl-7.0 [1] [a]), an "otherwise qualified person” being defined as "a handicapped person, who, with reasonable accommodation can satisfy the essential requisites of the job or benefit in question” (Administrative Code former § Bl-2.0 [16] [e]). The statute was silent as to the placement of the burden on the issue of reasonable accommodation.2
Under such circumstances, the practical construction of the statute by the agency charged with implementing it, if not unreasonable, is entitled to deference by the courts (see, Matter of Lezette v Board of Educ., 35 NY2d 272, 281). The reasonableness of the Commission’s interpretation here in allocating the burden to the employer to prove undue hardship is supported by its accord with the prevailing allocation of the ultimate burden on this issue under analogous Federal antidiscrimination laws (see, e.g., Wood v Omaha School Dist., 985 F2d 437, 439 [8th Cir]; Gilbert v Frank, 949 F2d 637, 642 [2d Cir]; Prewitt v United States Postal Serv., 662 F2d 292, 310 [5th Cir]). Moreover, it is clearly rational to place the ultimate burden of proving undue hardship on the employer who is in the better position to assess the feasibility of possible accommodations and to know how they will impact its business operations (see, Gilbert v Frank, 949 F2d, at 642, supra).
Accordingly, the order of the Appellate Division should be affirmed, with costs.
. Administrative Code § 8-109 (g), applicable to complaints filed on or *703after September 1, 1991, now provides: "[T]he commission shall commence proceedings with respect to the complaint, complete the investigation of the allegations of the complaint and make a final disposition of the complaint promptly and within the time periods to be prescribed by rule of the commission. If the commission is unable to comply with the time periods specified for completing its investigation and for final disposition of the complaint, it shall notify the complainant, respondent, and any necessary party in writing of the reasons for not doing so.”
. In 1991 the Administrative Code was amended to explicitly place the burden of proving inability to make reasonable accommodation on the employer, providing: "The term 'reasonable accommodation’ means such accommodation that can be made that shall not cause undue hardship in the conduct of the covered entity’s business. The covered entity shall have the burden of proving undue hardship” (Administrative Code § 8-102 [18]).

=== CASE 2225494 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:48.630113+00 ===

782 N.W.2d 345 (2010)
2010 ND 1
In the Matter of the JUDICIAL VACANCY IN DISTRICT JUDGESHIP NO. 1, with Chambers in Williston, North Dakota, Northwest Judicial District.
No. 20090366.
Supreme Court of North Dakota.
January 6, 2010.
PER CURIAM.
[¶ 1] On December 3, 2009, the Honorable Gerald H. Rustad, Judge of the District Court, with chambers in Williston, Northwest Judicial District, notified this Court of his intention not to seek reelection when his current term expires December 31, 2010. Under Section 27-05-02.1(2), N.D.C.C., Judge Rustad's declaration of his intention not to seek reelection will create a vacancy in District Judgeship No. 1 in the Northwest Judicial District.
[¶ 2] Under Section 27-05-02.1, N.D.C.C., this Court is required to review vacancies that occur and determine, within 90 days of receiving notice of a vacancy, whether the office is necessary for effective judicial administration. This Court may, consistent with that determination, order the vacancy filled or order the vacant office transferred to a judicial district in which an additional judge is necessary, to be filled in that district.
[¶ 3] Under N.D. Sup. Ct. Admin. R. 7.2, notice of a written consultation with the attorneys and judges of the Northwest Judicial District was posted December 3, 2009, on the website of the Supreme Court. Notice was also electronically provided to all presiding judges of the state. Written comments on the vacancy were permitted through January 4, 2010. For purposes of the consultation provided for under Section 27-05-02.1, N.D.C.C., this procedure is sufficient for determining the disposition of this vacancy.
[¶ 4] A Report containing population and caseload trends, and other criteria identified in N.D. Sup. Ct. Admin. R. 7.2, Section 4, was filed December 24, 2009, by the Northwest Judicial District.
[¶ 5] Under the criteria of Section 4 of N.D. Sup. Ct. Admin. R. 7.2, the Court has considered all submissions received by the Court and its own administrative records on state-wide weighted caseload data. It is also noted that an additional judgeship was created in the Northwest Judicial District by the 61st Legislative Assembly and has been filled in Minot. See Matter of Chambering of New Judgeship, 2009 ND 133, 770 N.W.2d 221.
[¶ 6] Based on the record before us, this Court determines this office is necessary for effective judicial administration in its present location.
[¶ 7] IT IS HEREBY ORDERED, that Judgeship No. 1 at Williston in the Northwest Judicial District be filled, that an election for this office be held, and that this office appear on the 2010 primary and general election ballots in North Dakota.
[¶ 8] GERALD W. VANDE WALLE, C.J., DALE V. SANDSTROM, DANIEL J. CROTHERS, MARY MUEHLEN MARING and CAROL RONNING KAPSNER, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2225498 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:48.718284+00 ===

240 Ind. 461 (1960)
165 N.E.2d 606
FAIR SHARE ORGANIZATION ET AL.
v.
THE KROGER COMPANY ET AL.
No. 29,792.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
Filed March 23, 1960.
Rehearing denied April 27, 1960.
*462 F.L. Anderson, Jr., Anderson, Hicks & Anderson, and Hiebert L. Bradley, all of Gary, for appellants.
Barrett, Barrett & McNagny and J.A. Bruggeman, both of Fort Wayne, for appellee.
Robert Karmel, of Chicago, Illinois, and George Sammons, Sr., of Kentland, for Intervenors.
John Preston Ward, of Indianapolis, and Max Cohen, of Gary, Amicus Curiae.
PER CURIAM.
This appeal from the granting of a temporary injunction by the court below was taken by appellant to the Appellate Court pursuant to Burns' § 40-510 (1952 Replacement).[1] The Appellate Court, upon appellee's motion, transferred the cause to this court on the theory that the case did not involve or grow out of a labor dispute and that an appeal from the granting of a temporary injunction under Burns' § 4-214 (1946 Replacement)[2] should be taken from the trial court to the Supreme Court.
We believe the finding of facts entered by the trial court shows that this cause involved or grew out of a labor dispute as defined in Burns' § 40-513 (1952 Replacement).[3] The finding was in part as follows:
"On and after September 19, 1958, the defendants picketed and caused to be picketed one or more of said three stores for purpose of forcing plaintiff to change its employment practices; and for the purpose of forcing plaintiff to engage in selective hiring of Negro employees based on the proportion of Negro customers who patronize its stores, which *463 would result in requiring the plaintiff to discharge or transfer competent white employees and replace them with Negroes; ..."
We believe the lower court's further statement that:
"There is no labor dispute existing between the plaintiff and its employees or the unions which lawfully, properly and exclusively represent them in collective bargaining."
is ambiguous but that under the facts found by the court heretofore set out, it could only be concluded that the case involved or grew out of a labor dispute as defined in the Indiana Statutes. See: New Negro Alliance v. Grocery Co. (1938), 303 U.S. 552, 58 S. Ct. 703, 82 L. Ed. 1012, involving a similar statute.
This cause is now ordered transferred back to the Appellate Court.
NOTE.  Reported in 165 N.E.2d 606.
NOTES
[1]  Acts 1933, ch. 12, § 10, p. 28.
[2]  Acts 1901, ch. 247, § 9, p. 565; 1907, ch. 148, § 1, p. 237; 1915, ch. 76, § 1, p. 149; 1925, ch. 201, § 1, p. 487.
[3]  Acts 1933, ch. 12, § 13, p. 28.

=== CASE 3784461 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:11.040336+00 ===

This cause came on to be heard upon the petition, supplemental petition, response, reply and the evidence, and was argued by counsel for the petitioners, the respondent not appearing in person or by counsel. On consideration whereof the court finds upon the issues joined in favor of the petitioners and it is therefore ordered and adjudged by the court that the certificate of admission to the bar of Ohio, heretofore issued by this court to said Charles W.G. Hannah, be, and the same hereby is, revoked and cancelled, his *Page 591
name be stricken from the roll of attorneys, the record of his admission be expunged and respondent be barred from admission to the bar of Ohio; it is further ordered that said Charles W.G. Hannah forthwith return to this court his certificate of admission to practice law in the state of Ohio, and that upon failure to return said certificate the said Charles W.G. Hannah stand committed in contempt therefor.
Judgment for petitioners.
WEYGANDT, C.J., ALLEN, STEPHENSON, JONES, MATTHIAS, BEVIS and ZIMMERMAN, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 3784462 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:11.071079+00 ===

The constitutionality of Section 10510-10, General Code, is challenged on the grounds that it is retroactive and in violation of Article II, Section 28 of the Constitution of Ohio, that it deprives defendants of their property without due process of law, in violation of Article XIV, Amendments of the Constitution of the United States, and that it violates ArticleI, Section 19, of the Constitution of Ohio, which provides that "Private property shall ever be held inviolate * * *."
Section 10510-10, General Code, provides: "When the interest of the decedent or ward in the real estate is fractional and undivided, the action shall include only such undivided fractional interest, except that (a) the executor, administrator or guardian, or (b) the owner or owners of any other fractional interest, or (c) any lien holder, may, by pleading duly filed in the cause, setting forth all interests in the property and liens thereon, require that the action include the entire interest in the property, and the owner or owners of said interests and liens shall receive their respective share or shares of the proceeds of sale after payment has been made of the costs and expenses of sale. The fees of the executor, administrator or guardian and of his attorney shall be a charge, as provided by law, only against such portion of the proceeds of sale as represents the interest of the decedent or ward."
It is essential first to ascertain whether the right of which defendants claim to be divested is remedial or vested. If remedial, the fact that the enactment may be retroactive is immaterial. If vested and the legislation is retroactive, then we must determine whether defendants are deprived thereof without due process of law, as the constitutional inhibition against retroactive legislation is aimed to protect vested property rights.
The right of which defendants claim to be deprived *Page 367
is to partition real estate owned by them in common with the deceased co-owner, in which real estate each co-owner holds an undivided interest as distinguished from a fractional interest.
The right to partition is remedial (Black v. SylvaniaProducing Co., 105 Ohio St. 346, 137 N.E. 904) rather than vested.
Remedial rights may be modified, altered or entirely extinguished by legislative enactment even though they be retroactive in character and operation.
Defendants' contentions are based on the assumption that their right to statutory partition is a basic and vested property right. However, there is no property in remedial rights. The contention being based upon a false premise, the reasoning is necessarily fallacious and the conclusion erroneous.
In the enactment of the statute in question the General Assembly did not exceed its constitutional power, nor does the statute destroy vested rights. It merely gives the successor in title of a deceased co-owner a remedy which he did not have before, and thereby places him on a basis of equality with the surviving co-owners.
Prior to the enactment of this statute any living co-owner had the right to partition, while the successor in interest of a deceased owner did not have such right. The right to partition which a surviving co-owner had was not however absolute but could be prevented by the contingency of the real estate sought to be partitioned being physically incapable of being aparted without prejudicially affecting the whole of the estate. Partition could also be prevented where any one of the other surviving co-owners elected to purchase the entire estate at the appraised value; and if more than one co-owner elected to purchase at the appraised value, then the entire estate would be offered for sale at public auction and the proceeds divided among the co-owners in accordance with their respective *Page 368
interests in the property. Therefore, the right of a co-owner to partition was not absolute but could be defeated by any one of the contingencies above mentioned.
A right which is not absolute but is dependent for its existence upon the action or inaction of another is not basic or vested, and deprivation thereof does not constitute a deprivation of property. A legislative enactment which interferes with or modifies the right to partition does not invade property rights and is not in derogation of the constitutional provision against deprivation of property without due process of law.
The statute, not being destructive of vested property rights but merely modifying remedial rights, is constitutional. The loss which defendants claim to have sustained may be characterized as a loss of an undue advantage which they had over the successor in interest of a deceased co-owner. However, undue advantage can never ripen into a vested right, deprivation of which is constitutionally repugnant. Were the right to partition a vested one, it would accrue not alone to each living co-owner but likewise to the successor in title of a deceased co-owner; for vested rights are not defeated by death.
There being no deprivation of a vested property right, it becomes unnecessary to discuss the question of "due process." Suffice it to say, however, that the land sale proceedings giving the defendants their day in a court of record, the Probate Court having been made such by Article IV, Section 8, of the Constitution, and adequate provision having been made for the service of process, the filing of pleadings, the introduction of evidence, and the right of appeal, a procedure followed in all civil actions, constitute "due process" guaranteed by the Constitution of the United States. Notice and opportunity to be heard are essential elements of due process of law. 8 Ohio Jurisprudence, 707, Section 591. When these two are afforded to a *Page 369
party he is afforded "a day in court." These being given in land sale proceedings conducted by Probate Court pursuant to the statute under consideration, defendants are given their day in court in accordance with the requirements of "due process" of law.
At the time the land sale proceedings were commenced there was pending in the Court of Common Pleas of Franklin county an action in partition instituted by one of the co-owners preceding the death of plaintiff's decedent. Subsequent thereto, plaintiff instituted land sale proceedings under Section 10510-10, General Code. The latter action prevails and the former is thereby rendered nugatory. Where an action in partition has been instituted following the death of a co-owner, and subsequent thereto the executor or administrator of such deceased co-owner institutes land sale proceedings under Section 10510-10, General Code, the latter supersedes and prevails over the former.
Judgment of the Court of Appeals will be reversed and the judgment of the Probate Court will be affirmed.
Judgment reversed.
WEYGANDT, C.J., STEPHENSON and ZIMMERMAN, JJ., concur. *Page 370

=== CASE 3784464 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:11.210779+00 ===

The appellant claims that it is a manufacturer with reference to the iron ore involved in this controversy, within the meaning of Section 5385, General Code, and that such ore constitutes "manufactured articles" within the meaning of Section 5388 (2), General Code.
The facts essential to a consideration of the questions presented may be summarized as follows:
The appellant, The Cleveland-Cliffs Iron Company, is an Ohio corporation with its principal office located in Cleveland, Ohio. For many years it has been engaged in the business of producing and selling iron ore to manufacturers of iron and steel. It operates both open pit and underground mines in the states of Michigan and Minnesota, and the ore produced from these mines is shipped by vessel to lower lake ports. Since the shipping season on the Great Lakes is limited by weather to a period from May to October, inclusive, sufficient ore is transported during that period to supply the steel mills throughout the whole year, which requires storage of ore in stock piles at these lake ports from which deliveries are made as purchased by the steel manufacturing companies.
With rare exception no iron ore is suitable for blast furnace use as mined, since ores vary as to their mineral content. The requirement of the mills for a standard analysis of the ores furnished necessitates the grading of such ores. The most common method of obtaining the desired uniformity of analysis is that of mixing several ores of varying mineral content and chemical analysis to produce a grade of ore containing *Page 426
uniform percentages of iron, silica, phosphorus, sulphur and other ingredients.
After mining operations have begun, extensive sampling of ore is necessary for the purpose of making estimates of available ore and to assist in its preliminary grading. Additional samples are taken from time to time after mining and, since these ores vary in mineral content, it is necessary before shipping to mix them. This mixing is done in several ways. Where ore has been stored in stock piles before loading on the cars, it is mixed by combing the pile with a power shovel. The ores are loaded into cars and thence into vessels. Mixing is accomplished by loading a vessel with different ores from the cars in such amounts that the resulting mixture will attain a predetermined chemical analysis.
During these operations foreign material, lean ore and rock are sorted out, some ore is crushed and screened by machinery, and by a washing process some free silica is removed.
All of the processing of the ores involved in these proceedings was performed by appellant either in Michigan or Minnesota, where the ore was produced.
During the years involved in these appeals, the appellant maintained stock piles of this standardized ore in Cuyahoga, Ashtabula and Lucas counties, Ohio, and these are the subject of the assessments involved herein.
The single question presented in this case is whether these inventories of iron ore should be assessed at 50% of the average monthly inventory value, or at 70% of such value. The determination of that question involves the construction of Sections 5385 and 5388, General Code.
Section 5385, General Code, provides in part as follows:
"A person who purchases, receives or holds personal property, of any description, for the purpose of *Page 427
adding to the value thereof by manufacturing, refining, rectifying, or by the combination of different materials with a view of making a gain or profit by so doing, is a manufacturer, and, when he is required to return a statement of the amount of his personal property used in business, he shall include therein the average value estimated, as hereinafter provided, of all articles purchased, received or otherwise held for the purpose of being used, in whole or in part, in manufacturing, combining, rectifying or refining, and of all articles which were at any time by him manufactured or changed in any way, either by combination or rectifying, or refining or adding thereto (separately listing finished products not kept or stored at the place of manufacture or at a warehouse in the same county therewith), which, from time to time, he has had on hand during the year next previous to listing day annually, if he has been engaged in such manufacturing business so long, and if not, then during the time he has been so engaged."
Section 5388, General Code, provides in part as follows:
"Excepting as herein otherwise provided, personal property shall be listed and assessed at seventy per centum of the true value thereof, in money, on the day as of which it is required to be listed, or on the days or at the times as of which it is required to be estimated on the average basis, as the case may be. * * *
"Personal property of the following kinds, used in business, shall be listed and assessed at fifty per centum of the true value thereof, in money, on the day as of which it is required to be listed, or on the days or at the times as of which it is required to be estimated on the average basis, as the case may be: * * *
"(2) The average value of all articles purchased, received or otherwise held by a manufacturer for the purpose of being used, in whole or in part, in manufacturing, *Page 428
combining, rectifying or refining; the average value of all articles which were at any time by him manufactured or changed in any way, either by combining or rectifying, or refining or adding thereto, but not including finished products unless kept or stored at the place of manufacture or at a warehouse in the same county therewith; and agricultural products on farms.* * *"
Under Section 5388, General Code, to authorize the listing and assessing of the property of the appellant at 50% of the value thereof, it is essential that appellant be a manufacturer, since this section is applicable only to "articles purchased, received or otherwise held by a manufacturer for the purpose of being used, in whole or in part, in manufacturing, combining, rectifying or refining," and "articles which were at any time by him manufactured or changed in any way, either by combining or rectifying, or refining or adding thereto."
Section. 5385, General Code, defines a manufacturer as a "person who purchases, receives or holds personal property, of any description, for the purpose of adding to the value thereof by manufacturing, refining, rectifying, or by the combination of different materials with a view of making a gain or profit by so doing."
Under the facts presented by the record in this case, is the appellant a manufacturer within the purview of these statutory provisions?
This court has heretofore considered a similar question in the case of Schumacher Stone Co. v. Tax Commission, 134 Ohio St. 529,  18 N.E.2d 405, 120 A. L. R., 1199. The Schumacher Stone Company was engaged in quarrying stone and preparing the stone for sale by successive processes of crushing and screening. Purchasers from the stone company required different sizes of stones and this process prepared the stone to meet the various specifications. This court *Page 429
there held that the "Machinery, used in crushing and screening limestone into various merchantable sizes without the application of any art or process to change the form or appearance of the broken pieces of stone, each grade being designated according to size and use, mostly for road construction but also for other minor purposes, is not, and should not be assessed as, personal property used in manufacturing, within Sections 5385, 5386 and 5388, General Code."
The similarity between the process involved in that case and the operations of the appellant herein is apparent. In neither instance was the product substantially altered. The ore produced by the appellant is still iron ore when sold to the steel manufacturing companies, and it was sold to them as such. Numerous cases were cited in the opinion in the Schumacher case
which show the rule to be well established that such operations as above set forth are not deemed to be manufacturing. Neither do the processes performed by the appellant constitute "refining, rectifying, or by the combination of different materials" within the meaning of Section 5385, General Code. Those words have clearly defined meanings and do not include such operations. The mere separation and removal of free silica from the iron ore, which thereby leaves the ore higher in iron and lower in silica, does not constitute either rectifying or refining as those terms are defined. The supporting cases cited in the opinion in the Schumacher case are applicable to this case, as is also the discussion of the term "manufacturing."
It will be observed that the facts disclosed by the record in this case are readily distinguishable from those involved in the cases of the Middletown Iron  Steel Co. v. Evatt, TaxCommr., 139 Ohio St. 113, 38 N.E.2d 585, and France Co. v.Evatt, Tax Commr., 143 Ohio St. 455, 55 N.E.2d 652. In theMiddletown case, miscellaneous steel articles were reduced by mechanical processes to steel scrap of particular *Page 430
sizes and specifications, and the finished product which resulted from the process employed was quite different in form and substance from the material subjected to such process.
Likewise, the France Company case arose under the sales-tax statutes, Sections 5546-1 to 5546-25, General Code, which exempted from the sales tax property which it was the purpose of the consumer "to use or consume * * * directly in the production of tangible personal property for sale by * * * processing."
The definition of the word "processing" is broader than the word "manufacturing," and while the writer of this opinion continues in disagreement with the conclusion reached by the majority in that case, as shown by his dissenting opinion, that case may be differentiated from the instant case on the facts.
It is well settled that the provision of any statute which purports to except certain property from general statutory provisions governing taxation is a measure of exemption, and that laws relating to exemption of property from taxation being in derogation of equal rights are strictly construed.
Our conclusion is that the finding of the Board of Tax Appeals that the appellant in this case is not engaged in manufacturing and its approval of the increased assessments made by the Tax Commissioner are neither unreasonable nor unlawful. It follows that the decision of the Board of Tax Appeals in each of the two cases here presented should be and is affirmed.
Decisions affirmed.
WEYGANDT, C.J., ZIMMERMAN, WILLIAMS, TURNER and HART, JJ., concur.
BELL, J., not participating. *Page 431

=== CASE 2225509 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:48.969785+00 ===

340 Mass. 581 (1960)
165 N.E.2d 394
MASSACHUSETTS SOCIETY OF OPTOMETRISTS & another
vs.
JAMES H. WADDICK, JUNIOR (and a companion case[1]).
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Suffolk.
November 6, 1959.
March 21, 1960.
Present: WILLIAMS, COUNIHAN, WHITTEMORE, & CUTTER, JJ.
James D. St. Clair, (Blair L. Perry with him,) for the plaintiffs.
*582 Samuel Abrams, (George S. Abrams & Ruth I. Abrams with him,) for the defendants.
Joseph G. Crane, by leave of court, submitted a brief as amicus curiae.
WILLIAMS, J.
The plaintiffs in these suits are Arthur F. March, Junior, a registered optometrist practising in Concord, and Massachusetts Society of Optometrists, a corporation with a membership of more than 500 registered optometrists comprising approximately seventy-five percent of the registered optometrists practising in Massachusetts. The defendant in one case is James H. Waddick, Junior, a registered optician, but not a registered optometrist, physician or surgeon, doing business in Boston under the name Dispensing Contact Lens Center for Fitting and Information. The defendants in the other case are George Hatfield, Junior, also a registered optician, but not a registered optometrist, physician or surgeon, doing business in Boston under the name "Vent-Air Contact Lens Specialists," and New England Contact Lens Specialists Corp., a corporation with a usual place of business at the same address as that of the codefendant. There is no record of service on the corporate defendant. Except for references to this defendant in the Hatfield case the bills of complaint in the two cases are the same. In each it is alleged that the defendant is engaged in the unlawful practice of optometry by prescribing and adapting contact lenses for the correction, relief and aid of the visual functions and that his activity constitutes a nuisance which endangers the public and threatens it with substantial and irreparable harm. This activity does substantial and irreparable harm to the plaintiffs "by interfering with their advantageous relationships with the general public and diminishing the reputation of registered optometrists, including the ... [plaintiffs] with the general public." It is also alleged that the defendant publishes in newspapers of wide circulation and in circulars advertisements including the statements "Call or come in for free information," "Lifetime prescription changes at no charge," and other statements of like import, in violation of G.L.c. 112, § 73A.
*583 Each defendant demurred on the grounds that the bill stated no cause of action entitling the plaintiffs to relief and that they had no standing to maintain the suit. The demurrers were sustained and the cases reported to this court.
The question for decision is whether registered optometrists are entitled, either individually or collectively without proof of special damage, to an injunction against the illegal practice of optometry by persons who are not registered and are not physicians or surgeons. Although we entertained a similar bill in McMurdo v. Getter, 298 Mass. 363, this problem was not presented since facts were alleged from which actual damage to the plaintiff was inferable and the parties agreed that "the sole question to be decided is whether or not, on the facts set forth herein, the defendants are illegally engaged in the practice of optometry."
Courts have differed widely in dealing with the right to equitable relief of persons holding licenses similar in character to those possessed by the plaintiffs. See Callmann, Unfair Competition and Trade-Marks (2d ed.) § 63.3; 11 So. Cal. L. Rev. p. 476; 32 Notre Dame Lawyer, p. 311. Injunctions have been granted on the theory that by the unlicensed practice of a defendant a property right of the plaintiff has been invaded, or that the activity of the defendant constitutes a public nuisance. See Eisensmith v. Buhl Optical Co. 115 W. Va. 776; Ezell v. Ritholz, 188 S.C. 39, 46-50; Neill v. Gimbel Bros. Inc. 330 Pa. 213; Dworken v. Apartment House Owners Assn. 38 Ohio App. 265; Seifert v. Buhl Optical Co. 276 Mich. 692, 700; Burden v. Hoover, 9 Ill. 2d 114. Equitable relief has been refused by courts holding that no property right has been encroached upon or imperilled and no nuisance created. New Hampshire Bd. of Registration in Optometry v. Scott Jewelry Co. 90 N.H. 368. Macbeth v. Gerber's Inc. 72 R.I. 102. Delaware Optometric Corp. v. Sherwood, 128 A.2d 812 (Supreme Court of Del.). New Jersey State Bar Assn. v. Northern N.J. Mortgage Associates, 22 N.J. 184. It is stated in Restatement, Torts, § 710: "One who engages in a business or profession in violation of a legislative enactment which prohibits persons *584 from engaging therein, either absolutely or without a prescribed permission, is subject to liability to another who is engaged in the business or profession in conformity with the enactment, if, but only if, (a) one of the purposes of the enactment is to protect the other against unauthorized competition, and (b) the enactment does not negative such liability."
The object of our statutes, G.L.c. 112, §§ 66-73B, as amended, wherein the practice of optometry is defined and the practice restricted to those found properly qualified after examination by the board of registration in optometry (see G.L.c. 13, § 16) is to promote public health and welfare by protecting from improper treatment persons suffering from defects of the eye. Commonwealth v. Houtenbrink, 235 Mass. 320, 323. Commonwealth v. S.S. Kresge Co. 267 Mass. 145, 148-149. See Lawrence v. Board of Registration in Medicine, 239 Mass. 424, 428-429; Commonwealth v. Ferris, 305 Mass. 233; Kay Jewelry Co. v. Board of Registration in Optometry, 305 Mass. 581, 583; Flynn v. Board of Registration in Optometry, 320 Mass. 29, 34; New Jersey State Bar Assn. v. Northern N.J. Mortgage Associates, 22 N.J. 184, 195.
Their justification, similarly to that for the statute limiting the right to practise law to members of the bar (G.L.c. 221, § 46A), is not in the protection of the registrants from competition, but in the protection of the public from being advised and represented by incompetent and unreliable persons. See Lowell Bar Assn. v. Loeb, 315 Mass. 176, 180.
The provisions respecting the right to practice optometry do not suggest a legislative purpose to confer on registrants having such right an additional right to restrain the unauthorized practice by others. Presumably a right of this nature would, if intended to be given, have been specifically granted as was done in the case of persons affected by retail sales made at less than cost with intent to injure competitors or destroy competition. G.L.c. 93, § 14H. See Fournier v. Troianello, 332 Mass. 636, 639.
*585 In the absence of statutory authority the right of the plaintiffs to maintain these suits depends on whether the allegations bring them within the jurisdiction of equity. The assertion that the activity of the defendants does substantial and irreparable harm to the plaintiffs by interfering with their advantageous relationships with the general public and diminishing the reputation of registered optometrists, including the plaintiffs, with the general public is a mere conclusion. Laughlin Filter Corp. v. Bird Mach. Co. 319 Mass. 287, 290. Carson v. Gikas, 321 Mass. 468. Jacobs v. Mann, 300 Mass. 258, 260. Foster v. Shubert Holding Co. 316 Mass. 470, 474. No facts are stated as to actual or imminent competition or interference with the plaintiffs' practice by the defendants from which it could be found that unless relief is granted the right of the plaintiffs to practise will be impaired to a material degree. See Kenyon v. Chicopee, 320 Mass. 528, 534.
The allegations that the activities of the defendants constitute a nuisance which endangers the public and threatens it with substantial and irreparable harm purport to be made in the public interest and state reasons for the enforcement of the criminal statutes pertaining to the illegal practice of optometry and the imposition of the substantial penalties provided by §§ 72A and 73A. It is plain that, so far as preventing harm to the public is concerned, the object of these suits is to enforce these penal statutes by injunction. This we have held is not within the jurisdiction of equity. Commonwealth v. Stratton Fin. Co. 310 Mass. 469. Malden v. Flynn, 318 Mass. 276. See Waltham v. Mignosa, 327 Mass. 250, 253.
The objections to so called "criminal equity" are stated in Commonwealth v. Stratton Fin. Co. at p. 474, and need not be repeated. The remedy by criminal prosecution is said to be complete. The right of the plaintiffs to maintain their suits is not enhanced by calling the illegal practice of the defendants a nuisance. If it were such, which we do not intimate (see Commonwealth v. Stratton Fin. Co., supra, p. 473), the Attorney General is the proper person to procure *586 its abatement. Dartmouth v. Silva, 325 Mass. 401, 404. We think that the plaintiffs, either personally or as representatives of the public, have not stated a case for equitable relief.
Orders sustaining the demurrers affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  The companion case is by the same plaintiffs against George Hatfield, Junior, and another.

=== CASE 2225510 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:49.001373+00 ===

18 Ill. 2d 531 (1960)
165 N.E.2d 279
ILLINOIS HOSPITAL SERVICE, INC., Appellee,
v.
JOSEPH S. GERBER, Director of Insurance, Appellant.
Nos. 35353, 35354 Cons.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
Opinion filed January 22, 1960.
Rehearing denied March 28, 1960.
*532 GRENVILLE BEARDSLEY, Attorney General, of Springfield, (WILLIAM C. WINES, RAYMOND S. SARNOW, and A. ZOLA GROVES, Assistant Attorneys General, of counsel,) for appellant.
JAMES B. MARTIN, of Springfield, and WILLIAM D. KNIGHT, JR., of Rockford, (ENSEL, MARTIN, JONES & BLANCHARD, of Springfield, and KNIGHT & KNIGHT, of Rockford, of counsel,) for appellee.
Judgments affirmed.
Mr. JUSTICE SCHAEFER delivered the opinion of the court:
The Director of Insurance appeals from judgments of the circuit court of Winnebago County which held unconstitutional section 14 of the Non-Profit Hospital Service Plan Act. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1959, chap. 32, par. 562b.) That section provides that no corporation organized under the act "shall solicit, or issue a contract to, any subscriber in any County of this State unless there are at the time in full force and effect contracts * * * between said corporation and hospitals which operate not less than thirty per cent (30%) of the total number of general hospital beds which normally serve the residents of said County."
The plaintiff, Illinois Hospital Service, Inc., is a non-profit corporation organized under the act. The Director conducted hearings and found that in 32 of the counties of the State plaintiff did not have the contracts with hospitals that section 14 requires. He therefore entered orders which, with respect to those counties, prohibited the plaintiff from soliciting or issuing new subscriber contracts, from selling riders to existing subscriber contracts, from adding dependents to the coverage provided by existing contracts, if an additional charge is made for the addition, and from issuing subscriber contracts to new members of existing *533 groups. The Director also forbade the replacement of existing subscriber contracts with new or different forms in any county of the State "at any time during which solicitation or issuance of new subscribers' contracts is forbidden by this order."
The plaintiff then instituted these actions, which have been consolidated in this court, to review the orders of the Director. The circuit court held section 14 unconstitutional and reversed the orders of the Director. The Director has appealed. The primary issue is the constitutionality of section 14 of the act, but before we reach that issue it is necessary to dispose of certain other contentions advanced by the parties.
These actions were brought under section 407 of the Insurance Code, (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1959, chap. 73, par. 1019,) which is incorporated in the present act by reference to govern proceedings for judicial review of orders of the Director. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1959, chap. 32, par. 560.) That section of the Insurance Code provides for review upon the transcript of the proceedings before the Director, and "such additional evidence as may be offered at the hearing of said cause before the court by any of the parties."
The Director argues that section 407 is unconstitutional as a result of our opinion in West End Savings & Loan Ass'n v. Smith, 16 Ill. 2d 523. In that case the statute authorized a review of the administrative determinations of the Auditor of Public Accounts under the Savings and Loan Act by a trial de novo in the circuit court. We held the provision invalid, on the ground that "where statutes purport to vest in courts a supervisory power which is not limited to a review of the administrative action but extends to a redetermination of factual issues, their effect is to grant, unlawfully, a power to exercise executive functions." (16 Ill.2d at 525.) In the course of that opinion it was also stated, however, that "The power and duty in courts to determine if administrative findings and orders have *534 support in the evidence is not a power to hear new evidence * * *." It is upon this statement that the Director relies in asserting the unconstitutionality of the present statute.
What was involved in the West End Savings and Loan Association case was the validity of a statute which provided for judicial determination, upon a trial de novo, of the propriety of allowing a savings and loan association to move from one location to another. The function thus sought to be imposed upon the courts was a nonjudicial one. In the statute that is now before us, there is no provision for judicial determination after a trial de novo, and the authority of the court is limited to the entry of an order affirming or reversing the administrative determination of the Director.
As we said in Illinois Bell Telephone Co. v. Fox, 402 Ill. 617, 626-7: "A branch of the judiciary does not exercise executive or administrative power unless there devolves upon the court the same power to exercise discretion as has been committed to the administrative agency. (Borreson v. Department of Public Welfare, 368 Ill. 425.) Whether a court is empowered to hear additional evidence upon review of an administrative decision is immaterial, provided that the court is not also authorized to substitute its own judgment, founded on the record as enlarged, for that of the administrative body on matters properly within the province of administrative discretion." The authority to hear additional evidence that is granted by section 407 is likewise immaterial, because the section does not contemplate the performance of administrative functions by the court, and does not authorize the court to substitute its judgment for that of the Director. Therefore it does not offend against the constitutional doctrine of separation of powers.
The plaintiff challenges the Director's authority to inquire into its conduct and to compel its compliance with the Non-Profit Hospital Service Plan Act. The act provides *535 that the Director shall have "the power of visitation and examination into the affairs of any such corporation and shall have free access to all of the books, papers and documents that relate to the business of the corporation and may summon and qualify witnesses under oath to examine its officers, agents or employees, or other persons in relation to the affairs, transactions and condition of corporation." (sic.) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1959, chap. 32, par. 557.) The plaintiff reads the statutes as conferring only authority to investigate, but the traditional concept of "visitation" does not warrant this narrow reading. That concept is thus expressed in Guthrie v. Harkness, 199 U.S. 148, 158, 50 L.ed. 130, 134: "Visitors of corporations have power to keep them within the legitimate sphere of their operations, and to correct all abuses of authority, and to nullify all irregular proceedings." In the present statute the General Assembly has authorized the Director to hold hearings in connection with the exercise of his visitorial powers, and its purpose to confer upon him the authority to require compliance with the statute seems clear.
Section 14 was added to the act by amendment in 1947. The plaintiff contends that the section is not applicable to it because it was organized under the act before 1947 and because section 3 of the act has provided from the outset that no amendment to the act shall apply to corporations organized under it "unless they be expressly designated therein." (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1959, chap. 32, par. 553.) In our opinion this contention is without merit. The language of section 14 is that "No corporation which is subject to the provisions of this Act" shall issue contracts except in accordance with its provisions. This language includes the plaintiff as well as all other corporations that are subject to the act.
With the preliminary contentions thus disposed of, we come to the question of the constitutionality of section 14. The corporations with which the act is concerned are those *536 which are organized "for the purpose of establishing, maintaining and operating a non-profit Hospital service plan whereby Hospital service may be provided by the said corporation or hospital with which it has a contract for such care, * * * to those persons who become subscribers to said plan under a contract which entitles each subscriber to certain hospital care, * * *." (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1959, chap. 32, par. 553.) Section 14 prohibits such a hospital-service-plan corporation from operating in any county unless it has contracts with hospitals "which operate not less than thirty per cent (30%) of the total number of general hospital beds which normally serve the residents of said County."
The record shows how the provisions of that section came to be invoked against the plaintiff. It contains statements of the Illinois Hospital Association that in 1957 it formulated a policy to solve a problem which had concerned it for "several years." The problem was whether the two Illinois Blue Cross Plans, one known as the "Chicago" plan, and the other, the plaintiff in this case, known as the "Rockford" Plan, should be allowed to operate concurrently in the same areas in the State. "On this question," the Association stated, "it is the opinion of the Board of Trustees that the public is better served and confusion avoided if only one Blue Cross Plan operates in a given area." Since the plans were unable to "agree upon territories," the Association directed the attention of its members to section 14, and recommended that no member hospital have a contract with more than one Blue Cross Plan. "If this is done, the Plan not selected would be restricted from operating in that County under the provisions of the State Statutes." The record also shows that as a consequence of the Association's action, many hospitals cancelled their contracts with the plaintiff, and plaintiff fell below the 30% figure in many counties.
Section 14 places control over the economic life of hospital *537 service plans in the hands of the hospitals. The statute does not suggest and the record does not show that any public purpose is served by placing this power over hospital service plans  and over those who desire to subscribe to them  in private hands. By means of annual reports and his powers of visitation and examination, the Director is required to supervise the financial stability of a hospital-service-plan corporation; its funds may be invested only in securities eligible for investment by life insurance companies. Costs incurred in the solicitation of subscribers are subject to the approval of the Director, as are the rates charged by the corporation to its subscribers and the rates of payment from the corporation to hospitals. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1959, chap. 32, pars. 556, 557, 558, 559, 555.) In view of this comprehensive plan of governmental regulation, we see no proper purpose to be served by the private controls that are authorized by section 14.
Moreover, although section 14 gives hospitals ultimate power over hospital service plans, it specifies no standards upon the basis of which that power is to be exercised. So far as the statute is concerned, a single hospital or a group of hospitals may be motivated by caprice or by self-interest. A decision that puts a hospital service plan out of business is not required to be related in any way to the interests of subscribers to hospital service plans, whose interests may  or may not  coincide with those of the hospital.
If dominion over the economic life of one individual or enterprise is to be given to another, some justification must exist and the conditions upon which control is to be exercised must be stated with at least that degree of precision which is required when comparable authority is given to a public official. That is the meaning of our decisions in Schroeder v. Binks, 415 Ill. 192, and People v. Brown, 407 Ill. 565. Cf. Fink v. Cole, 302 N.Y. 216, 97 N.E.2d 873; Union Trust Co. v. Simmons, 116 Utah 422, 211 P.2d 190.
*538 We hold, therefore, that section 14 violates section 2 of article II of the constitution of Illinois. The judgments of the circuit court are affirmed.
Judgments affirmed.
Mr. JUSTICE HERSHEY took no part in the consideration or decision of this case.

=== CASE 3784467 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:11.415684+00 ===

After judgment was secured by the plaintiff below at the second trial, the insurance company did not contest in the Court of Appeals the amount of recovery for the single indemnity, but challenged only the amount of recovery upon the insured's double indemnity clause; and that is the only legal contention made by the company in this court. Motions of the defendant below for a directed verdict at the close of *Page 103
the plaintiff's evidence, and renewed at the close of the entire evidence, were overruled by the trial court. Three claims of prejudicial error are advanced in this court by the plaintiff in error: (1) That the insurance company was entitled to have its motions for a directed verdict sustained by the trial court; (2) that the court erred in its charge on the double indemnity liability; and (3) that on the second hearing the Court of Appeals erroneously applied the doctrine "the law of the case," in sustaining its judgment of affirmance.
Chronologically, the history of the case is as follows: In July and September, 1930, the insured consulted with two physicians about an abdominal disturbance. Both of those physicians found that she was suffering from chronic appendicitis and advised the removal of the appendix. On March 20, 1931, the insured consulted a third physician who, after several weeks' supervision of her case, and upon finding that the insured had costiveness for some time previously, determined that an operation for appendicitis was necessary, and on that date he removed the appendix. He testified that he found that her appendix was normal and that its removal was a very minor operation. On June 19, 1931, the insured violently fell on the polished hardwood floor of her apartment, the fall causing her to cry. She was assisted upstairs by her husband, but returned to work for her employer that day, and continued to work until July 7, 1931, when she was taken violently sick. One Dr. McBeth, a physician and surgeon, was called into consultation and on July 10, 1931, he made a diagnosis of the insured's condition. Finding there was evidence of total obstruction of the bowels, he performed an operation on the insured's abdomen, finding the bowels to be in a very serious condition. On August 9 he performed a second operation, and sought to alleviate her condition by making a bowel resection. The results from both operations were unfavorable to the patient and *Page 104
she died, as stated, on the 15th of the following month. This last physician, who had charge of her case from early in July until her death, testified that in his opinion the fall that she had on the floor of the apartment would cause the condition that he found in the abdomen, and that such condition was in no way attributable to her appendicitis trouble. He also testified that "there was no connection at all between the region of the appendix and the region of the trouble." Whether the insured's death resulted solely through external, violent and accidental means, or was caused directly or indirectly from illness or disease, was a question for the jury's determination, and, in the light of the physician's testimony above referred to, the trial court did not err in overruling the motions of the defendant for a directed verdict.
The trial court, in his charge to the jury, placed upon the plaintiff below the burden of proof respecting recovery upon the double-liability clause of the policy. In his charge he stated that the plaintiff was required to prove by preponderance of the evidence "that the death of the decedent was accidental; that the decedent met with an accident, and that her death was due to that accident, and within the conditions or terms of the policy." In several instances in the charge, he stated that plaintiff was required to furnish preponderating proof that the decedent received an accident and that she "died as the result of an accident." Complaint is made that the court should have further charged the jury to the effect that if they found that the death did not result wholly from the accident, or if illness or disease contributed thereto, or if they found that death did not result from violent and accidental means and independently of other causes, their verdict should be for the defendant. Since the court charged that the jury must find that the insured's death resulted from the accident or fall and that her death was due to such accident, it became the duty of *Page 105
counsel for the defendant below to request its negative, to wit: That if the death did not result solely through accidental means, the verdict should be for the defendant. They made no such request. At the close of his charge, the court asked counsel on both sides whether they had anything further to suggest. Counsel for the insurance company then said: "We have nothing," although they later excepted generally to the charge.
We cannot say, from the language employed by the trial court, that the charge misled the jury. If any error intervened on the part of the trial court it was one of omission rather than commission, and it became the duty of counsel to call the attention of the court to such omission and to request such further instructions as they might desire. Columbus Ry. Co. v.Ritter, 67 Ohio St. 53, 65 N.E. 613; State v. McCoy, 88 Ohio St. 447,  103 N.E. 136.
Counsel for both sides have presented and at some length have argued to this court the doctrine commonly known as "the law of the case." Plaintiff in error contends that the first and second propositions of the syllabus in Gohman v. City of St.Bernard, 111 Ohio St. 726, 146 N.E. 291, 41 A. L. R., 1057, are not sound law and should be overruled. With equal vigor, counsel for defendant in error insists that those paragraphs should be sustained. The question is thus presented. On the second rehearing, the appellate court, in affirming the second verdict and judgment, in its opinion said: "The second trial was had in substantial conformity with the former decision of this court. The doctrine of the law of the case is therefore applicable, and pursuant to it the judgment will not be disturbed. 111 Ohio St. 726." The procedural doctrine announced in Gohman v. City of St. Bernard, supra, is not consonant with the principles of judicial procedure upheld not only in Ohio but by the United States Supreme Court, as shown by those cases reported *Page 106
on pages 760 and 769 of the dissenting opinion in the foregoing case. The claim that an erroneous declaration of the law pronounced by an inferior court can forestall review by our state Supreme Court rests upon a doctrine which is repugnant not only to our established judicial system providing for a Supreme Court as the last court of review, but also to Section 2, Article IV of our State Constitution, which expressly empowers the Supreme Court with authority to "review, and affirm, modify or reverse the judgment of the courts of appeals." The propositions of law announced in the first and second paragraphs of the syllabus in Gohman v. City of St.Bernard, supra, are overruled. However, in any view, the law of the case cannot be here considered, since we have found the decision and judgment of the Court of Appeals not to be erroneous. It is only in cases where the appellate court has in its former hearing erroneously determined the law of the case and adhered to such determination at a later hearing, and has committed prejudicial error in so doing, that this court will review such determination. If the appellate court has correctly pronounced the law of the case, of course its former determination will not be disturbed. In this case, the appellate court committed no error in applying the law or in affirming the judgment of the nisi prius court. Its judgment will be affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.
WEYGANDT, C.J., STEPHENSON and MATTHIAS, JJ., concur.
WILLIAMS, DAY and ZIMMERMAN, JJ., concur in proposition one of the syllabus and in the judgment. *Page 107

=== CASE 3027424 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2015-10-13 22:38:13.734445+00 ===

United States Court of Appeals
FOR THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT
___________
No. 01-1852
___________
Anthony Carniglia,                       *
*
Appellant,                  * Appeal from the United States
* District Court for the Western
v.                                 * District of Arkansas.
*
Cory Dearmon; Todd Sanders;              * [UNPUBLISHED]
Paul Bosson,                             *
*
Appellees.                  *
___________
Submitted: July 31, 2001
Filed: August 6, 2001
___________
Before BOWMAN, LOKEN, and BYE, Circuit Judges.
___________
PER CURIAM.
Federal inmate Anthony Carniglia appeals the district court’s dismissal prior to
service of his 42 U.S.C. § 1983 damages action, and moves to proceed in forma
pauperis (IFP). We grant him leave to appeal IFP, leaving the fee-collection details to
the district court in accordance with 28 U.S.C. § 1915(b). We also affirm in part,
reverse in part, and remand.
Carniglia claimed defendants--County Drug Task Force employees--exceeded
the scope of a search warrant by removing from his residence property not described
in the warrant, and by conducting the search at night when the warrant indicated it was
to be conducted during the day, in violation of the Fourth Amendment. He also claimed
defendants failed to return the seized property when the criminal charges against him
were withdrawn, in violation of the Fourteenth Amendment. The district court
dismissed the action, finding Carniglia could not state a section 1983 claim because he
had adequate post-deprivation remedies under state law.
Upon de novo review, see Cooper v. Schriro, 189 F.3d 781, 783 (8th Cir. 1999)
(per curiam), we agree with the district court that Carniglia’s Fourteenth Amendment
claim lacked merit, as Carniglia indeed has post-deprivation remedies under state law.
See Hudson v. Palmer, 468 U.S. 517, 536 (1984) (when state actor deprives individual
of personal property, individual does not have § 1983 claim if state law provides
adequate postdeprivation remedy); McQuillan v. Mercedes-Benz Credit Corp., 961
S.W.2d 729, 732 (Ark. 1998) (conversion is common-law tort action for wrongful
possession or disposition of another’s property); Ark. R. Crim. P. 15.2 & 15.5
(providing that motion for return of seized items can be filed or other civil remedies can
be pursued). However, we reverse the dismissal of the Fourth Amendment claim and
remand for the district court to consider it independently of the Fourteenth Amendment
claim.
Accordingly, we affirm as to the Fourteenth Amendment claim, and reverse and
remand as to the Fourth Amendment claim.
-2-
A true copy.
Attest:
CLERK, U.S. COURT OF APPEALS, EIGHTH CIRCUIT.
-3-

=== CASE 2225551 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:50.210962+00 ===

340 Mass. 491 (1960)
165 N.E.2d 103
LOUIS MASTRANGELO
vs.
BOARD OF HEALTH OF WATERTOWN.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Middlesex.
February 3, 1960.
March 8, 1960.
Present: WILKINS, C.J., WILLIAMS, COUNIHAN, WHITTEMORE, & CUTTER, JJ.
James C. Gahan, Jr., (Paul A. Kelley with him,) for the petitioner.
Thomas C. Menton, for the respondent.
Robert J. Glennon, for the intervener.
WHITTEMORE, J.
The judge in the Superior Court rightly ordered the entry of final judgment dismissing the petition for a writ of mandamus. The petitioner's claim to the office of public health physician of the town of Watertown depends on the vote of the board of health on February 26, 1956, to appoint the petitioner to the position. When that vote was taken, the petitioner was a member of the board. General Laws c. 41, § 4A, as amended by St. 1951, c. 6, provides, "Except as otherwise expressly provided, a town board may, if authorized by vote of the town, appoint any member thereof to another town office or position for the *492 term provided by law, if any, otherwise for a term not exceeding one year. The salary of any such appointee shall be fixed by vote of the town, notwithstanding the provisions of section one hundred and eight [boards, with exceptions, fix the salary of their appointees]. In this section, the word `town' shall not include city. The provisions of this section, so far as apt, shall apply to fire, water, light and improvement districts."
The statement of agreed facts on which the case was heard does not show that the town had voted to authorize the board of health to do this. An opinion given by town counsel to the board of health stated that "there appears to be no [such] vote of the town."
The statute, except for the last sentence, was enacted by St. 1929, c. 36. The case of Attorney Gen. v. Henry, 262 Mass. 127, 132, was decided January 5, 1928, and held that a board of selectmen could not properly elect one of their number superintendent of streets where they were to fix his compensation, supervise his acts, and determine when he should be removed, citing Gaw v. Ashley, 195 Mass. 173, and Barrett v. Medford, 254 Mass. 384.
The statute, enacted soon after that decision, provides by necessary implication that only in accordance with its terms may the board make such an appointment. It is inconsequential that the petitioner resigned immediately after taking the action which purported to make him town physician and that some emphasis in the cases is on the incompatibility of holding two positions having repugnant duties. It is conclusive that the statute uses the word "appoint."
We do not reach the other asserted grounds of invalidity of the action of the board.
Judgment affirmed.

=== CASE 2225555 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:50.352054+00 ===

340 Mass. 481 (1960)
165 N.E.2d 120
J.J. STRUZZIERY CO., INC.
vs.
A.V. TAURASI CO., INC., & others.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Suffolk..
November 2, 3, 1959.
March 8, 1960.
Present: WILKINS, C.J., SPALDING, WILLIAMS, COUNIHAN, & CUTTER, JJ.
Joseph H. Elcock, Jr., Assistant Attorney General, for the Commonwealth.
Francis C. Zacharer, for Oak Hill Granite Company, Inc., intervener.
Henry Gesmer, for Atlantic Corporation.
Benjamin C. Perkins, (Edward R. Thomas with him,) for The Whittemore Company, intervener.
John W. Blakeney, for Continental Casualty Company.
Alphonse Sancinito, Robert K. Lamere, Howard W. Robbins & Joseph E. Levine, for certain interveners, were present but did not argue.
Bernard V. Martin & Walter F. Maguire, for certain interveners, joined in a consolidated brief.
WILLIAMS, J.
This is a petition under G.L.c. 30, § 39, by J.J. Struzziery Co., Inc., to enforce a claim against A.V. Taurasi Co., Inc. (Taurasi), for material furnished it in performing a contract with the Commonwealth of Massachusetts made by the department of public works for the construction of a section of State highway (Route 128) in the towns of Dedham, Westwood and Needham. The Commonwealth, Taurasi, and Continental Casualty Company, the surety on a performance and payment bond given by *483 Taurasi, are joined as respondents. The petitioner seeks the establishment of its claim; a determination that money retained by the Commonwealth under the contract with Taurasi is security for the payment of the claim; an order that on its establishment the Commonwealth satisfy it from the money retained; and, if this money is insufficient, an order that the casualty company pay so much of the claim as remains unsatisfied. Other subcontractors with claims for labor, materials, appliances and equipment furnished Taurasi in the work of construction have intervened as petitioners.
The Commonwealth in its answer lists the statements of claim which have been filed, states that it holds a "reserve" of money retained under the contract, and alleges that this money is subject to its right "to assert a claim for liquidated damages should the circumstances so require." The casualty company in its answer asserts by way of counterclaim that as part consideration for its suretyship Taurasi assigned to it all moneys which should become due Taurasi under the contract with the Commonwealth and that it is entitled to the funds retained by the Commonwealth.
The execution of the contract between the Commonwealth and Taurasi and the giving of a performance and payment bond by Taurasi and the casualty company are undisputed. A master to whom the petition was referred found that Taurasi contracted with the Commonwealth (No. 5669) on March 30, 1954, to construct a highway at a price of $4,499,538.33 and gave a bond with the casualty company as surety under G.L.c. 30, § 39, for that amount. The total value of the work performed by Taurasi was $4,414,498.47 and the amount paid it by the Commonwealth was $4,086,945.43. The Commonwealth "has retained as statutory security" $327,553.04, which sum "is held by reason of and on account of claims filed with it" under c. 30, § 39. Said sum, "together with the bond executed by the respondent, Continental Casualty Company, as surety herein, constitutes the statutory security taken by the officers and agents who contracted on behalf of the Commonwealth" *484 for the benefit of those complying with the statutory provisions.
The master further found that twelve intervening creditors of Taurasi with claims totaling $316,550.53 are entitled to the benefits of the statutory security, and that other intervening creditors including Oak Hill Granite Company, Inc., with a claim for $8,083.73, although having valid claims against Taurasi, are not entitled to participate in the security.
None of the respondents filed objections to the master's report and on motion of the casualty company it was confirmed by interlocutory decree on July 31, 1958.
On the same day the Commonwealth moved to recommit the report for further findings on the grounds that as a result of Taurasi's suggested bankruptcy and its default in completing the contract the sum which had been withheld by the Commonwealth had become subject to encumbrances not reported by the master, namely, (1) a tax lien by the United States on the goods, effects and credits of Taurasi, (2) a claim of Atlantic Corporation as assignee of Taurasi, (3) a claim of priority to the retained fund by Taurasi's receiver in bankruptcy, and (4) a counterclaim by the Commonwealth for Taurasi's default amounting to $37,040.54. The motion for recommittal was denied and the Commonwealth appealed. A final decree was entered in which the indebtedness of Taurasi to the twelve creditors found by the master to be entitled to statutory security was established and it was declared that the bond on which the casualty company was surety and the moneys retained by the Commonwealth "together constitute the statutory security." The decree further established the indebtedness of Taurasi to seven other claimants including Oak Hill Granite Company, Inc., in the sum of $8,083.73 which were not entitled to participate in this security. The Commonwealth was ordered to pay the amounts due the secured claimants and in the event the funds retained by the Commonwealth were insufficient for this purpose the casualty company was ordered to make up the deficiency. It was provided that all *485 claims of Taurasi, the casualty company and the Commonwealth against each other arising out of the contract "are hereby expressly reserved with the right to pursue [them] in some further proceeding."
From this final decree the Commonwealth and Oak Hill Granite Company, Inc., appealed. On July 31, 1958, the same date as that of the final decree, Atlantic Corporation filed a petition for leave to intervene which was denied and Atlantic appealed.
In a report of material facts the judge found that the claim of Atlantic against Taurasi appeared to be based on various notes given by Taurasi between October 18 and December 20, 1956, that they totaled $106,444.90 and were set out in a pending suit by Atlantic against Taurasi. He found that Atlantic was a creditor of Taurasi "pure and simple, and ... would not be eligible to have participated in the fund retained by the Commonwealth." He found that "the funds retained would have been exhausted by those rightly entitled thereto before intervening petitioner's claim if any could be anticipated," and concluded that "to allow intervention at this late date would cause great financial hardship to the claimants found by the master to be entitled to participate in the funds held."
There was no error in the final decree. The master found on evidence which is unreported that the Commonwealth retained $327,553.04 as statutory security under its contract with Taurasi for the payment of claims filed under c. 30, § 39. This finding is supported by the provisions of art. 57 of "Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges" which was a part of the contract. Therein it was provided that the Commonwealth "may retain such sum or sums from the moneys due the contractor under this contract as will be necessary to discharge all such claims whether for labor or materials or for damages as aforesaid [see art. 56], and until the validity of such claims shall be established and finally determined, and if determined and finally established as valid, all such claims shall be paid from the amount so retained if it be sufficient for that purpose.... It is understood *486 that the security required by § 39 of c. 30 ... is obtained both by the bond accompanying the contract and by the power of the ... [Commonwealth] to retain and pay money under the provisions of this article...."
The judge was right in ruling that under the language of the contract both the retained sum and the surety bond constituted the statutory security contemplated by § 39. Hub Steel & Iron Works, Inc. v. Dyer, 283 Mass. 463, 466-467. Berkal v. M. De Matteo Constr. Co. 327 Mass. 329, 332. The retained funds were held by the Commonwealth in the nature of a trust for the benefit of those described in the statute and it would have no right to use them for any other purpose. It was said in J.H. McNamara, Inc. v. McGuire, 254 Mass. 589, 594, in a suit under G.L.c. 149, § 29, a statute similar to § 39 but applying to cities, towns, counties and other political subdivisions: "The Legislature cannot have intended that the person upon whom it placed the duty to secure `sufficient security' for the payment `for labor performed or furnished and materials used' should be permitted so to use that security for his own benefit as to render it insufficient for the payments for labor and material.... Where the law requires one person to obtain security for the benefit of others, that person cannot himself share in it until those for whom he is bound to obtain it have had the full benefit intended to be secured to them.... [T]he city cannot render what has been obtained as security under the statute insufficient by taking so much for itself that the remainder falls short of satisfying the statutory beneficiaries." "[T]he rights of general creditors of the principal contractor are subordinate to the rights of the statutory beneficiaries in the security until the indebtedness of the latter has been paid." Duteau v. Salvucci, 330 Mass. 531, 535. The damages referred to in that part of the contract which has been quoted are those resulting from claims for personal injury or property damage arising from the performance of the contract (see art. 56) and it is clear that the satisfaction of such claims must be subordinated to those of the petitioner and the interveners.
*487 There is no merit in the appeal of the granite company. Admittedly it filed its claim on the ninetieth day following the date of its last delivery of materials. On March 30, 1954, the date of Taurasi's contract with the Commonwealth, c. 30, § 39, required that a claimant under the statute must file its claims within sixty days after it ceased to furnish the materials for which it had contracted, otherwise it was not entitled to the statutory security. Duteau v. Salvucci, 330 Mass. 531, 534. The appellant relies on the amendment to § 39 by St. 1955, c. 702, § 1, wherein the period within which a claim could be filed was extended to ninety days. But by § 3 it was specifically provided that this amendment was not to apply retroactively. The granite company therefore did not bring its claim within the terms of the statute and cannot avail itself of the statutory security.
The motion for recommittal was properly denied. Its purpose was to obtain findings relevant to issues which were collateral to those presented by the pleadings in this proceeding. The rights of the petitioner and the interveners could not be affected by findings respecting an alleged tax lien against the effects and credits of Taurasi, an assignment by it to Atlantic Corporation, and a claim by a receiver in bankruptcy proceedings against Taurasi.
For like reasons the motion of Atlantic Corporation, a creditor of Taurasi, to intervene was rightly denied. This "was not a proceeding in which creditors of the [principal] contractors who had furnished neither labor nor material might appropriately be joined. The judge was right in his conclusion that a proceeding brought to establish rights under the statute should not be complicated and the administration of the fund ... hampered by the intervention of general creditors of the [principal] contractors who have no rights under the statute." Old Colony Crushed Stone Co. v. Cronin, 276 Mass. 221, 227. Duteau v. Salvucci, 330 Mass. 531, 535.
The judge was justified in refusing to postpone the entry of the final decree until the collateral matters referred to in *488 the motion to recommit had been litigated. The petition of J.J. Struzziery Co., Inc., was filed on December 12, 1956. Many of the claimants who were entitled to the benefits of the statutory security are found to have waived interest on their claims doubtless on the expectation of speedy payment. To this they are entitled. The rights of the respondents against each other are expressly preserved by the decree.
The interlocutory decrees denying the Commonwealth's motion to recommit and the motion of Atlantic Corporation to intervene are affirmed.
The final decree is affirmed.
So ordered.

=== CASE 2225571 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:50.831681+00 ===

340 Mass. 638 (1960)
165 N.E.2d 751
CARMILLO C. CESARONE
vs.
JENNIE M. FEMINO & others.[1]
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Essex.
January 7, 1960.
April 4, 1960.
Present: WILKINS, C.J., WILLIAMS, COUNIHAN, WHITTEMORE, & CUTTER, JJ.
Edward H.J. Wilson, for the defendant Femino.
John J. Jennings, (Daniel J. Horgan, Jr., & Joseph W. Jennings with him,) for the plaintiff.
COUNIHAN, J.
This is a suit in equity involving the ownership of a parcel of registered land (G.L.c. 185) with the buildings thereon on Highland Avenue and Barnes Road, Salem. The suit was referred to a master whose report was confirmed by an interlocutory decree. Thereafter a final decree was entered granting the plaintiff relief substantially as prayed for in the bill, with costs to the plaintiff.
The suit comes here upon the appeals of Jennie M. Femino from the interlocutory and final decrees. There was no error.
*639 The master found that the plaintiff and Jennie M. Femino, formerly husband and wife, were married on April 25, 1943, and thereafter their separate earnings were put into a common fund to which the plaintiff contributed the larger share. On February 26, 1947, they purchased these premises with money from this common fund, taking title as tenants by the entirety as shown by a certificate of title numbered 17303 in the files of the Land Court for the Essex South Registry District.
Sometime in 1952 Jennie and Carmillo were divorced by a decree absolute of the Essex Probate Court. Shortly before their final separation a deed of the premises dated November 3, 1950, purportedly executed by Carmillo and Jennie was delivered to Stephen C. Ingemi, Jennie's brother, and was recorded in the office of the Land Court for the Essex South Registry District as document numbered 60946. The master found that the signature of Carmillo on that deed was not his signature and that no consideration was paid by Ingemi for the deed.
On September 5, 1951, a few days before the divorce hearing, Ingemi executed a note secured by a mortgage of these premises to Giuseppe Giacoppo, an uncle of Ingemi's wife, for $8,000 and Giacoppo paid no consideration for either the note or the mortgage.
The master also found that Jennie held the sum of $1,320 from rents collected from these premises.
The defendant Jennie states in her brief that the only issue to be decided is whether the Superior Court sitting in equity has jurisdiction over the parties and the property because it involved a parcel of registered land. G.L.c. 185. While it is true that the Land Court would have jurisdiction over this suit as provided by G.L.c. 185, § 1 (k), it is also true that by the provisions of c. 214, § 1, the Supreme Judicial Court and the Superior Court have original and concurrent jurisdiction of all cases and matters of equity under the general principles of equity jurisprudence and, with reference thereto, shall be courts of general equity jurisdiction, with an exception not here material. Thus it appears that *640 either the Land Court or the Superior Court could take jurisdiction. St. George's Church v. Primitive Methodist Church, 315 Mass. 202, 206. Cowden v. Cutting, 339 Mass. 164.
Interlocutory decree affirmed.
Final decree affirmed with costs of appeal to the plaintiff.
NOTES
[1]  Stephen C. Ingemi and Giuseppe Giacoppo.

=== CASE 9740956 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:45:56.877424+00 ===

Jackson, J.
This is an appeal from a conviction on an affidavit charging the appellants with the crime of Petit Larceny, predicated upon an alleged theft of fifteen gallons of gasoline. Originally appellants were charged, by affidavit in three counts, with the crimes of Petit Larceny, Automobile Banditry and Second Degree Burglary. On motion of appellants, at the close of the state’s evidence, the court directed the jury to find the appellants not guilty of the third count of the affidavit charging Second Degree Burglary. The jury, by its verdict, found the defendants not guilty of Automobile Banditry and guilty of Petit Larceny.
The pertinent part of the section of the statute on which the prosecution was based and conviction had, Acts 1929, ch. 156, §2, p. 487, §10-3002, Burns’ 1956 Replacement, reads as follows:
“Petit larceny. — Whoever unlawfully steals, takes and carries, leads or drives away the personal goods of another, of the value of any sum less than twenty-five dollars [$25.00] shall be deemed guilty of petit larceny . . . .”
*203Following the judgment and conviction, the appellants separately and severally filed their motion for a new trial, such motion containing nineteen grounds.
The assignment of errors contains three specifications, however, we need consider only number one, which is as follows:
“1. The trial court erred in overruling each of the appellants’ motion for a new trial.”
In view of the decision we must render in this cause we need consider only ground three and four of the motion for a new trial, which read as follows:
“3. The verdict of the jury is contrary to law.
“4. The verdict of the jury is not sustained by sufficient evidence.”
A brief summary of the evidence most favorable to the appellee shows that on January 27, 1959, appellants in company with one James Stanley Pirtle were using a green Studebaker pick-up truck owned by one William Dudley, father of one of the appellants, for the purpose of going to a free moving picture show at Sullivan. There is evidence to show that all three boys were at the picture show. From that point the evidence is in conflict as to whether or not the boys went to Robinson, Illinois, and then returned and went to the property owned by Gilbert Stanley, or whether Pirtle took the pick-up truck from the public square in Sullivan, with the consent of the appellant Dudley, to take a girl home, later returning the truck to Sullivan and having the appellants return him to his home at Merom Station. Pirtle testifying for the state places himself and the appellants at the Stanley property in the proximity of the gasoline tank from which the gasoline was allegedly stolen. The witness testified that he heard *204gasoline running into the tank of the truck, heard some object or objects loaded on the truck, but even though he was part way out of the truck he did not see any gasoline put in the truck nor did he see any object or objects placed in or on the pick-up truck. There is no evidence in the record as to the amount, if any, or value, if any, of any gasoline allegedly stolen.
Considering the evidence most favorable to the State we must and do find that there is a total failure to prove the essential elements of the crime charged, i.e., that the defendants stole, took or carried away gasoline in any amount or of any value. The most that can be said of the proof adduced by the State is that by inference, the jury might have concluded that the appellants broke the latch on the gasoline tank and permitted a part of the gasoline in the storage tank to drain out upon the ground.
In order to sustain a conviction every material allegation contained in the affidavit must be established by the evidence beyond a reasonable doubt. Rhoades v. State (1946), 224 Ind. 569, 572, 70 N. E. 2d 27; Abraham v. State (1950), 228 Ind. 179, 184, 91 N. E. 2d 358; Hill v. State (1937), 212 Ind. 692, 699, 11 N. E. 2d 141; Morgan v. The State (1878), 61 Ind. 447, 448; Thomas v. State (1958), 238 Ind. 658, 662, 154 N. E. 2d 503; Johnson v. State (1957), 236 Ind. 509, 512, 515, 141 N. E. 2d 444; Sylvester v. State (1933), 205 Ind. 628, 631, 187 N. E. 669.
While the appellants may have had the opportunity to commit the offense charged, opportunity is not enough. Christen v. State (1950), 228 Ind. 30, 40, 89 N. E. 2d 445.
The motion for a new trial should have been sustained, and for failure of the trial court to- do so this cause is reversed and remanded with instructions to *205grant appellants’ motion for a new trial and for further proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion.
The other errors complained of are not apt to arise on a new trial and for that reason are not considered here.
Judgment reversed.
Bobbitt and Landis, JJ., concur.
Arterburn, C. J., dissents with opinion.
Achor, J., not participating because of illness.

=== CASE 9740957 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:45:56.881164+00 ===

DISSENTING OPINION
Arterburn, C. J.
I cannot agree with the majority opinion that there is no evidence of the taking of property sufficient to constitute petty larceny in this case. A showing is made that the lock on the gasoline tank was found broken. One of the witnesses stated that he could hear the sound of the flow of gasoline going out of the tank into the cans in the rear of the truck. The owner of the gasoline testified that there were 165 gallons missing from his tank. The evidence also showed gasoline spilled on the ground around the tank. This is sufficient evidence to show a taking of the property. The mere movement of an article is a sufficient taking or asportation in larceny. Warnke v. State (1929), 89 Ind. App. 683, 167 N. E. 138; 52 C. J. S., Larceny, §6a (b), p. 802.
The market price of the gasoline was shown. The fact that the cans into which the gasoline was poured leaked and the gasoline flowed out on the bed of the truck where it saturated the floor, does not negate a taking, but rather substantiates the charge of petty larceny.
Note. — Reported in 165 N. E. 2d 380.

=== CASE 9740958 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:45:57.152746+00 ===

Abrams, J.
A single justice has reserved and reported the correctness of a substituted judgment determination calling for a “no code”1 order to be entered on the medical charts of *189an incompetent minor ward. A judge of the Holyoke Division of the District Court determined that an infant in a persistent vegetative coma would choose, were she competent, to have the “no code” order entered on her medical charts. For the reasons stated we affirm.
Facts. The child whose treatment is at issue was born on September 30, 1986. Her mother and putative father were both minors at the time. Less than one month after her birth, in response to a petition filed by the Department of Social Services (DSS), a District Court judge found the child to be in need of care and protection. By order of the District Court, DSS gained legal and physical custody of the child. On October 30, 1986, the child’s mother was also found in need of care and protection and placed in DSS custody. In December of the same year, DSS returned physical custody of the child to her mother, while retaining legal custody.
Shortly thereafter, the mother and child were involved in an automobile accident. That accident, in which the straps on the child’s car seat wrapped around her neck and cut off the supply of oxygen to her brain for a substantial period of time, left the child in an irreversible coma.
As a result of the accident, the child cannot see, hear, or engage in any purposeful movement. Her ability to breathe on her own is extremely limited. A breathing tube has been inserted directly into her lungs through an incision in her trachea, and her rate of breathing is controlled by a machine. She is fed through a feeding tube permanently inserted in her stomach. The child suffered cardio-respiratory arrests as a result of aspirating food regurgitated from her stomach. She was resuscitated on these occasions by extraordinary treatment, including the administration of medication to *190restart her heart. Although the child has undergone Nissen fundoplication surgery,2 which significantly decreases the likelihood that she will regurgitate food into her lungs, she nevertheless still runs the risk of such cardiorespiratory arrests.3
On July 7, 1987, DSS and the child’s mother jointly moved for appointment of a guardian ad litem for the child and entry of a substituted judgment decision as to what further medical care should be given to the child. Because both the child and her parents were minors, as well as under the legal custody of DSS, a guardian was appointed to represent the child.
The primary witness at the hearing for entry of substituted judgment was Dr. Stephen Lieberman, the director of the pediatric intensive care unit at Baystate Medical Center, where the child was hospitalized following the accident. Dr. Lieberman, who has extensive training and experience in treating children with neurological problems, was primarily responsible for the child from the time she was admitted to Baystate. After extensive testing, Dr. Lieberman determined that “there is nothing to indicate that she has any ability to fuñetion from her cerebral cortex. But she does function from a brain stem level where things are not under [her conscious] control.”4 He testified that the child is irreversibly in a state *191of coma from which “she will never regain [consciousness or] be able to function in any way.” He testified that “there is really no potential for this condition to be reversed” except through the perfection of a complete brain transplant operation. Dr. Lieberman stated that, although there is medical controversy as to whether a person functioning at a brain stem level can feel pain, in his opinion, the child does not feel pain, or at least is not “able to localize it.” He testified that entry of a “no code” order was completely consistent with medical ethics.
The District Court judge, substituting his judgment for the incompetent child, found that, if competent, the child would choose not tó be resuscitated by extraordinary measures. He therefore ordered that “further ventilator treatment and resuscitative measures be withheld” in the event the child “suffers respiratory distress or cardiac arrest in the future.” In addition, he ordered that the Nissen fundoplication surgery be performed in order to reduce the likelihood of the child’s aspirating regurgitated food.5
Pursuant to G. L. c. 211, § 3 (1990 ed.), the child’s guardian ad litem sought relief from the District Court’s DNR order before a single justice of this court. The single justice *192reserved and reported the matter after the parties6 so requested and submitted a statement of agreed facts.7 The guardian argues that: (1) the judge’s factual findings with respect to the effects of full code treatment are clearly erroneous; (2) the judge’s determination that the child would choose to decline resuscitative medical treatment in the event of respiratory or cardiac arrest is without support in the record and the judge’s findings; and (3) even if the judge’s substituted judgment determination were correct, resuscitative treatment should nevertheless be administered because the State’s interest in the preservation of life outweigh’s the child’s desire to have a “no code” order entered on her medical charts. The guardian requests that the order placing the child on “no code” status be vacated, and that we enter a judgment that the child would choose to have all extraordinary medical treatment continue in the event of further cardiac or respiratory arrests.
The “no code” determination. “Cardiac arrest occurs at some point in the dying process of every person, whatever the underlying cause of death. Hence the decision whether or not to attempt resuscitation is potentially relevant for all patients.” Deciding to Forego Life-Sustaining Treatment: Ethical, Medical and Legal Issues in Treatment Decisions, President’s Commission for the Study of Ethical Problems in Medicine and Biomedical and Behavioral Research, 235 *193(March, 1983). It is not surprising, then, that “no code” orders have become fairly routine.8
Generally, “no code” orders do not require judicial oversight. See Matter of Dinnerstein, 6 Mass. App. Ct. 466, 474-475 (1978). Cf. Brophy v. New England Sinai Hosp., Inc., 398 Mass. 417, 423 (1986) (unlike substituted judgment to discontinue artificial nutrition and hydration, DNR order entered on Brophy’s chart at wife’s request not reviewed by court). Courts should not be in the business of reviewing uncontroversial “no-code” cases simply because doctors and hospitals seek to shield themselves from liability. See Liacos, “Dilemmas of Dying,” Legal and Ethical Aspects of Treating Critically and Terminally Ill Patients 149, 153 (Am. Soc’y of Law & Med., 1982) (“there is a difference between acting to preserve the interest of the patient and acting to preserve the interest of the profession”). “If hospitals ensure that decisionmaking practices are reasonable and that internal review and advice are readily available, decisions concerning resuscitation will seldom need to come before courts.” Deciding to Forego Life-Sustaining Treatment, supra at 252.9
In this case, however, the minor is incompetent by virtue of both her age and irreversible coma. Further, both parents were also minors, and the mother and child were in the legal *194custody of DSS. The guardian opposes the DNR order. Moreover, as in Custody of a Minor (No. 1), 385 Mass. 697, 709 (1982), “the child already was within the jurisdiction of the court before the question whether a ‘no code’ order should be made . . . arose.” In these circumstances, a judicial “no code” determination is appropriate. Cf. id. at 709 (where, among other factors: (1) minor patient is ward of State in DSS custody; (2) child’s mental faculties have not developed to point that he is competent to make decision; (3) parents have failed to exercise parental responsibilities toward child; and (4) child already was within the jurisdiction of the court, judicial determination of [“no code”] is appropriate); Matter of Spring, 380 Mass. 629, 636-637 (1980) (“[O]ur opinions should not be taken to establish any requirement of prior judicial approval that would not otherwise exist. . . . [A] variety of circumstances [are] to be taken into account in deciding whether there should be an application for a prior court order with respect to medical treatment of an incompetent patient.” [Circumstances include whether the patient is in State custody, the patient’s level of comprehension and mental ability, and whether the patient, spouse or guardian consents to the action]).
The right of incompetent individuals to refuse medical treatment is effectuated through the doctrine of substituted judgment.10 See, e.g., Custody of a Minor (No. 1), supra at 697; Superintendent of Belchertown State School v. Saikewicz, 373 Mass. 728, 738-739 (1977). In making a substituted judgment determination, the court “dons ‘the mental mantle of the incompetent’ and substitutes itself as nearly as possible for the individual in the decision-making process . . . . [T]he court does not decide what is necessarily the best decision but rather what decision would be made by the incompetent person if he or she were competent.” Matter of Moe, 385 Mass. 555, 565 (1982), citing Saikewicz, supra at 752, quoting In re Carson, 39 Misc. 2d 544, 545 (N.Y. Sup. *195Ct. 1962).11 In determining what the incompetent person’s choice would be, the judge should consider: (1) the patient’s expressed preferences, if any; (2) the patient’s religious convictions, if any; (3) the impact on the patient’s family; (4) the probability of adverse side effects from the treatment; and (5) the prognosis with and without treatment. See Guardianship of Roe, 383 Mass. 415, 444 (1981). The judge must also “tak[e] into account the present and future incompetency of the individual as one of the factors which would necessarily enter into the decision-making process of the competent person.” Saikewicz, supra at 752-753. The judge should also consider any countervailing State interests, which may include: (1) the preservation of life; (2) the protection of innocent third parties; (3) the prevention of suicide; and (4) the maintenance of the ethical integrity of the medical profession. See Norwood Hosp. v. Munoz, 409 Mass. 116, 125 (1991); Saikewicz, supra at 741; Spring, supra at 641. The judge may consider any additional factors which appear to be relevant. Rogers v. Commissioner of the Dep’t of Mental Health, 390 Mass. 489, 506 (1983).12
With respect to the foregoing factors, the judge found the following facts. Because of her infancy, the child had not expressed any wishes from which the judge could draw guidance. “[B]ecause of the absence of natural family involvement there is no information regarding the child’s ethical, *196moral or religious values that the Court could examine.” There would be little, if any, impact on the child’s family because the family was never intact.13 “[T]he implications of a full-code effort would involve a substantial degree of bodily invasion.”14 If the infant were to experience cardiac or respiratory arrest, in the absence of extraordinary measures, the child might die. Even with the full-code treatment, “the prognosis for the child . . . would remain terminal because of the untreatable ‘brain-dead’ condition.” The child “has made no gains during her long hospitalization;” “at best [she] will live for an indefinite period in a vegetative coma without any real hope of improvement, and as to the brain damage itself the prognosis is hopeless.”15 The judge’s findings, excluding the one for which there is no support, see note 15, supra, are sufficient to support the determination that the child would refuse resuscitative measures in the event of cardiac or respiratory arrest.
Arguing that the child has no dignity interest in being free of bodily invasions, the guardian states that the child “has no cognitive ability and therefore will suffer no ‘indignity’ that *197the medical care might be supposed to produce in a conscious person.” “Cognitive ability” is not a prerequisite for enjoying basic liberties. In the law of this jurisdiction, incompetent people are entitled to the same respect, dignity and freedom of choice as competent people. See Guardianship of Roe, 411 Mass. 666, 672 (1992); Moe, supra at 566, Custody of a Minor (No. 3), 378 Mass. 732, 745 (1979); Saikewicz, supra at 745.
The guardian also argues that, in any event, “the necessity for the bodily invasions occasioned by the efforts to resuscitate have been greatly reduced by [the Nissen fundoplication] surgery.” The fact that the invasions may be less frequent than before the surgery does not make any particular invasion less likely to offend the child’s dignity.
The guardian claims that “treatment would not occasion any financial disruption of the ward’s family, nor involve emotional disturbance which the ward would, if competent, find compelling.” Although the guardian proposes that lack of financial disruption counsels in favor of continued treatment, we hardly think the guardian would accept the converse proposition. As we recently stated in Doe, supra at 520 n.15, “[t]he judge quite properly did not consider whether [the patient’s] continued care would pose a burden of any kind on anyone. The cost of care in human or financial terms is irrelevant to the substituted judgment analysis.” The guardian’s second claim is controverted most strongly by the fact that both the child’s mother and father have expressed their desire that extraordinary measures not be used to prolong the child’s life. The mother testified: “I don’t like to see her going through, suffering that she’s going through .... I know what she was like before this accident. She was a very healthy baby, always smiling . . . and she’s just laying there doing nothing, and it’s not like my daughter.” Moreover, the emotional disturbance which the ward herself, if competent, would experience as a result of her condition cannot be underestimated. Last, contrary to the guardian’s assertions, there is no evidence that the decision to enter the “no code” *198order reflects the judge’s own judgment about the quality of the child’s life.16
The guardian alternatively argues that, assuming that the judge was correct in deciding that the child would choose to refuse resuscitation, the State’s interest in the preservation of life outweighs the child’s wishes. As we have stated on previous occasions, the State’s general interest in the preservation of life is not absolute. Here, as in Saikewicz, supra at 742, “[t]he interest of the State in prolonging a life must be reconciled with the interest of an individual to reject the traumatic cost of that prolongation. There is a substantial distinction in the State’s insistence that human life be saved where the affliction is curable, as opposed to the State interest where, as here, the issue is not whether, but when, for how long, and at what cost to the individual that life may be briefly extended.” The substituted judgment decision and the entry of the “do not resuscitate” order are affirmed.
So ordered.
A “no code” order, also referred to as a “DNR” or do-not-resuscitate order, directs a hospital and staff not to employ extraordinary resuscitative measures in the event of cardiac or respiratory failure. “The terminology derives from the development in recent years, in acute care hospitals, of *189specialized ‘teams’ of doctors and nurses trained in the administration of cardiopulmonary resuscitative measures. If a patient goes into cardiac or respiratory arrest, the nurse in attendance causes a notice to be broadcast on the hospital’s intercommunications system giving a code word and the room number. The members of the code team converge on the room immediately from other parts of the hospital.” Matter of Dinnerstein, 6 Mass. App. Ct. 466, 469 n.3 (1978).
This surgical procedure involves tying off the top part of the stomach to prevent reflux of food into the esophagus and thence to the trachea, where it might be aspirated. The surgery was undertaken in response to a court order. See infra at 191. The issue of the correctness of the judge’s substituted judgment order as to this surgical procedure is not before us.
Indeed, she has required resuscitation at least once since the Nissen fundoplication surgery was performed.
In other words, the child’s lower brain, and not her upper brain, functions. The upper .brain controls thinking and awareness. The lower brain controls only vegetative functions. Currently, only patients who have lost operation of both their upper and lower brain are classified as legally dead.
We note, however, that the definition of “death” is not static. It evolves with advances in medical technology and changes in social attitudes. Formerly, patients were declared dead when their heart and lungs ceased to function. See Black’s Law Dictionary 488 (4th ed. 1968). Once the capacity to mechanically maintain cardiac and respiratory functions was devel*191oped, however, this definition was no longer adequate and was supplemented (either by statute or judicial decision) by the “total brain death” definition. See Black’s Law Dictionary 360-361 (5th ed. 1979).
One commentator argues that our understanding of death should undergo another revision: when the upper brain ceases to function (“neocortical death”), the patient ought to be considered dead. According to this commentator, the values underlying the “total brain death” and “neocortical death” standard are compatible: the former, like the latter, rests on the view that consciousness is the sine qua non of human existence, since a person who is permanently unconscious will currently be declared dead even though her respiration could be mechanically maintained. K.G. Gervais, Redefining Death (Yale U. Press, 1986).
DSS sought clarification of the order. In response, the District Court judge issued a supplemental order stating that the child should continue to breathe with the aid of a respirator until she experienced pulmonary or cardiac failure.
There are three parties to this matter: the guardian ad litem; DSS; and the judge of the District Court, whose motion to be designated a nominal party was allowed.
Resort to G. L. c. 211, § 3, ordinarily is inappropriate where normal appellate review is available. See Planned Parenthood League of Mass., Inc. v. Operation Rescue, 406 Mass. 701, 706 (1990); Fogarty v. Commonwealth, 406 Mass. 103, 106-107 (1989). Because a substituted judgment order is an appealable judgment, normal appellate review will usually be appropriate, see, e.g., Brophy v. New England Sinai Hosp., Inc., 398 Mass. 417, 422 n.5 (1986); Guardianship of Doe, 411 Mass. 512, 515 (1991); an appellant may preserve his or her rights, where necessary, by requesting a stay pending appeal. This particular case, however, was reserved and reported pursuant to G. L. c. 211, § 3, in recognition of its importance and the fact that it is a case of first impression.
In a study conducted in two California hospitals, “the withholding or withdrawal of life support precipitated death in almost half of the patients who died in the [intensive care] units during the year of the study. . . . Do-not-resuscitate orders almost invariably preceded the withholding or withdrawal process.” Smedira et al., Withholding and Withdrawal of Life Support from the Critically 111, 322 N. Eng. J. Med. 309, 310 (1990).
A growing number of government institutions, medical societies and hospitals, in an effort to provide patient protection and uniform procedures, have promulgated internal guidelines regarding the entry of “no code” orders. These guidelines usually include a rebuttable presumption against seeking judicial authorization for “no code” orders. See, e.g., Limiting Life-Sustaining Treatment Policy, Yale New Haven Hospital (Feb. 27, 1991) 3; Guidelines for Withholding, Withdrawing or Limiting Life-Sustaining Treatment, Including Resuscitation, Beth Israel Hospital (Sept. 1991) 3; Guidelines for Do Not Resuscitate Orders, Children’s Hospital, 104.
Nobody disputes that the child is incompetent and that a substituted judgment decision was necessary in this case.
We have noted that, in cases like this one involving incompetent children, “the substituted judgment doctrine is consistent with the ‘best interests of the child’ test. It is true that, when applying the ‘best interests’ test, the inquiry is essentially objective in nature, and the decisions are made not by, but on behalf of, the child. . . . Nevertheless, the best interests analysis, like that of the substituted judgment doctrine, requires a court to focus on the various factors unique to the situation of the individual for whom it must act. ... As a practical matter, the criteria to be examined and the basic applicable reasoning are the same.” (Citation omitted.) Custody of a Minor (No. 1), 385 Mass. 697, 710 n.10 (1982), quoting Custody of a Minor, 375 Mass. 733, 753 (1978).
The judge did not address two other State interests, the protection of innocent third parties and prevention of suicide, as they are not relevant to this case. See Doe, supra at 522. The guardian does not contest the fact that these considerations are irrelevant.
We have said that the impact on the ward’s family “is primarily relevant when the patient is part of a closely knit family.” Rogers v. Commissioner of the Dep’t of Mental Health, 390 Mass. 489, 505 (1983), citing Roe, supra at 446.
Resuscitation techniques are described in Dinnerstein, supra at 468: “Such efforts typically involve the use of cardiac massage or chest compression and delivery of oxygen under compression through an endotracheal tube into the lungs. An electrocardiogram is connected to guide the efforts of the resuscitation team and to monitor the patient’s progress. Various plastic tubes are usually inserted intravenously to supply medications or stimulants directly to the heart. Such medications may also be supplied by direct injection into the heart by means of a long needle. A defibrillator may be used, applying electric shock to the heart to induce contractions. A pacemaker, in the form of an electrical conducting wire, may be fed through a large blood vessel directly to the heart’s surface to stimulate contractions and to regulate beat.”
The judge also found that “there exists a high probability of adverse neurological effects and serious brain damage, were the infant subjected to the vigors of a full-code treatment.” This finding is not supported by the evidence. It is not crucial to the judge’s substituted judgment determination.
The guardian advances as another reason for opposing the “no code” order that “the treatments will keep her alive indefinitely so that should medical advances occur, however unlikely that may at present appear to be, she will be here to take advantage of them.” We reject this argument. By this logic, we must mechanically maintain with respirators and ventilators all people whom current medicine classifies as dead, in the hope that one day medical treatment will become available to remedy their condition. We note that the guardian’s suggestion is inconsistent with current medical practice. See guidelines cited in note 9, supra.

=== CASE 2225583 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:51.154096+00 ===

587 N.E.2d 4 (1992)
224 Ill. App. 3d 674
167 Ill. Dec. 122
Kenneth R. HOKE and Annetta K. Hoke, Plaintiffs-Appellees,
v.
Melvin D. BECK and Carol J. Beck, Defendants-Appellants.
No. 3-91-0106.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Third District.
January 10, 1992.
Rehearing Denied March 6, 1992.
*5 Stanley L. Tucker, Hartzell, Glidden, Tucker & Hartzell, Carthage (argued), for Melvin D. and Carol J. Beck.
Jim D. Lucie, Lucie & Carper, Macomb (argued), for Kenneth Ross and Annetta Kay Hoke.
Justice HAASE delivered the opinion of the Court.
The plaintiffs, Kenneth and Annetta Hoke, brought this action against the defendants, Melvin and Carol Beck, for damages because of defects in a house sold to them by the defendants. The third amended complaint set out two counts. The first alleged that the defendants failed to disclose defective conditions of the house in violation of the Consumer Fraud and Deceptive Business Practices Act (Consumer Fraud Act) (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 121½, par. 261 et seq.). The second alleged that the defendants had breached a warranty of habitability implied in the sale of the house. Following a bench trial, the trial court entered judgment for the plaintiffs on both counts, awarding them $7,600 in damages and $6,017.30 in attorney fees. Thereafter, the court denied the defendants' post-trial motion. The defendants appeal.
Count I of the plaintiffs' complaint alleged that the defendants, as builder-vendors for the purposes of the Consumer Fraud Act, knew or should have known of the following defects and failed to disclose them: (1) that pipes to the master shower leaked causing damage to the wall, baseboard and floor; (2) that the window trim was improperly installed; (3) that a severe moisture problem existed under the house causing odor and damage to the floor and foundation; (4) that the garage was not completely insulated as stated by the defendants; (5) that two electrical outlets did not work; (6) that overhang was rotten and a section of siding was undone; (7) that the plumbing was improperly installed causing continuous sewer gas smell; (8) that the furnace was improperly installed in numerous ways; (9) that shingles on the roof were not properly affixed; (10) that the crawl space was improperly installed; (11) that joist braces were not installed; (12) that the garage door headers were not properly built; (13) that the utility room *6 roof and floor were not level; and, (14) that vents were not securely fastened.
Count II of the plaintiffs' complaint alleged that the defendants, as builder-vendors of a commercial nature, breached the implied warranty of habitability as a result of the above-described defects.
Melvin Beck testified that he was not a construction contractor and had never built a house by himself, but he did have a hand in the construction of several houses. From 1969 through 1982, he had five homes built. He and his wife lived in each of them for about two years before selling them. The first house was built in 1969 and sold in 1971. At the time the first house was sold, construction on a second house had begun. The Becks lived in the second house until they had a third house built next door in 1973. The Becks sold the third house in late 1976 or early 1977. The Becks then had a fourth house constructed adjacent to the two previous new homes. The Becks sold the fourth house in 1979. In November of 1981, construction was begun on the Becks' fifth house, which is the subject of this lawsuit.
Melvin stated that he performed various tasks in the construction of the homes such as carpentry work, painting and clean up work, common labor, and installation of the plumbing and furnace. He noted that he did not have any written contracts with the carpenters, but paid them on an hourly basis. He also stated that his wife kept the financial books and they both paid the bills for the supplies and materials.
Regarding the house in question, Melvin testified that the house was located across the street from his mother's house and he did not intend to sell it. He only decided to sell it after suffering a significant financial reversal. He worked on the crawl space, installed the plumbing and heating systems, and helped with the carpentry work. He knew there was a moisture problem in the crawl space area when the house was constructed. According to Melvin, he told the Hokes that he had fixed the water problem, but if it was not fixed, they would have to pump it out with a new sump pump he would give them. Melvin further stated that he had told the Hokes that the garage was insulated and that the best of everything was used in the house.
The Becks' tax returns introduced into evidence indicated that they filed a Schedule D form and a 2119 form with the IRS only in 1978. A 2119 form is apparently required for the sale of a personal residence.
Tom Leach, an engineer and licensed plumber, testified that he examined the plaintiffs' furnace on February 12, 1986. In so doing, he smelled carbon monoxide fumes and observed numerous problems with the way the furnace was installed. He called the gas company and had the gas shut off. He advised the Hokes to vacate the premises. Leach further testified that the plumbing system violated several state plumbing laws.
Herb Bozard, a carpenter-builder, testified that various portions of the house did not meet general industry standards. He noted that the use of visqueen and limestone rock in the crawl space was improper and created additional water problems.
Annetta Hoke testified that Carol Beck approached her regarding the purchase of the house in question. One week later, Melvin Beck showed her the house and told her that he had installed the furnace and plumbing. He also told her that he had built other homes with the help of other people such as his son-in-law and Steve Coatsenberg. According to Annetta, Melvin further stated to her that he guaranteed that the crawl space would be dry and that the most water they would have would be a quart. Melvin also represented to her that the garage was insulated.
Kenneth Hoke testified that both of the Becks showed him the house on two occasions. During that time, Melvin told Kenneth and his wife that the house was the best quality and that it was the best house he had ever built. After they purchased the house, the Hokes noticed that an odor emanated from their crawl space. They eventually determined that the crawl space was very wet. Kenneth also testified regarding various other problems with the construction of the house.
*7 The plaintiffs' attorney, Jim Lucie, testified that he worked 71.6 hours at $75 per hour, which was a reasonable rate in the area. He introduced into evidence an itemized bill showing dates and times that he rendered services for the plaintiffs.
At the outset, the defendants argue on appeal that the trial court improperly found defendant Carol Beck liable.
We agree. There was no evidence establishing that Carol was a builder-vendor or that she made any misrepresentations in violation of the Consumer Fraud Act. In our opinion, Carol Beck had an ownership interest in the property but was not a builder-vendor either for purposes of the warranty of habitability or for the purposes of the Consumer Fraud Act. Accordingly, we reverse the court's judgment pertaining to Carol.
Defendant Melvin Beck next argues that he was not a builder-vendor for the purposes of the implied warranty of habitability. He asserts that he was not a builder-vendor because he did not intend to sell the house in question and that his course of conduct in having other homes built over the years was very attenuated.
The warranty of habitability is a creature of public policy to protect purchasers of new houses when latent defects are discovered. (Petersen v. Hubschman Construction Co. (1979), 76 Ill. 2d 31, 27 Ill. Dec. 746, 389 N.E.2d 1154.) The Supreme Court in Petersen noted that the primary reason for the warranty is "because of the unusual dependent relationship of the vendee to the vendor." (Petersen (1979), 76 Ill. 2d 31, 41, 27 Ill. Dec. 746, 750, 389 N.E.2d 1154, 1158.) In many cases, the purchase of a home is the most important investment of a lifetime and it would be unjust to apply the rule of caveat emptor to an inexperienced home buyer in favor of a builder who is in the business of building and selling homes. (Hefler v. Wright (1984), 121 Ill.App.3d 739, 77 Ill. Dec. 259, 460 N.E.2d 118.) Such a vendee is usually not knowledgeable in construction practices and, to a substantial degree, must rely upon the integrity and skill of the builder-vendor. (Petersen (1979), 76 Ill. 2d 31, 27 Ill. Dec. 746, 389 N.E.2d 1154.) In defining the scope of the warranty, it has been found that the house must be reasonably suited for its intended use and not simply inhabitable. Redarowicz v. Ohlendorf (1982), 92 Ill. 2d 171, 65 Ill. Dec. 411, 441 N.E.2d 324.
Since Petersen, the warranty of habitability has been applied in a broad fashion to protect home buyers. In Park v. Sohn (1982), 89 Ill. 2d 453, 60 Ill. Dec. 609, 433 N.E.2d 651, the Illinois Supreme Court defined a builder-vendor as one who is engaged in the business of building, so that the sale is of a commercial nature, rather than a casual personal one. The court noted, however, that the "commercial" requirement does not demand that the builder-vendor have a long and extensive experience in the construction industry. Liability was found to exist in Park despite the defendant's arguments that the dwelling was only the second one he had constructed and that the house was not "new" because he had lived in it for a short time.
Applying the principles of the above-mentioned cases, we reject Melvin's argument that the trial court erred in finding that he was a builder-vendor. Whether a defendant is a builder-vendor for the purposes of the warranty is a question of fact to be determined on a case-to-case basis. (See Park v. Sohn (1982), 89 Ill. 2d 453, 60 Ill. Dec. 609, 433 N.E.2d 651.) Here, the trial court had before it sufficient evidence from which it could conclude that the sale was of a commercial nature. The record shows that Melvin built five homes in a 13 year period. In so doing, he operated as a general contractor subcontracting for much of the work. He paid the subcontractors on an hourly basis. As time progressed, he personally did more and more of the work on the homes himself. Moreover, he did not claim the sale of any of the five homes as the sale of a personal residence for federal income tax purposes. While these sets of facts do not necessarily mandate a finding that Melvin was a builder-vendor, the trial court here specifically found that he was operating a business for profit in his sale of the homes. We are unable to *8 say that the court's determination was erroneous.
Melvin claimed that he did not initially intend to sell the house. The trial court, however, as the judge of the credibility of the witnesses, was not obligated to accept his contention. Under the circumstances, the court could properly conclude that the sale was of a commercial nature rather than a strictly personal and casual one.
Having determined that Melvin was a builder-vendor for the purposes of the implied warranty of habitability, we now turn to Melvin's contention regarding Count I of the plaintiff's complaint which alleged a violation of the Consumer Fraud Act. He argues that the trial court's determination that he made misrepresentations in the sale of the house was against the manifest weight of the evidence because the defects were unknown to him.
We disagree. We note that the Consumer Fraud Act should be liberally construed to effect its purposes. (Warren v. LeMay (1986), 142 Ill.App.3d 550, 96 Ill. Dec. 418, 491 N.E.2d 464.) Under the Act, the plaintiff must show: (1) a deceptive act or practice; (2) an intent by the defendant that he rely on the deception; and (3) the deception occurred in the course of conduct involving trade or commerce. (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 121½, par. 262.) The "intent" required by the statute is only the intent that the plaintiff in the primary action rely on the information that the defendant gave him, as opposed to any intent on the defendant's part to deceive. Village of Carl Sandburg v. First Condo Developers (1990), 197 Ill.App.3d 948, 145 Ill. Dec. 476, 557 N.E.2d 246.
Here, we find that the evidence was sufficient to show that Melvin violated the Act. Melvin clearly misrepresented the amount of water that would be in the crawl space and whether the garage was fully insulated. The plaintiff was not required to show by direct proof that Melvin knew that these representations were false. The defendant's knowledge of the falsity could be inferred from the circumstantial evidence. Moreover, we note that a representation made in culpable ignorance of its truth or falsity is fraudulent for the purposes of the Act. Crowder v. Bob Oberling Enterprises (1986), 148 Ill.App.3d 313, 101 Ill. Dec. 748, 499 N.E.2d 115.
Melvin next argues that the trial court's judgment should be reversed because the plaintiffs were required to prove their cause of action under the Act by clear and convincing evidence.
Melvin concedes that the courts appear to have assumed that the standard of proof under the Act is a preponderance of the evidence and that the question of which standard of proof applies has not been raised before on appeal. We find it unnecessary, however, to reach the issue, since the record shows that the plaintiffs proved their cause of action by clear and convincing evidence.
Lastly, Melvin contends that the evidence was insufficient to support the trial court's award of attorney fees.
In Kleidon v. Rizza Chevrolet, Inc. (1988), 173 Ill.App.3d 116, 122 Ill. Dec. 876, 527 N.E.2d 374, the court reversed a trial court's award of attorney fees and remanded the cause, directing that the trial court, before determining the proper award, consider the novelty and difficulty of the question involved, the experience and ability of the plaintiffs' counsel, the skill necessary to perform the legal services rendered, and the benefits resulting to the plaintiffs. In the case at bar, the record does not reveal that the trial court considered the factors set forth in Kleidon. Furthermore, it does not appear that the trial court made an attempt to apportion the award of attorney fees between the Consumer Fraud Act count in Count I and the Implied Warranty of Habitability count in Count II. Under section 10a(c) of the Consumer Fraud Act (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 121½, par. 270a(c)), the court may award reasonable attorney fees to the prevailing party. However, the plaintiffs are not entitled to an award of attorney fees for the Implied Warranty of Habitability. Accordingly, we vacate the attorney fees awarded and remand this cause for further proceedings consistent with Kleidon and also for the court to *9 make an apportionment of the attorney fees between those which relate to the Consumer Fraud count and those which relate to the Implied Warranty of Habitability count.
The judgment of the circuit court of McDonough County pertaining to both the award of attorney fees and the liability of Carol Beck is reversed. The cause is remanded for further proceedings consistent with Kleidon. The remainder of the court's judgment is affirmed.
Affirmed in part; reversed in part and remanded with directions.
GORMAN and STOUDER, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2225588 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:51.274896+00 ===

343 Mich. 334 (1955)
72 N.W.2d 60
MACKLEM
v.
WARREN CONSTRUCTION COMPANY.
Docket No. 43, Calendar No. 46,538.
Supreme Court of Michigan.
Decided October 3, 1955.
David M. Miro, for plaintiff.
Tilden M. Gallagher, for defendant.
BUTZEL, J.
Avery C. Macklem, plaintiff, brought suit against the Warren Construction Company, a Michigan corporation, for specific performance of a verbal agreement which he alleged provided for a 30-day extension of the redemption period of 1 year after a foreclosure of a mortgage by advertisement.
For some years plaintiff owned a 2-family flat centrally located in the city of Detroit. He had received a deed to the property from one of his parents who had previously owned it for a considerable *336 length of time. He occupied the upper flat with his 91-year-old mother and rented the lower flat for $80 per month. There was a mortgage of some $750 on the property. It appears that plaintiff failed to pay the interest on the mortgage for many years and the mortgage was in default, so that the amount bid in at the sale by defendant was $1,405.21 which was sufficient to fully pay the amount due. In addition, plaintiff failed to pay taxes aggregating $1,396.25 which defendant has also paid. It is stipulated by the parties that the property is worth $15,000.
The mortgage was foreclosed and the 1-year equity of redemption expired on October 10, 1953. However, plaintiff claims in his sworn bill of complaint as well as in his testimony that on or about October 2, 1953, he called Vincent Lukas, president of the defendant company, and asked him for a 30-day extension of the redemption period during which he could make arrangements to pay the amount necessary to redeem including taxes paid by defendant. This amounted in toto to $3,004.85, including interest to the date of tender. Plaintiff claims that Lukas agreed to such an extension and on October 26, 1953, plaintiff deposited with the county clerk the amount necessary to redeem the property. Lukas absolutely denied that there was a telephone call and the agreement.
Was there or was there not such an agreement? Who is telling the truth? This is the sole question in this case, and it was answered in defendant's favor by the court below.
In reaching a conclusion all of the testimony and surrounding circumstances must be considered. Both plaintiff and Lukas were experienced in the real estate field, particularly in regard to foreclosures. Plaintiff is a real-estate broker and for some 8 years was employed in the State land office board in charge *337 of collections and foreclosures. He claims that he knew Lukas because the latter had bought considerable property through the State land office board and had appeared before plaintiff a number of times. Lukas, an attorney, first said that his sole contact was with the auctioneer, and then only upon a few occasions, but in later testimony extended the number of times to 2 or 3 dozen and finally stated he had bought some 300 lots in all. Of course, there might have been a large number of lots sold as 1 or more parcels.
Plaintiff undoubtedly knew what his rights were. He found out by examining the records that defendant had purchased the property at the foreclosure sale, the regularity of which is not questioned. Early in the redemption period he made arrangements to refinance the mortgage but apparently he never followed through. He testified that during the period of the alleged extension of time he borrowed $2,000 from one Harold McGregor which, in addition to $1,000 of his own, was sufficient to pay the amount required. This, however, was not entirely consistent with the testimony of plaintiff's witness, one Harry Rott. Rott testified that he advanced the $3,000 which was paid into court and that plaintiff did not pay it because the McGregor loan was to have been repaid in 30 days. Just what plaintiff did in regard to the $1,000 he testified he had is not shown by the record. Rott also testified that he was present on one occasion when Lukas appeared before the State land office arbitration board of which plaintiff was a member, and that it was exceedingly improbable that Lukas did not recognize plaintiff or had not seen him prior to this litigation. Rott further testified as to a phone conversation with Lukas on October 23, 1953, regarding this whole matter. There was some question as to how Lukas' phone number was ascertained on that occasion. Rott was apparently mistaken *338 insofar as he testified that he obtained it from the phone directory, at least under the name he claimed he knew Victor Lukas by.
Lukas claimed that at the time of the alleged agreement over the telephone he was not at his office and had not been there the entire week; that defendant was moving its offices to a larger space in the same building that previous summer and, because of the limited space in the temporary quarters occupied that summer, he had taken his books and files home and had not yet returned them at the time of the alleged extension agreement; that consequently, having been notified that an income tax examiner would come to examine his returns, he had remained home to review his records and files. He thus claims that he was away from his office for a week at the time the alleged conversation and agreement took place.
It would seem improbable that a person with a large business would remain incommunicado from his office for an entire week when he was at home in the city. He could have corroborated such vital testimony by someone from his office or home, or the income tax examiner, but did not see fit to do so. Plaintiff cites us to the rule that failure to produce evidence within a party's control raises a presumption or inference that if produced it would operate against him. See e.g., Brandt v. C.F. Smith & Co., 242 Mich. 217; Leeds v. Masha, 328 Mich. 137; Gibbons v. Delta Contracting Co., 301 Mich. 638; Griggs v. Saginaw & Flint Railway Co., 196 Mich. 258. However, we have also stated in Cole v. Lake Shore & Michigan Southern R. Co., 81 Mich. 156, 161, 162:
"But the mere omission of a party to call a witness, other than the party himself, who might with equal propriety have been called by the other party, is no ground for a presumption that the testimony of the witness would have been unfavorable."
*339 Without discussing the specific applicability of these rules to a case such as this where the evidence not produced would have been corroborative, it is evident that even if applied to these facts, merely an inference of fact results in favor of the plaintiff. It does not, in and of itself, justify a reversal of the finding made by the court below that the plaintiff "failed to meet the burden of proof showing any extension whatsoever of the statutory period of redemption from foreclosure of the mortgage involved herein."
While such verbal extensions are not within the statute of frauds and thus are enforceable, Moore v. Muskegon Trust Co., 286 Mich. 21, they must be established by a preponderance of the evidence and a plaintiff's inattention and indifference to his rights weighs against him. See Chauvin v. American State Bank, 242 Mich. 269; Markoff v. Tournier, 229 Mich. 571. We review a chancery case de novo but cannot in this instance substitute our judgment for that of the trial judge who heard and saw the witnesses. This is especially so in a case such as this where the issue is basically one of credibility, and as the judge found, plaintiff and his witness made statements that were at best doubtful.
Plaintiff asks that we grant relief because of the inadequacy of the bid price in relation to the stipulated worth of the dwelling. We have held that inadequacy of price alone will not vitiate an otherwise fair and regular statutory foreclosure sale. Carlisle v. Dunlap, 203 Mich. 602; Cameron v. Adams, 31 Mich. 426; Moss v. Keary, 231 Mich. 295; Blackwood v. Sakwinski, 221 Mich. 464 (29 A.L.R. 1314); Postal v. Home State Bank for Savings, 284 Mich. 220; Guardian Depositors Corp. v. Keller, 286 Mich. 403. We have apparently relaxed this rule in cases where the foreclosure was by decree rather than by statutory advertisement. Michigan Trust Co. v. *340 Cody, 264 Mich. 258; Cameron v. Adams, supra; see Gilbert v. Haire, 43 Mich. 283. The foreclosure in this case was by advertisement.
We are sympathetic with the plight of the plaintiff and his aged mother in this needless loss of their home through the harsh and almost cruel insistence of defendant upon his bargain. However, as the court found after seeing and hearing the witnesses, plaintiff has not sustained the burden of proof.
We are constrained to follow the law as cited and must affirm the judgment of the court below dismissing plaintiff's bill of complaint. On account of the nature of this case, we award no costs.
CARR, C.J., and SMITH, SHARPE, BOYLES, REID, DETHMERS, and KELLY, JJ., concurred.

=== CASE 3027425 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2015-10-13 22:38:13.938456+00 ===

Opinions of the United
2007 Decisions                                                                                                             States Court of Appeals
for the Third Circuit
6-29-2007
USA v. Mota-Herrera
Precedential or Non-Precedential: Non-Precedential
Docket No. 06-2904
Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.law.villanova.edu/thirdcircuit_2007
Recommended Citation
"USA v. Mota-Herrera" (2007). 2007 Decisions. Paper 858.
http://digitalcommons.law.villanova.edu/thirdcircuit_2007/858
This decision is brought to you for free and open access by the Opinions of the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit at Villanova
University School of Law Digital Repository. It has been accepted for inclusion in 2007 Decisions by an authorized administrator of Villanova
University School of Law Digital Repository. For more information, please contact Benjamin.Carlson@law.villanova.edu.
NOT PRECEDENTIAL
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE THIRD CIRCUIT
____________
No. 06-2904
____________
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
v.
ROBERTO MOTA-HERRERA,
Appellant
____________
On Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Middle District of Pennsylvania
(D.C. No. 05-cr-00413-2)
District Judge: Honorable William W. Caldwell
____________
Submitted Under Third Circuit LAR 34.1(a)
June 18, 2007
Before: McKEE, FISHER and CHAGARES, Circuit Judges.
(Filed: June 29, 2007)
____________
OPINION OF THE COURT
____________
FISHER, Circuit Judge.
Pursuant to a plea agreement on March 8, 2006, Appellant Roberto Mota-Herrera,
pleaded guilty to conspiracy to distribute and possession with intent to distribute cocaine
hydrochloride, in violation of 21 U.S.C. § 846. The District Court sentenced Appellant to
81 months in prison, and he timely appealed. Appellant’s Counsel now requests leave to
withdraw and has filed a brief pursuant to Anders v. California, 386 U.S. 738 (1967),
asserting that there are no nonfrivolous issues to appeal. We will grant Counsel’s Anders
motion and affirm the District Court’s judgment of sentence.
I.
As we write only for the parties who are familiar with the factual context and
procedural history of the case, we will set forth only those facts necessary to our analysis.
In October 2005, a grand jury returned a two-count indictment against Appellant and his
co-defendants. Specifically, Count I charged Appellant with conspiracy to distribute and
possession with intent to distribute in excess of 100 kilograms of cocaine hydrochloride
and Count II consisted of a forfeiture count. Pursuant to a written plea agreement,
Appellant pleaded guilty to Count I and waived his right to appeal any conviction or
sentence on the grounds set forth in 18 U.S.C. § 3742, or on any other constitutional
grounds. In return, Appellant was not required to admit the amount of cocaine in the
transaction and, if warranted, the Government agreed to recommend a three-level
reduction under the United States Sentencing Guidelines (“Guidelines”) for acceptance of
responsibility.
Neither party objected to the Pre-Sentence Report (“PSR”) which calculated
Appellant’s base offense level to be 36. In accordance with the plea agreement, the
Government moved for a downward departure, requesting a two-level reduction under the
safety valve provision and a three-level reduction for acceptance of responsibility. The
2
Government’s motion was granted and the offense level was adjusted to 31. A base
offense level of 31 and a criminal history category of I yield an advisory Guidelines range
of 108-135 months. Subsequently, the District Court sentenced Appellant to 81 months
imprisonment and his co-defendants to 48 months and 65 months, respectively.
Appellant filed a timely appeal, but his Counsel now moves to withdraw pursuant to
Anders. Appellant submitted a pro se brief claiming that in addition to being
unreasonable, the District Court’s sentence violated his Eighth Amendment right to be
free from cruel and unusual punishment. We exercise jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. §
1291 and 18 U.S.C. § 3742(a).1
II.
In Anders v. California, the Supreme Court held that if counsel “finds [an appeal]
to be wholly frivolous, after a conscientious examination” of the record, he should “so
1
In its brief, the Government argued that we do not have jurisdiction over this
appeal because Appellant signed a plea agreement waiving his right to appeal. However,
in our recent decision in United States v. Gwinnett, 483 F.3d 200 (3d Cir. 2007), we
explained that we do have jurisdiction over appeals even where, as here, the defendant
has waived his right to appeal. Id. at 203 (“This Court has both statutory and
constitutional subject matter jurisdiction over appeals when a criminal defendant has
waived his appellate rights in an enforceable plea agreement.”). Nonetheless, we held
that “we will not exercise that jurisdiction to review the merits of [such an appeal] if we
conclude that [the defendant] knowingly and voluntarily waived h[is] right to appeal
unless the result would work a miscarriage of justice.” Id. As the instant case was filed
prior to our opinion in Gwinnett, however, neither Defense Counsel nor the Government
has briefed the issue of whether the waiver here was knowing and voluntary. Thus,
although a review of the record does not raise any concerns regarding the knowing and
voluntary nature of Appellant’s waiver, we choose in this instance to look to the merits of
the possible claims Appellant might have on appeal.
3
advise the court and request permission to withdraw.” 386 U.S. at 744; see also United
States v. Youla, 241 F.3d 296, 299 (3d Cir. 2001). Counsel is required to examine the
record and submit a brief addressing any issues that arguably support the appeal. Anders,
386 U.S. at 744; L.A.R. 109.2(a).2 In the brief, counsel must “satisfy the court that he or
she has thoroughly scoured the record in search of appealable issues” and must also
“explain . . . why the issues are frivolous.” United States v. Marvin, 211 F.3d 778, 780-
81 (3d Cir. 2000). We must then must make a two-part inquiry asking: “(1) whether
counsel adequately fulfilled the requirements [of Rule 109.2(a)] and (2) whether an
independent review of the record presents any nonfrivolous issues.” Youla, 241 F.3d at
300 (internal citation omitted).
A.
To comply with the first part of a Rule 109.2(a) inquiry, the Court must be
satisfied that “counsel has thoroughly examined the record in search of appealable issues,
and . . . [has] explain[ed] why the issues are frivolous.” Id. In his brief, Counsel
addressed two possible issues: (1) whether the Guidelines calculation was correct and
(2) whether Appellant’s sentence was unreasonable under 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a). Counsel
also explained why the issues raised are frivolous and submitted an appendix containing
2
L.A.R. 109.2(a) provides that “[w]here upon review of the district court record,
trial counsel is persuaded that the appeal presents no issue of even arguable merit, trial
counsel may file a motion to withdraw and supporting brief pursuant to Anders v.
California, 386 U.S. 738 [] (1967), which shall be served upon appellant and the United
States.” Id.
4
the relevant portions of the record. After reviewing Counsel’s brief and the
accompanying materials, we conclude that he has satisfied the requirements of Rule
109.2(a).
B.
After concluding that counsel has satisfied the requirements of Rule 109.2(a), we
must independently review the record and determine whether any nonfrivolous issues
exist for purposes of the appeal. An appeal is frivolous as a matter of law where “none of
the legal points [are] arguable on their merits.” Neitzke v. Williams, 490 U.S. 319, 325
(1989). Pursuant to Youla, “where an Anders brief initially appears adequate on its face,
the proper course is for the appellate court to be guided in reviewing the record by the
Anders brief itself.” 241 F.3d at 301 (internal quotation marks and citations omitted). A
“complete scouring of the record” is unnecessary. Id. Here, we have determined that
Counsel’s Anders brief is adequate on its face and thus, we are guided by that brief.
In his brief, Counsel raises the Guidelines calculation of Appellant’s base offense
level as a possible issue. However, he also demonstrates that the challenge lacks merit
because there is no evidence to suggest that Appellant’s base offense level was
improperly calculated by the District Court. The record shows Appellant received a five-
level downward departure from his original base offense level of 36, receiving instead an
adjusted offense level of 31. This level was calculated using the PSR, to which Appellant
never objected.
5
The argument that Appellant’s sentence was unreasonable pursuant to United
States v. Booker, 543 U.S. 220 (2005), also lacks merit because the District Court
adequately considered the 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a) factors in its determination of Appellant’s
sentence. See United States v. Cooper, 437 F.3d 324, 329 (3d Cir. 2006). Appellant
argues that his sentence is unreasonable because of the disparity between his sentence and
the sentences of his co-defendants. This claim is without merit as the District Court did
consider the disparity in the sentences, but explained that the disparity was warranted
because of Appellant’s major role in the offense as opposed to the minor roles played by
his co-defendants. As the District Court gave meaningful consideration to the factors
under 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a), including the disparity in sentencing between the co-
defendants, we find the sentence to be reasonable.
Appellant further argues that the sentence violates his Eighth Amendment right to
be free from cruel and unusual punishment. A sentence of 81 months imprisonment for
engaging in a conspiracy to distribute and possess cocaine is not “so grossly out of
proportion to the severity of the crime” as to shock the conscience of the court. See
United States v. Washington, 578 F.2d 256, 259 (9th Cir. 1978) (internal citation
omitted). Therefore, Appellant’s Eighth Amendment claim is also without merit. After
our independent review, this Court finds itself in agreement with Counsel that there are
no nonfrivolous issues for appeal.
III.
6
Accordingly, we will affirm the District Court’s judgment of sentence and grant
counsel’s motion to withdraw.3
3
As a result, we conclude that it is not necessary to appoint counsel to file a
petition for rehearing in this Court or a petition for writ of certiorari in the United States
Supreme Court on Mota-Herrera’s behalf. See L.A.R. 109.2(b).
7

=== CASE 2225592 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:51.351248+00 ===

587 N.E.2d 1320 (1992)
Betty J. BABCOCK, Appellant-Plaintiff,
v.
LAFAYETTE HOME HOSPITAL, Woman's Clinic and Jean Carter, M.D., Appellees-Defendants.
No. 79A02-9004-CV-209.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, Second District.
January 22, 1992.
Publication Ordered March 10, 1992.
*1322 Lisa V. Schrader, Mathew S. Sandy, Heide Sandy Deets Kennedy Schrader & Antalis, Lafayette, for appellant-plaintiff.
Steven J. Cohen, Edna M. Koch, Tipton Cohen & Koch, Indianapolis, Larry R. Fisher, Susan K. Holtberg, Stuart & Branigin, Lafayette, for Lafayette Home Hosp.
SHIELDS, Judge.
Betty J. Babcock appeals the trial court's grant of summary judgment in favor of Lafayette Home Hospital, Woman's Clinic, and Jean Carter, M.D. (health providers).
We affirm.
ISSUES
1. Whether the doctrine of continuing wrong renders this action timely.
2. Whether health providers are estopped from asserting the statute of limitations defense due to the doctrine of fraudulent concealment.
3. Whether IC 16-9.5-3-1 violates the equal protection clauses of the United States and Indiana Constitutions.
FACTS
In March 1986 Babcock was admitted to Lafayette Home Hospital (Hospital) after seeking treatment at the emergency room. Dr. Jean Carter, who was associated with Clinic, performed a hysterectomy on Babcock on March 10, 1986.[1] She performed a second surgical procedure on Babcock the next day due to complications arising from the first operation. Chest x-rays taken on March 12 showed an unexplained pocket of gas or air, known as a "right partial, simple apical pneumothorax." Record at 87. When Babcock was discharged from Hospital on March 17, 1986, Carter told Babcock there would be things she would not be able to eat such as spicy foods, but said that otherwise she would be alright. Carter examined Babcock in Carter's office on April 14, 1986, after which Carter informed Babcock she was recovering well but might continue to experience symptoms of an upset stomach and be unable to eat spicy foods, normal circumstances following a hysterectomy. Carter told Babcock to contact her if she began experiencing problems related to the operations. Babcock did not return to Carter for any further treatment or examination. In July 1986 Carter moved to North Carolina.
Approximately four to five months after the hysterectomy, Babcock began to feel "sick all the time." Supplemental Record at 42. She stated she felt bloated and nauseated and used Pepto-Bismol every day until December of 1988.
In May 1988 Babcock sought treatment for a backache from Dr. Broadar, a chiropractor. Broadar informed Babcock that x-rays revealed an object may have been left in her body cavity from the hysterectomy. Babcock's only response to the information was to sign a release for Broadar to examine her previous health records.
In September 1988 Babcock consulted Dr. Eldon Baker for treatment of "a vaginal gynecological itch." Supplemental Record at 38. On December 13, 1988, she was seen by a Hospital emergency room physician for the same problem. At that time, an x-ray revealed a ribbon-like opacity projected over the upper pelvic region. Babcock was referred to Dr. W.G. Mentzer who removed a sponge from Babcock's pelvis on January 17, 1989.
Babcock filed a proposed complaint with the Indiana Department of Insurance on *1323 June 1, 1989, more than three years after the two operations performed by Carter. Hospital, Clinic, and Carter, the named defendants, filed motions for summary judgment which the trial court granted because Babcock had not filed her complaint within the two-year statute of limitations. Babcock appeals.
DISCUSSION
In reviewing a trial court's ruling on a motion for summary judgment, we apply the same standard as the trial court. Summary judgment is appropriate only if there is no genuine issue of material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Smith v. Methodist Hospital of Indiana, Inc. (1991), Ind. App., 569 N.E.2d 743, 745. We will affirm the grant of summary judgment on any theory sustainable in the record. Id.
The relevant statute of limitations provides "[n]o claim ... may be brought against a health care provider based upon professional services or health care rendered or that should have been rendered unless filed within two (2) years from the date of the alleged act, omission, or neglect... ." IC 16-9.5-3-1 (1988). Indiana courts have repeatedly described this statute as an "occurrence" statute rather than a "discovery" statute, that is, the two-year period begins to run at the occurrence of the negligence as opposed to the discovery of the negligence. Ferrell v. Geisler (1987), Ind. App., 505 N.E.2d 137, 139.
I.
Babcock claims her action is timely under the doctrine of continuing wrong. The doctrine of continuing wrong applies where an entire course of conduct combines to produce an injury. Cyrus v. Nero (1989), Ind. App., 546 N.E.2d 328, 331. When certain conduct is determined to constitute a continuing wrong, the statute of limitations does not commence running until the wrongful act ceases. Havens v. Ritchey (1991), Ind., 582 N.E.2d 792, 795.
Babcock argues "the defendants' failure to remove all foreign objects and leaving a surgical sponge in the plaintiff's body for nearly three (3) years constitutes a continuing wrong. Further, the failure to diagnose this wrong, especially after x-rays demonstrate something foreign remained in plaintiff's body, constitutes a continuing wrong." Appellant's Brief at 16.
The cases applying the doctrine of continuing wrong establish that the conduct that produces the injury must be of a continuing nature, not an isolated event. See, e.g., Ferrell, 505 N.E.2d 137 (involving the continuing failure of the physician to diagnose the plaintiff's breast cancer); Frady v. Hedgcock (1986), Ind. App., 497 N.E.2d 620 (involving the long-term prescription of medications). This case involves only the isolated events of leaving a surgical sponge in Babcock's pelvis and misreading a chest x-ray and is similar to the facts in Cyrus in which the court found a failed sterilization operation was an isolated incident and not a continuing wrong. 546 N.E.2d at 331. Thus, in light of existing case law, the trial court correctly determined the alleged malpractice that caused the injury was an isolated event and the doctrine of continuing wrong does not apply.
II.
Babcock also claims the doctrine of fraudulent concealment estops the health providers from asserting the statute of limitations as a defense.
The doctrine of fraudulent concealment estops a defendant from asserting a statute of limitations defense when the defendant has, either by deception or by a violation of a duty, concealed from the plaintiff material facts which prevent the plaintiff from discovering the malpractice. Cacdac v. Hiland (1990), Ind., 561 N.E.2d 758, 759; Hospital Corp. of America v. Hiland (1989), Ind. App., 547 N.E.2d 869, 873. Thus, equitable estoppel may arise either from active efforts to conceal the malpractice or from a failure to disclose material information when a fiduciary or confidential relationship exists between the physician and the patient. Id. Failure of the physician to disclose that which he or *1324 she knows, or in the exercise of reasonable care should have known, satisfies the conduct requirement and constitutes a constructive fraud. Id. The constructive fraud terminates, and, accordingly, the basis for the estoppel, when the physician-patient relationship terminates or when a patient learns of the malpractice or discovers information which would lead to the discovery of the malpractice through the exercise of reasonable diligence. Id. Fraudulent concealment thus "tolls" the running of the statute of limitations until either the physician-patient relationship ends or the patient discovers the malpractice or learns information which, in the exercise of reasonable diligence, would lead to discovery of the malpractice. Id.
Babcock asserts the health providers had a duty to disclose that a foreign substance was left in her body cavity as a result of the surgery, and their failure to do so estops health providers from raising the statute of limitations as a defense. Thus, Babcock relies upon that branch of fraudulent concealment arising from the breach of a duty to disclose material information rather than from any active concealment. The trial court's grant of judgment for Carter was correct on two alternative bases.
The physician-patient relationship between Carter and Babcock terminated, at the earliest, in April 1986, and at the latest in July 1986. Babcock's last visit to Carter for medical treatment was on April 14, 1986. Carter moved her practice from Indiana to North Carolina in July 1986. The record is totally devoid of any evidence of a continuing relationship between Babcock and Carter. Babcock's statement in her affidavit that she "considered ... Carter to be her gynecologist and would have contacted her had she had further problems which were gynecological in nature" is insufficient by itself. Record at 77-78. A patient's bare assertion he or she continued to rely upon a physician for medical treatment is insufficient as a matter of law to create a factual issue. Jones v. Cloyd (1989), Ind. App., 534 N.E.2d 257, 259. Furthermore, Babcock's actions belie her statement. Babcock consulted Dr. Baker for treatment of "a vaginal gynecological itch." Supplemental Record at 38. Thus, the trial court was correct in determining that, as a matter of law, the relationship between Babcock and Carter terminated no later than July 1986, and that Carter and Clinic were not estopped from asserting the statute of limitations as a defense.
Similarly, the relationship between Hospital and Babcock was not one of a continuing nature. The relationship was an isolated event which terminated upon Babcock's discharge from Hospital on March 17, 1986. Thus, any duty Hospital owed Babcock ended on March 17, 1986, and Hospital was not estopped from asserting the statute of limitations defense.
Alternatively, the trial court properly granted judgment for the health providers because Babcock did not use due diligence in initiating her action after discovering the alleged malpractice. The doctrine of fraudulent concealment does not provide a plaintiff two full years from the discovery of the alleged malpractice to file his or her claim. Id.
Where grounds exist for estopping a defendant from claiming the statute of limitations as a defense, estoppel will nevertheless be denied if the plaintiff fails to exercise due diligence in filing his claim after the equitable grounds cease to be operational as a valid basis for inducing the plaintiff's delay. A plaintiff should have a reasonable time within which to commence an action after the discovery of the malpractice.
Ferrell, 505 N.E.2d at 139. If the period between discovery and the date upon which the statute would ordinarily expire is relatively short, a factual question may be presented as to whether the remaining time was reasonable. Id.
In May 1988 Babcock was informed by Dr. Broadar that x-rays revealed an object might have been left in her body cavity from the hysterectomy. At that time Babcock "learn[ed] information which in the exercise of due diligence would lead to the discovery of the malpractice," Hospital Corp. of America, 547 N.E.2d at 873, and *1325 yet she did not file her proposed complaint until June 1, 1989, more than one year after learning the information and more than three years after the alleged malpractice. As a matter of law, this delay is not reasonable.
III.
Finally, Babcock claims the trial court's application of IC 16-9.5-3-1 violates the equal protection guarantees of the United States and Indiana Constitutions.[2] Claiming she is "a member of a class of citizens who are barred in pursuing their legal remedies despite the fact that they are unaware of the existence of their cause of action against a professional until after the two (2) year statute of limitations has run," Appellant's Brief at 17, Babcock argues the application of the two-year statute of limitations from the date of occurrence to all citizens is arbitrary and unreasonable because many people have no knowledge of the malpractice until more than two years after the malpractice occurred.
It is questionable whether Babcock belongs to the class of citizens she alleges is harmed by IC 16-9.5-3-1. Babcock's deposition testimony shows she began to experience medical problems four to five months after the hysterectomy. However, for the purpose of Babcock's argument, we assume she is a member of the class.
Courts have repeatedly upheld the constitutionality of IC 16-9.5-3-1 when the statute has been challenged on equal protection grounds. See Johnson v. St. Vincent Hospital, Inc., (1980), 273 Ind. 374, 404 N.E.2d 585 (time limitation and legal disability provisions of IC 16-9.5-3-1 bear a fair and substantial relationship to the legislative purposes of the act and do not violate the equal protection guarantees of the state and federal constitutions); Rohrabaugh v. Wagoner (1980), 274 Ind. 661, 413 N.E.2d 891 (reasonable basis exists for legislature to strengthen the statute of limitations in malpractice cases, and children between the ages of six and twenty-one and adults are similarly situated with regard to their ability to bring malpractice claims so as not to violate equal protection); Carmichael v. Silbert (1981), Ind. App., 422 N.E.2d 1330 (IC 16-9.5-3-1 does not violate equal protection merely because it treats medical malpractice victims differently than IC 34-1-2-2 treats general tort victims; such classifications are rationally related to the Medical Malpractice Act purposes and are not arbitrary or unreasonable); Douglas v. Hugh A. Stallings, M.D., Inc. (1989), 7th Cir., 870 F.2d 1242, 1248 (Medical Malpractice Act does not violate Equal Protection Clause merely because it treats minor plaintiffs with legal disabilities less favorably than under the general tolling statute by reducing the age of majority to six years and removing the indefinite tolling provision contained in the general statute of limitations for other legal disabilities; limits imposed by IC 16-9.5-3-1 are rationally related to the stated goals of preventing stale claims and controlling the cost of medical care). Statutes of limitations provide a desired order and finality to the litigation process. In addition to addressing the concerns of stale claims and loss of evidence over time that are common to all litigation, IC 16-9.5-3-1 evidences a policy determination that a particular need exists for a shorter than usual period in which malpractice claims must be commenced. IC 16-9.5-3-1 reduces the age of majority to six years, begins the limitations period with the occurrence of the injury rather than its discovery, and abandons the tolling periods for other legal disabilities. Douglas, 870 F.2d at 1248.
Creating a shorter period of limitations in which to commence actions against health care providers is clearly a rational legislative response to the fiscal uncertainties in the health care industry. The ability to commence an action at an indefinite time in the future would no doubt prevent insurance companies from accurately computing the actuarial risk of future claims and compound the escalation of medical costs.
Douglas, 870 F.2d at 1248. Although IC 16-9.5-3-1 may provide harsh results in some instances, the distinction it draws *1326 bears a rational relationship to legitimate state interests supporting the Medical Malpractice Act's statute of limitations and, therefore, survives Babcock's equal protection challenge.
Judgment affirmed.
HOFFMAN and SULLIVAN, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Based upon Woman's Clinic's (Clinic) failure to proceed on its burden to establish the lack of a genuine issue of material fact and its entitlement to judgment as a matter of law, we assume the existence of an association between Carter and Clinic as alleged in Babcock's proposed complaint that could result in Clinic's imputed liability.
[2]  U.S. Const. amend. 14 § 1; Ind. Const. art. 1, § 23.

=== CASE 3027427 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2015-10-13 22:38:14.131256+00 ===

United States Court of Appeals
FOR THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT
___________
No. 00-2913
___________
United States of America,                *
*
Appellee,                    *
* Appeal from the United States
v.                                 * District Court for the Western
* District of Missouri.
John E. Francis,                         *
*      [UNPUBLISHED]
Appellant.                   *
___________
Submitted: July 27, 2001
Filed: August 3, 2001
___________
Before BOWMAN, BEAM, and BYE, Circuit Judges.
___________
PER CURIAM.
John E. Francis pleaded guilty to a charge of being a felon in possession of
ammunition, 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1) (1994). Using the Guidelines determinations
described in the written plea agreement and followed in the presentence report (to
which Francis filed no objections), the District Court1 sentenced him to forty-one
months' imprisonment and three years of supervised release. On appeal, counsel filed
a brief and moved to withdraw under Anders v. California, 386 U.S. 738 (1967),
1
The Honorable Scott O. Wright, United States District Judge for the Western
District of Missouri.
arguing that the District Court erred by (1) denying Francis’s pro se request for the
appointment of substitute counsel, and (2) by sentencing Francis at the top of the
applicable Guidelines range.
These arguments fail. First, Francis's offense level of eighteen and his category
III criminal history produced a Guidelines range of thirty-three to forty-one months'
imprisonment. The District Court’s decision to sentence Francis at the top of the
Guidelines range—particularly where the top and bottom of the Guidelines range does
not span more than twenty-four months—is an unreviewable matter. See 18 U.S.C.
§ 3742(a) (1994); United States v. Woodrum, 959 F.2d 100, 101 (8th Cir. 1992) (per
curiam) ("[a] sentence is not reviewable merely because it is at the top of a properly
calculated Guidelines range"); cf. 18 U.S.C.§ 3553(c)(1) (1994) (requiring sentencing
court to state its reasons for imposing a sentence at a particular point within the
Guidelines range in cases where the range exceeds twenty-four months). Second, we
conclude that the District Court did not abuse its discretion in denying Francis’s motion
for substitute counsel, given that the record and counsel’s testimony from a hearing
held on the motion contradicted Francis’s alleged reasons for seeking new counsel. See
United States v. Long Crow, 37 F.3d 1319, 1324 (8th Cir. 1994) (explaining the abuse-
of-discretion standard of review), cert. denied, 513 U.S. 1180 (1995).
In a pro se supplemental brief, Francis argues that counsel was ineffective in
various ways, that the District Court erred in accepting his guilty plea, and that his
rights under Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966), were violated. These arguments
also fail. See United States v. Vong, 171 F.3d 648, 652 (8th Cir. 1999) ("[b]y pleading
guilty [the defendant] waive[d] all non-jurisdictional defenses"); United States v.
Martin, 59 F.3d 767, 771 (8th Cir. 1995) (noting that ineffective-assistance claims are
more appropriately raised in 28 U.S.C. § 2255 proceedings); United States v. Murphy,
899 F.2d 714, 716 (8th Cir. 1990) (holding that involuntary-guilty-plea claim must first
be presented to the district court and is not cognizable on direct appeal).
-2-
Following our independent review under Penson v. Ohio, 488 U.S. 75 (1988),
we find no nonfrivolous issues. Accordingly, we grant counsel’s motion to withdraw,
deny Francis’s motion for appointment of new counsel, and affirm.
A true copy.
Attest:
CLERK, U.S. COURT OF APPEALS, EIGHTH CIRCUIT.
-3-

=== CASE 2225648 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:52.434705+00 ===

587 N.E.2d 712 (1992)
Lowell K. IDLE, Appellant-Defendant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee.
No. 79A02-9010-CR-615.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, Second District.
March 5, 1992.
Transfer Denied April 23, 1992.
*713 Susan K. Carpenter, Public Defender, M.E. Tuke, Deputy Public Defender, Indianapolis, for appellant-defendant.
Linley E. Pearson, Atty. Gen., Ian A.T. McLean, Deputy Atty. Gen., Indianapolis, for appellee.
SULLIVAN, Judge.
Upon a guilty plea, Lowell Idle (Idle) was convicted of three counts of Confinement While Armed with a Deadly Weapon,[1] a class B felony, one count of Criminal Deviate Conduct While Armed with a Deadly Weapon,[2] a class A felony, and one count of Rape While Armed with a Deadly Weapon,[3] a class A felony. Upon appeal, Idle challenges the sentences imposed by the trial court asserting that they are manifestly unreasonable, and resulted from the trial court's failure to appropriately weigh mitigating factors.
We affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand.
In the early morning hours of November 1, 1988, Idle went to the house of S.K. with the intent to kill S.K.'s husband. Apparently, Idle hoped that S.K., who was his sister-in-law, would marry him after he killed her husband. H.S., S.K.'s eleven-year-old daughter, answered Idle's knock. When the door was opened, Idle pointed a sawed-off .22 caliber rifle at H.S. and she ran screaming into her mother's bedroom. Idle followed H.S. into S.K.'s bedroom, where he found S.K. in bed with L.S., her two-year-old daughter.
After shutting the door, Idle ordered H.S. to disrobe. S.K. responded that H.S. would not comply with his demand, whereupon Idle ordered both S.K. and H.S. to disrobe. S.K. then asked Idle to allow L.S. to get off of the bed, which he permitted. At this point, H.S. and L.S. went to a corner of the room and covered themselves with a blanket. S.K. then asked Idle about his conduct, to which he responded that he had always wanted S.K., and that he never wanted Sharon (Idle's wife and S.K.'s sister). He then forced S.K. to disrobe, laid the gun on the dresser, and performed cunnilingus upon her. After she refused his request to perform fellatio upon him, Idle raped S.K. After picking up his gun again, Idle allowed S.K. to get dressed. Thereafter, everyone went into the kitchen. After a brief discussion in the kitchen, Idle left the house and S.K. immediately locked the door behind him and called the police.
*714 Following his plea, the trial court imposed the maximum 20-year sentence for each of the three convictions of Confinement, the three sentences to run concurrently, and it imposed the presumptive 30-year sentence for each of the sex-related offenses (Rape and Criminal Deviate Conduct), which also were to run concurrently. In addition, the court ordered that the three 20-year sentences were to run consecutive to the two 30-year sentences, for a total executed sentence of 50 years.
I. Sentencing
A trial court has wide discretion in sentencing and upon review we do not set aside or alter a sentence that is within statutory limits unless the record reveals a manifest abuse of discretion. Arthur v. State (1986) Ind., 499 N.E.2d 746.
Idle contends that a pre-sentence report submitted to the court was improper because the preparer recommended the maximum sentence but did so without explaining the rationale. In effect, Idle's argument is that the trial court gave undue weight to the subjective viewpoint of the report preparer.
Even were we to accept Idle's assertion that the report's recommendation is without supporting rationale, Idle's argument is without merit. A trial court may consider relevant information when determining what sentence to impose. Yates v. State (1982) 3d Dist.Ind. App., 429 N.E.2d 992, 994. Although our legislature has mandated that a pre-sentence report must be filed prior to sentencing (I.C. XX-XX-X-X (Burns Code Ed.Supp. 1991)), it has not legislated the weight which a judge must accord the report. The record here does not indicate how much weight the trial judge accorded the report, nor does it reflect what weight, if any, was given to the preparer's recommendation as opposed to the factual data contained in the report. Moreover, such weighing is included in the broad discretion granted to trial courts when sentencing. For this reason, the relevant inquiry regarding pre-sentence reports generally concerns their accuracy and, to that end, whether the defendant had an opportunity to examine the report and challenge any inaccuracies, pursuant to I.C. XX-XX-X-XX(b) (Burns Code Ed.Supp. 1991).
In the instant case, Idle's sole substantial challenge at the sentencing hearing was to the report's assertion that his criminal history included an assault and battery charge, which was the only item listed in his criminal history. The trial court apparently accepted Idle's challenge, as indicated by the listing, as a mitigating factor, of Idle's long period of good behavior and apparent lack of prior criminal activity. Having found that the report was substantially accurate, that Idle had ample opportunity to challenge the report, and mindful of the broad discretion vested in the trial court's use of pre-sentence reports when sentencing, we discern no error regarding the trial court's use of the pre-sentence report.
Idle's remaining claims of error involve the trial court's identification and use of aggravating factors which supported the sentence enhancements and consecutive sentences. When a court imposes consecutive terms, the record must disclose articulated facts which support a finding of the presence of at least one of the aggravating circumstances listed in former I.C. XX-XX-X-X(b) (Burns Code Ed. 1985). Brown v. State (1986) Ind., 497 N.E.2d 1049. However, the statutory factors are not exclusive and the trial court may, in its discretion, consider other relevant factors. Ballard v. State (1988) Ind., 531 N.E.2d 196, 197. Following is the trial court's statement of aggravating and mitigating circumstances.
"Right, the Court will find as mitigating circumstances, ... apparently there was a long period of good behavior. We didn't find very many  many crimes were committed. In fact, according to what you said today, there were none prior to this that we could find. You served in Vietnam. Mentally ill, and I know that being mentally ill probably doesn't add or subtract from the seriousness of the crime. The aggravating circumstances, the extreme violence and the excessive use of alcohol and the use of *715 drugs. And you had [an] eleven-year-old girl to un-robe in your presence. And you raped their mother in the presence of the three-year-old and eleven-year-old girl. And you performed oral sex on the victim and raped her. And I believe the victim was your sister-in-law. And the intent with which you said that you went to that place was to commit murder. Those are the aggravating circumstances that the Court finds. Is there anything that I have omitted?" Record at 253-54.
In summary, the aggravators identified by the court were: 1) the extreme violence of the crime; 2) Idle's history of alcohol and drug abuse; 3) having H.S. disrobe in his presence; 4) committing the sex crimes in the children's presence; 5) performing cunnilingus on S.K. and raping her; 6) the fact that the victim was Idle's relative; and 7) Idle's intent to murder S.K.'s husband. Idle contends that the only proper aggravating factor was the children's presence, and that this was not sufficient to justify the enhanced and consecutive sentences.
The same single aggravating factor may support both the enhancement of a presumptive sentence and the imposition of consecutive sentences. Davidson v. State (1990) Ind., 558 N.E.2d 1077. Although the court cited a factor or factors which may not constitute valid aggravators, it also cited several, including the children's presence, which are valid. Having examined the record and reviewed the sentence, we conclude that the sentence enhancements and consecutive sentences were adequately supported by valid aggravating circumstances. Moreover, we cannot say that the sentences imposed by the court were obviously the result of its consideration of invalid aggravating circumstances.
II. Double Jeopardy
We note sua sponte that Idle was convicted of two counts of Confinement in which H.S. was the victim. I.C. XX-XX-X-X defines Criminal Confinement as follows:
"Criminal Confinement.  A person who knowingly or intentionally:
(1) Confines another person without the other person's consent; or
(2) Removes another person, by fraud, enticement, force, or threat of force, from one (1) place to another;
commits criminal confinement, a Class D felony. However, the offense is a Class C felony if the other person is less than fourteen (14) years of age and is not the person's child, and a Class B felony if it is committed while armed with a deadly weapon or results in serious bodily injury to another person."
In this case, the double jeopardy issue is implicated because Idle was convicted twice for one continuous act of confinement involving the same victim. In fact, at the guilty plea hearing, Idle expressed confusion that he was being convicted of two counts of confinement with H.S. as the victim, and expressed his belief that the two counts each charged him with the same criminal behavior; essentially, he believed he was being convicted twice for one crime. The State explained that the counts differed in that there are two separate types of confinement. In essence, the State explained at the hearing, and argues upon appeal, that Idle received two convictions because I.C. XX-XX-X-X defines two separate and distinct crimes of confinement, and he committed both: subsection one defines it as non-consensual restraint in one place; and subsection two defines it as removal from one place to another.
The double jeopardy prohibition flowing from the fifth amendment of the federal Constitution prohibits imposition of two punishments for a single offense arising from one set of operative circumstances. Haggard v. State (1983) Ind., 445 N.E.2d 969, 971. We must determine whether violation of both subsection one and subsection two in the same continuous act constitutes a single offense, or whether it constitutes multiple offenses, within the meaning of double jeopardy jurisprudence.
Cases have said that the violation of one subsection of our confinement statute would not be sufficient to show violation of the other. See, e.g., Kelly v. State (1989) Ind., 535 N.E.2d 140; Addis v. State (1980) 4th Dist.Ind. App., 404 N.E.2d 59, 61. To that extent the statute does define two *716 separate criminal activities. However, we have found no case which addresses the propriety of separate convictions under both subsections for activities occurring in a single episode. Our Supreme Court in Kelly used language which arguably could be interpreted to support such convictions:
"It is evident that [I.C. XX-XX-X-X], framed in the disjunctive, includes two distinct types of criminal confinement by encompassing both confinement by non-consensual restraint in place and confinement by removal." Kelly, supra, 535 N.E.2d at 140.
* * * * * *
"The jury's general verdict indicates that they did find the defendant guilty of confinement, but does not indicate whether the conviction was based upon a violation of Ind. Code § 35-42-3-3(a)(1), non-consensual confinement, as charged in the information, or Ind. Code § 35-42-3-3(a)(2), confinement by removal, as allowed by the instructions but not charged by information." Id. at 142.
However, the specific issue addressed by our Supreme Court in Kelly was the propriety of instructing a jury that it may convict a defendant of confinement if it concluded that he had committed acts described in either subsection one or two, when in fact the charging instrument only charged that he had committed acts described in subsection one. Justice Pivarnik's dissent, in which Justice Givan joined, maintained that I.C. XX-XX-X-X actually defines only one crime, and that the two subsections merely define two ways in which the crime may be committed. However, the resolution of that question, although important in Kelly, is not determinative as to the instant inquiry. Rather, the relevant inquiry here is whether I.C. XX-XX-X-X defines two separate species of confinement which may properly divide one continuous confinement episode into two distinct crimes for purposes of multiple convictions. Because we have found no Indiana case directly on point we look to the law of other states for assistance.
Our research reveals that Indiana's Criminal Confinement statute is somewhat unique. Other states have enacted statutes which essentially address the same crime, although called by various other names. E.g., Iowa Code Ann. § 710.7 (West 1979) ("False Imprisonment"); N.H. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 633.2 (1986) ("Criminal Restraint"); Utah Code Ann. § 76-5-304 (1990) ("Unlawful Detention"); Wash. Rev. Code Ann. § 9A.40.040 (1988) ("Unlawful Imprisonment"). None of the aforementioned statutes, however, defines the proscribed behavior as does Indiana  as committed in two ways, which are listed in the disjunctive. Other states' kidnapping statutes are also properly considered here because the critical "removal" and "restraint" elements are common to both kidnapping and confinement.[4]
Whether a confinement incident may result in two separate convictions depends in large part upon whether the confinement episode may be divided into separate parts. The initial question is then  what constitutes one confinement?
Because kidnapping  like confinement  involves the element of unlawful detention, it is a continuing crime; that is, it is continuously committed so long as the unlawful detention lasts. See, e.g., State v. Zimmer (1967) 198 Kan. 479, 426 P.2d 267, cert. den., 389 U.S. 933, 88 S.Ct. 298, 19 L.Ed.2d 286; People v. Behm (1973) 45 Mich. App. 614, 207 N.W.2d 200, rev'd on other grounds, (1974) 52 Mich. App. 119, 216 N.W.2d 631; State v. Hutchinson (1983) 99 N.M. 616, 661 P.2d 1315, 1322-23; State v. Dove (1988) 52 Wash. App. 81, 757 P.2d 990, 994-96. In People v. Martinez (1984) 2d Dist., 150 Cal. App.3d 579, 198 Cal. Rptr. 565, the court considered the question whether, and how, a single confinement may be broken into distinct episodes.
In Martinez a woman was robbed and raped by two men in her bedroom while her *717 husband was confined in another part of the house. The husband managed to escape and called to his wife, who then ordered an assailant in the bedroom to leave. After that assailant left, the wife was alone in the bedroom. Police had arrived on the scene and ordered the other assailant to "freeze," whereupon that assailant called out that he had a hostage, referring to the wife who was still alone in the bedroom. At that point the wife ran down the hallway and past the assailant, who unsuccessfully attempted to grab her as she ran past. Both assailants were then arrested. The court noted that so long as the wife felt compelled by fear to remain, the confinement continued. Martinez, supra, 198 Cal. Rptr. at 580. However, the court concluded that after she had successfully ordered the assailant out of the room, she was no longer confined. In language relevant to the instant case the court stated:
"The situation changed again when the police ordered [the other assailant] to freeze, stopping him in his flight. It was then that he declared the intent to hold [the wife] as a hostage, an intent that was not reasonably manifest before the order to freeze. At that point, in order for [the wife] to be held as a hostage, it was necessary for the defendants to seize or confine her anew... . Had [the other assailant] succeeded in securing [the wife] in the hallway, she would have been seized anew. Had the threat of his presence in the hallway caused her to remain where she was for any appreciable length of time, she would have been confined anew." (Footnote omitted) (emphasis supplied) 198 Cal. Rptr. at 580.
The above-quoted passage indicates that a confinement ends when the victim both feels and is, in fact, free from detention. It also indicates that a separate confinement begins if and when detention is reestablished.
In Indiana, courts have subscribed to the "continuous act" theory when discussing confinement in other contexts. In Haggard, supra, 445 N.E.2d 969, the defendant abducted a store employee following a robbery and drove with her to another county, where he raped her before she managed to escape. The defendant pleaded guilty to confinement in the county in which the robbery and abduction occurred. He was subsequently convicted of confinement and rape in the county in which the victim escaped. Our Supreme Court overturned the second confinement conviction, stating:
"In this case, defendant committed one continuous act which violated the state statute against confinement, and while his act continued through four counties it was nevertheless a single offense against the state." (Emphasis supplied) Haggard, supra, 445 N.E.2d at 972.
While Haggard specifically prohibits the State from dividing a continuing offense into separate offenses based upon geographical boundaries, the above-highlighted portion impliedly indicates that for double jeopardy purposes "confinement" is considered a single offense.
In Hopper v. State (1985) Ind., 475 N.E.2d 20, the defendant was convicted of Criminal Confinement and Criminal Confinement with a Deadly Weapon for activities occurring in one continuous act. In reversing the Criminal Confinement conviction, the court stated: "There was but one confinement and both convictions flowed from that offense. It is improper to twice sentence for the same offense in a single proceeding." Hopper, supra, 475 N.E.2d at 22. Our Supreme Court again seemingly indicated that, for double jeopardy purposes, confinement is a single offense. Whether the implications of Hopper and Haggard may be reconciled with the seemingly contradictory holding in Kelly lies within the context in which our Supreme Court addressed the statute. We do not read Kelly so expansively as to suggest that I.C. XX-XX-X-X lists two separate and distinct offenses, which may result in convictions for both, even when they are committed in one continuous episode. Kelly was considered in the context of jury instructions and charging informations. Its message is that the State must be precise when describing the allegedly criminal behavior in the charging information. It also states that the court may not instruct the *718 jury that it may convict upon proof of an element or activity not set out in the charging instrument. However, in a double jeopardy context, such as in Haggard and Hopper, our Supreme Court has consistently held that I.C. XX-XX-X-X defines one offense. When the confinement episode is continuous, only one confinement offense is committed, and multiple confinement convictions are improper. Haggard, supra; Hopper, supra. We therefore hold that a violation of I.C. XX-XX-X-X during one continuous confinement may result in only one confinement conviction, notwithstanding that the defendant engaged in two different acts, one proscribed in subsection one, and the other in subsection two.
In the instant case, H.S. was confined by removal, a violation of subsection two, when she was compelled at gunpoint to move from the front door to S.K.'s bedroom. Her confinement while in S.K.'s bedroom during the sexual assaults was of the kind defined in subsection one  restraint. However, at no time did H.S. escape from Idle's detention, although his attention was briefly diverted. It cannot be said that there were two distinct periods of confinement. Therefore, H.S. was the victim of only one continuous episode of confinement, and Idle may not be convicted twice for that single offense.
We remand to the trial court with instructions to vacate Idle's Confinement conviction under either Count I or Count V, and to modify the sentence accordingly. The confinement conviction under Count II is affirmed as are the Criminal Deviate Conduct and Rape convictions under Counts III and IV. In all other respects, the judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
BUCHANAN and SHARPNACK, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  I.C. XX-XX-X-X (Burns Code Ed.Supp. 1991).
[2]  I.C. XX-XX-X-X (Burns Code Ed. 1985).
[3]  I.C. XX-XX-X-X (Burns Code Ed.Supp. 1991).
[4]  Kidnapping differs from confinement only in that the former is purposeful removal or restraint, whereas the latter is knowing removal or restraint. That difference is inconsequential here.

=== CASE 2225652 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:52.492258+00 ===

587 N.E.2d 1113 (1992)
224 Ill. App.3d 815
167 Ill.Dec. 498
The PEOPLE of the State of Illinois, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Eugene MACKE, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 5-90-0416.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Fifth District.
January 31, 1992.
*1114 Daniel M. Kirwan, Deputy Defender, Robert S. Burke, Asst. Defender, Office of State Appellate Defender, Mt. Vernon, for defendant-appellant.
Michael Kiley, State's Atty., Shelbyville, Stephen E. Norris, Deputy Defender, Diane L. Campbell, Staff Atty., Office of State's Attys. Appellate Prosecutor, Mt. Vernon, for plaintiff-appellee.
Justice HOWERTON delivered the opinion of the court:
Defendant was convicted by a jury of armed robbery on May 8, 1990. The last day for him to file a post-trial motion was June 6, 1990. On June 22, 1990, defendant was sentenced to 25 years' imprisonment and ordered to pay $900 in restitution. Defendant appeals only his sentence claiming that the circuit court erred by requiring him to pay restitution. Defendant failed to file a post-trial motion (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 38, par. 116-1(b)) or a motion to reduce his sentence (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 38, par. 1005-8-1(c)), and he did not object to restitution at his sentencing hearing. We affirm.
Defendant argues that it was impossible for him to file a post-trial motion (Ill.Rev. Stat.1989, ch. 38, par. 116-1(b)), since the error did not occur until after the time period for filing a post-trial motion expired. Defendant claims that rejection of his argument on appeal for failure to file a post-trial motion under these circumstances would require defendants who allege no error at trial to file a post-trial motion prior to sentencing in order to preserve any error that might possibly occur. We, however, affirm for failure to file a motion to reduce a sentence. Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 38, par. 1005-8-1(c).
Section 5-8-1(c) of the Unified Code of Corrections provides:
"A motion to reduce sentence may be made, or the court may reduce a sentence without motion, within 30 days after the sentence is imposed * * *.
If a motion to reduce a sentence is timely filed within 30 days after the sentence is imposed, the proponent of the motion shall exercise due diligence in seeking a determination on the motion and the court shall thereafter decide such motion within a reasonable time.
If a motion to reduce a sentence is timely filed within 30 days after the sentence is imposed, then for purposes of perfecting an appeal, a final judgment shall not be considered to have been entered until the motion to reduce a sentence has been decided by order entered by the trial court.
A motion to reduce a sentence shall not be considered to have been timely filed unless it is filed with the circuit court clerk within 30 days after the sentence is imposed * * *." Ill.Rev.Stat. 1989, ch. 38, par. 1005-8-1(c). (Emphasis added.)
Section 5-8-1(c) requires that before a defendant can appeal only his sentence, he must first file a motion to reduce his sentence with the trial court within 30 days after the sentence is imposed.
Requiring a defendant to file a motion to reduce his sentence is similar to requiring a post-trial motion to preserve issues on appeal (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 38, par. 116-1(b)) and requiring a defendant who pleads guilty to move to withdraw that plea before appealing. (134 Ill.2d R. 604(d).) Failure to file these motions denies the trial court the opportunity to correct any error that might have occurred and thereby burdens appellate counsels and the court of review with the time and expense of preparing and processing appeals. (See People v. Enoch (1988), 122 Ill.2d 176, 119 Ill.Dec. 265, 522 N.E.2d 1124, cert. denied (1988), 488 U.S. 917, 109 S.Ct. 274, 102 L.Ed.2d 263, 109 S.Ct. 274; People v. Wilk (1988), 124 Ill.2d 93, 124 Ill.Dec. 398, 529 N.E.2d 218.) As in Enoch, our decision in this case promotes judicial economy and finality of judgments. Enoch, *1115 122 Ill.2d at 190, 119 Ill.Dec. at 273, 522 N.E.2d at 1132.
Affirmed.
LEWIS and WELCH, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2225656 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:52.574831+00 ===

271 Wis. 113 (1955)
GUNNISON and wife, Respondents,
vs.
KAUFMAN, Appellant.
Supreme Court of Wisconsin.
October 11, 1955.
November 8, 1955.
*118 For the appellant there was a brief and oral argument by Harlan W. Kelley of Baraboo, attorney, and Wayne W. Martin of Madison of counsel.
For the respondents there was a brief by Langer & Cross of Baraboo, and oral argument by Clyde C. Cross.
FAIRCHILD, C. J.
On November 6, 1952, at the time appellant S. J. Kaufman agreed to take over the corporation and pay certain obligations of Gunnison to the Reedsburg Bank, Gunnison was obligated to that bank on the following notes:
(1) An unsecured judgment note dated October 6, 1952, due December 2, 1952, for $7,000, with interest thereon at five per cent.
(2) A note dated October 6, 1949, due October 6, 1954, secured by a first real-estate mortgage on the premises of the said corporation and other real estate owned by plaintiff Ivor Gunnison and his wife individually, with balance of the principal then due of $20,000 with interest thereon at four per cent.
*119 At the time of the original complaint appellant had paid $2,000 and interest on the secured note, and $1,000 on the unsecured note. During the interim between the time of the original complaint and the time of the trial, appellant had made final payment of the $20,000 secured note. Also during that interim, respondents, at the insistence of the bank, had paid the balance of the principal due on the unsecured note plus interest. As a result of the payments so made, there was a change in the amount owed by appellant to respondents. Appellant's counsel suggested the advisability of amending the complaint in order to bring the figures up to date. It appears to have been understood between counsel that the obligation on the secured note for $20,000 "had been paid and was out of the case." The case then before the court was upon pleadings showing that amount paid. The judgment sought by respondents in their amended complaint was for $6,271.88, the amount paid by them on the balance of the unsecured note plus interest, with interest from the date of payment.
At the time of the trial a motion for continuance was made by appellant on the grounds that sec. 263.10, Stats., allowed him twenty days in which to answer the amended complaint. The court denied appellant's motion, and appellant contends that such denial precluded him from forming a defense based on the amended complaint, and that therefore the denial was an abuse of discretion by the court.
A continuance delaying a trial is not a matter of course. A standard of requirements to warrant an adjournment is found in reported cases. "`Such an application is always addressed to the sound discretion of the trial court, and prejudice must be made to appear in order to set aside its ruling thereon.'" Estate of Hatten (1940), 233 Wis. 256, 289 N. W. 630; Rahles v. J. Thompson & Sons Mfg. Co. (1909), 137 Wis. 506, 118 N. W. 350, 119 N. W. 289; Kleimenhagen *120 v. Dixon (1904), 122 Wis. 526, 100 N. W. 826; Druska v. Western Wisconsin Tel. Co. (1922), 177 Wis. 621, 189 N. W. 152, and the decisions cited therein. The complaint was properly amended and served upon appellant's counsel. No substantial change to his disadvantage confronted the appellant because of the amended complaint, and no new issues arose because of any new facts introduced. The question of the existence of the contract was still the issue, and the amended complaint reflected the claimed obligations brought up to date. The case of Erickson v. Westfield Milling & Electric Light Co. (1953), 263 Wis. 580, 58 N. W. (2d) 437, relied upon by appellant, is not applicable here. In that case there was a wide change of issues, resulting from the amended complaint, and a counterclaim was filed. The record before us discloses a situation where the trial court was well warranted in denying appellant's motion. Sec. 270.145, Stats.
The second question before us whether there was a valid contract under which Kaufman agreed to pay the $7,000 unsecured note. Appellant claims that the $7,000 unsecured note was a personal liability of Gunnison, that he (Kaufman) did not promise to pay that note, and that the alleged promise to pay it is void under the statute of frauds as being a promise, not in writing, to answer for the debt, default, or miscarriage of a third person. With respect to the application of the statute of frauds: The alleged promise which Kaufman made to get Gunnison "off the hook" and personally take care of the two obligations at the Reedsburg Bank was not a promise to answer for the debt of Gunnison to the bank. It was a promise made as part of a purchase deal in which Kaufman, the purchaser, and Gunnison, the seller, agreed that Kaufman's undertaking to pay those existing obligations was to be part of the purchase price for the property he (Kaufman) received. In other words, the promise merely specified the method by which the promisor (Kaufman) was to pay *121 off his own obligations to the promisee (Gunnison) for the transfer of the corporation property to him (Kaufman). The statute of frauds clearly does not apply to such a situation. The rule is plainly stated in Fosha v. O'Donnell (1904), 120 Wis. 336, 97 N. W. 924, where the holder of the notes brought action directly against the defendant purchasers on the basis of his oral promise to the seller and original obligor. At page 340 it was there said:
"Such an agreement it is held is not in effect an undertaking in the nature of a `special promise to answer for the debt, miscarriage, or default of other persons,' though it is collateral to the liability of the original debtor to pay the same debts. The agreement is not a mere promise to answer for another's liability contemplated by the statutes requiring such agreements to be in writing, expressing the consideration, and signed by the party sought to be charged. It is an agreement that the defendant O'Donnell will pay his debt to Prosser in a particular manner, by discharging these notes held by plaintiff, based upon the consideration between him and Prosser at the time the agreement was made."
The evidence accepted as controlling is that in 1948 or 1949 respondent Gunnison and one Earl Schilling entered into the business of manufacturing cultivators as partners. For the purpose of constructing a factory, they borrowed $26,000 on a secured judgment note from the Reedsburg Bank. On an unsecured note they borrowed from the same bank an additional $30,000 for materials and cash to enable the company to operate. They later incorporated as Schilling and Gunnison, and Schilling and his wife and Gunnison and his wife, between them, owned all the stock. The mortgages given to the bank were on the factory and the homes of the stockholders. Later Gunnison bought out Schilling with money obtained also from the Reedsburg Bank, and the corporation became known as the Baraboo Manufacturing, Inc., and additional stock was sold to other persons. Payment *122 of the money with which Gunnison bought out Schilling was guaranteed up to $25,000 by a note signed by one L. C. Welch, who retained as security 225 shares of stock formerly owned by Ivor Gunnison. In addition to the money thus borrowed, Gunnison personally put into the corporation some $16,000 of his own to keep the business running.
The venture was unsuccessful, and in August, 1952, S. J. Kaufman, an officer in the Industrial Spring Corporation of Chicago, a creditor of Baraboo Manufacturing, Inc., after conferences in Chicago and Baraboo, agreed to take over the business and compromise its debts. On November 6, 1952, a meeting was held in Baraboo at which Kaufman and all the stockholders were present. At this meeting it was first suggested by Kaufman to the stockholders that they cancel any obligations the corporation had to them and turn all their stock over to him without compensation. That proposition was not accepted. Mr. Kaufman then left the room and there was a discussion among the stockholders. When he returned he made a second proposal, namely, that the stockholders assign their claims against the corporation and turn over all of their stock for a nominal price. It was at that time that the alleged promise of Kaufman was made "to get Ivor Gunnison off the hook" and personally pay the two obligations at the Reedsburg Bank. The following agreement was dictated by Kaufman and later put in writing and signed by the stockholders
"W the undersigned agree to assign to Martin S. Gordon (attorney at law) the corporation stock of Baraboo Manufacturing, Inc., plus all loans made from the undersigned to Baraboo Manufacturing, Inc., for X numbers of dollars, and agree to assign all loans due us from Baraboo Manufacturing, Inc., to Martin S. Gordon (attorney at law) for X number of dollars."
The agreement between Kaufman and Gunnison under which Kaufman was to pay the two notes at the Reedsburg *123 Bank was not put in writing. However, there was testimony to the effect that some discussion was had about putting into the written agreement details about the payment of the $7,000 note and mortgage, but Kaufman said that it would not be necessary because everyone understood about it, and that he was a gentleman of his word and would live up to his promise. Further, the testimony shows that the written agreement set forth above was signed by the stockholders in full reliance upon the oral promise of Kaufman to take care of all creditors and the bank notes. One witness testified: "He [Kaufman] said we had nothing to loseeverything was gone, and that Ivor was the only one to lose anything. If he got all of our stock he would assume all obligations so Ivor would not have to lose his home and business. He told us that before we signed anything." Gunnison and other stockholder witnesses testified to the same effect.
The two loans made by the Reedsburg Bank for a building and for material and cash were made in 1948 or 1949, when Ivor Gunnison and Earl Schilling were partners. When the business was later incorporated, the Reedsburg Bank refused to transfer those obligations to the corporation, but insisted that the original partners remain personally liable to it. Both loans were used in carrying on the business of the partnership and corporation. The original obligations were gradually reduced by payments to the bank made from earnings of the business, and the notes were renewed from time to time. There is no doubt that the obligations of the two notes were carried on the books of the corporation and treated as company debts to the bank. When Kaufman became interested in Baraboo Manufacturing, Inc., he sent his own auditors from Chicago to audit the corporation. In the audit report, which they submitted to him, both the $20,000 secured note and the $7,000 unsecured note were listed as obligations of the corporation owed to the Reedsburg Bank. An earlier audit report prepared by C. P. A. John Hoppe, also listed *124 those obligations as company liabilities. Therefore, when Kaufman, on November 6, 1952, agreed to assume the obligations of the corporation to the bank, he was well aware that the $7,000 unsecured note was a part of the obligations he was assuming. Furthermore, on May 6, 1953, $1,000 was paid to the Reedsburg Bank with a check drawn on the First National Bank of Baraboo by Baraboo Manufacturing, Inc. That $1,000 was applied to the $7,000 unsecured note, and the bank gave Gunnison a receipt for the same. It is undisputed that after selling the building of the corporation, Kaufman paid the $20,000 mortgage note. Thus part performance of the contract is clearly in evidence. A week or two after Kaufman paid the $1,000, he informed Gunnison that he was not going to make any further payments on the $7,000 note. Gunnison subsequently paid the balance of that note to the bank.
Appellant contends that he is not bound by the alleged promise because the transfer of the stock and assignment of claims was made before November 6, 1952. It is true that all of the stock of Baraboo Manufacturing, Inc., except the 225 shares referred to above, was indorsed in blank and sent to Chicago by mail on October 31, 1952, to Kaufman's attorney, by Gunnison, with the promise that Kaufman would have the 225 remaining shares "on Monday morning." An accompanying letter contained resignations of all of the officers. And on November 4, 1952, Gunnison assigned to Kaufman for $10 all claims by him on Baraboo Manufacturing, Inc. However, the record reveals that the checks given by Kaufman to Gunnison for his assignment to Kaufman of claims against the corporation amounting to some $16,000 were made payable on January 6, 1953; and the two notes given by Kaufman to Gunnison as a part of the deal were both executed on November 6, 1952, and due January 6, 1953. Appellant's own testimony on adverse examination, admitted by appellant, was that "The agreement of November*125 6, 1952, was merely an agreement of intent or willingness to consummate this deal." He was asked, "And in what fashion was it actually consummated in January, what do you have reference to there as consummating it?" and he answered, "The turning over of the stock and signing of the stock." Furthermore, a letter dated March 2, 1953, contains the statement by Kaufman to the effect that he had bought both the 444 shares of stock and the loans by Gunnison to Baraboo Manufacturing, Inc., from Gunnison and his wife on January 6, 1953. This evidence corroborates the testimony of Gunnison that the stock certificates sent to Kaufman's attorney in October, 1952, were sent merely for the purpose of examination.
From the foregoing it is plain that respondents transferred to appellant 444 shares of stock in Baraboo Manufacturing, Inc., and also assigned to appellant their claims amounting to some $16,000 against the corporation for its indebtedness to them. In exchange for the transfer of stock and assignment of claims, the Gunnisons received, in addition to the Kaufman promise to pay the two notes at the bank, a note for $519.80, the amount necessary to get Gunnison's stock released from the lien held by the estate of L. C. Welch, and $15, and two checks for $10. The contention of appellant that the agreement is void for lack of consideration cannot be sustained.
It is unnecessary, it seems to us, to further repeat or analyze the testimony. The findings of fact are supported by the evidence. Appellant is liable to respondents for the amount of $6,271.88 which they paid on the balance of the $7,000 note subsequent to the payment by Baraboo Manufacturing, Inc., of $1,000, with interest from the time of payment.
By the Court.Order and judgment affirmed.

=== CASE 9740968 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:46:28.555804+00 ===

KRAHULIK, Justice.
Defendant-Appellant Marvin D. Castor was convicted by a jury of murder and carrying a handgun without a license. Because the death penalty was sought, the jury was reconvened and, after hearing evidence and argument of counsel, recommended that the death penalty be imposed. The trial court entered a detailed sentencing order which ultimately found that Castor should be executed. This direct appeal followed.
Castor alleges the following errors:
(1) The trial court erred by denying Castor's request for individual voir dire and sequestration of jurors during voir dire.
(2) The trial court erred in admitting gruesome photographs and inflammatory items of tangible evidence.
(8) The trial court erred in dismissing a prospective juror for cause.
(4) The trial court erred in repudiating certain precautions requested by Castor to foster the selection of an impartial jury.
(5) The trial court erred in denying and, during sentencing, granting Castor's request to proceed pro se.
(6) Castor was denied a fair trial because he was denied his right to present his defense.
(7) The trial court erred in denying Castor's request for a defense psychologist.
(8) The State's request for the death penalty was based upon an invalidly-charged aggravating cireumstance.
(9) Castor was improperly sentenced to death in violation of the United States and Indiana Constitutions.
Having reviewed the transcript in light of the alleged errors, we affirm Castor's conviction for murder but reverse the trial court's sentencing of Castor to death.
FACTS
The facts which support the jury's verdict follow. In May 1986, Castor was an employee of the Sugar Creek Resort, located near Greenfield, Indiana. Sugar Creek Resort was affiliated with a business entity generally referred to as Collett Ventures. Castor was a salesman and "contract closer" for Sugar Creek Resort. Castor's brother, Gerald Castor, also was an employee of Sugar Creek Resort, working in the capacity of a collections manager. On May 5th, Castor, his brother Gerald, and one Mark Barmes reviewed documents which Gerald had obtained from Collett Ventures. The three concluded that such documents indicated that the employer was engaged in defrauding lending institutions and, after much discussion concerning the course of action to be taken with this damaging information, Castor determined that he would approach his employer in order to request $250,000 in exchange for this information. Barmes, who was studying to become a paralegal, told Castor in substance that this plan was illegal in that it constituted blackmail. After being told that Castor was going to proceed with the plan, Barmes withdrew and participated no further.
*1284On May 6th, Castor, in a meeting with Bill Collett, Jr., his superior at Collett Ventures, demanded payments of $30,000 and $250,000 in exchange for the alleged damaging information that he had garnered from the company's records. After Castor left his office, Collett reported this extortion attempt to the Hancock County Sheriff's office which, in turn, reported it to the Federal Bureau of Investigation. The next day, May 7th, the FBI recorded telephone conversations between Castor and Collett Ventures during which Castor stated that he believed that Collett Ventures had sent "hit men" to his house and intended to injure him. Castor also stated that he was "armed to the teeth" and that these "hit men" would not intimidate him. Throughout those phone conversations, Collett Ventures, through two representatives, informed Castor that there were no "hit men" after him, but that his extortion attempt had been reported to the police. Additionally, during those phone conversations, Castor and Collett Ventures' representatives discussed amounts, methods and locations for payment of the money Castor demanded.
Castor presented evidence that after his meeting with Collett on May 6th, two men had been reported looking for him at his house and that he later determined that his house had been broken into and ransacked. It is undisputed that on the evening of May 6th Castor and his brother Gerald purchased a box of shotgun shells, a .857 Smith & Wesson handgun, and a .22 revolyer. Early the next morning, on May 7th, Castor purchased ammunition for the .857 Smith & Wesson handgun and, after loading it, placed it in his briefcase which he kept next to him in the cab of his pickup truck. Throughout the day of May Tth, Castor and the two representatives of Col-lett Ventures continued to discuss, by telephone, the arrangements for the payment of money by Collett Ventures to Castor. They finally agreed to a time and place for the exchange of money and documents.
As agreed, at approximately noon on May 8th Castor, in his pickup truck, and Gerald, in his automobile, waited at an Amoco station on State Road 9 immediately north of Interstate 70 for Bill Collett, Jr., to pay the money demanded by Castor. While Castor was waiting at the station inside of his truck, Malcolm Grass, a Hancock County deputy sheriff, and other FBI law enforcement personnel arrived in several different cars to arrest Castor and his brother for extortion. None of the law enforcement personnel were in uniform and all arrived in unmarked automobiles. The automobile in which Malcolm Grass was riding, as a front seat passenger, was driven so that it was nose-to-nogse with Castor's truck, thereby blocking Castor's escape route. Grass and the driver of his car pulled their weapons and exited their vehicles. Castor exited his truck with the .357 Smith & Wesson revolver in his hand. Grass and Castor faced each other from a distance of approximately five feet. The witnesses' accounts vary as to when and with what force the law enforcement officers announced that they were either police or FBI. One officer, driving another unmarked car several feet away, wore a hat with the letters FBI on it. According to all of the witnesses, this was the only visual identification that any of the law enforcement personnel were, in fact, law enforcement personnel.
Almost immediately, as Grass and Castor faced each other, Castor fired at least two and 'possibly three bullets at Grass as Grass and Castor retreated behind their respective vehicles. Castor ultimately fired all five rounds of ammunition from his gun. Although Grass did not return Castor's fire, the FBI agents on the scene did. Castor ultimately surrendered and stated to the arresting FBI agents that he believed that they were "hit men". Ballistics and autopsy later determined that Grass died from one of Castor's ricochet bullets which struck him in the head. The State charged Castor with murder and asked for the death penalty because the victim of the murder was a law enforcement officer who was acting in the course of duty.
At trial, the State adduced evidence that the victim and others had announced themselves as law enforcement officers before *1285Castor shot. Additionally, the State presented two witnesses who testified that, while they were incarcerated with Castor in jail, he admitted to them that he recognized Malcolm Grass as a law enforcement officer at the time of the shooting. Based on this evidence, the State contended that Castor knew that he was shooting at a law enforcement officer.
On the other hand, Castor defended his action at trial on the basis of a mistake of fact and self-defense. Castor contended that he believed that Collett Ventures was a "Mafia" organization and that, after his conversation with Bill Collett on May 6th, two hit men were flown to Greenfield in order to harm Castor and his family. Castor further contended that at the time of the shootout with the plainclothes police officers in unmarked cars, he thought that he was shooting at such hitmen and, therefore, was acting in self-defense.
I. Individual Sequestered Jury Voir Dire
Castor urges that the trial court erred in denying his request for individualized sequestered voir dire of prospective jurors. His motion, filed with the trial court, contained an affidavit from a psychologist in which it was opined that "the only possibility of obtaining a fair trial would be through extensive, open-ended, attorney-conducted sequestered voir dire." In fact, Castor contends that during the voir dire itself, a potential juror infected the entire panel when he stated that his brother-in-law was a good friend of Malcolm Grass's and that "from what he had already heard, the man's guilty." While Castor acknowledges that such juror was excused, he urges that the infectious harpoon had already been planted. Castor also acknowledges, as the record reveals, that the trial judge exercised his discretion during voir dire when he referred a question to the pool of prospective jurors as to whether any of them had acquired knowledge of events regarding this case from newspaper articles, radio reports, television news, or from anyone else who claimed to know anything about these events. In response to this inquiry, four prospective jurors answered in the affirmative, prompting the trial judge to ask the balance of the prospective jurors to step outside of the courtroom while the four prospective jurors were questioned in greater detail concerning their knowledge. All four were, ulti'mately, excused.
Having acknowledged that the trial judge has a wide range of discretion in determining whether to grant a request for individual voir dire and sequestration of jurors during voir dire, Castor maintains that he was denied a fair and impartial jury by the trial court's refusal to grant his motion. We disagree. -
This Court consistently has rejected the notion that individualized, sequestered voir dire is required in any case, death penalty cases included. Conner v. State (1991), Ind., 580 N.E.2d 214, 217; Lowery v. State (1989), Ind., 547 N.E.2d 1046, 1049, cert. denied (1990), - U.S. -, 111 S.Ct. 217, 112 L.Ed.2d 176. In this case, the trial judge exercised his discretion and adopted a procedure in which four jurors who acknowledged having outside information concerning this case were sequestered for individual voir dire which resulted in their being excused. The only potentially prejudicial statement pointed to by Castor is that of the juror whose brother-in-law knew the deceased and who felt that Castor was guilty. The court immediately called counsel to the bench and excused that juror from further duty. We do not perceive that the juror's statement infected the jury panel so as to deprive Castor of a fair jury and a fair trial. Voir dire was not conducted erroneously.
II. Admission of Photographs and Allegedly Inflammatory Tangible Evidence
While conceding that the admission of evidence is governed by the sound discretion of the trial judge, Castor nevertheless argues that the admission into evidence, over objection, of photographs and/or slides which graphically depicted the decedent's injury was an abuse of discretion requiring reversal. Suffice it to say that we have examined such evidence and hold that such exhibits were material *1286and relevant to prove the trajectory and physical identity of the bullet which caused death as coming from the gun of Castor. They were properly admitted. Fisher v. State (1989), Ind., 541 N.E.2d 520, 523; Drollinger v. State (1980), 274 Ind. 5, 18, 408 N.E.2d 1228, 1237.
III. Dismissal, For Cause, Of Prospective Juror and Trial Court's Conduct of Voir Dire
Castor urges that a prospective juror was improperly dismissed in violation of Witherspoon v. Illinois (1968), 391 U.S. 510, 88 S.Ct. 1770, 20 L.Ed.2d 776, because a prospective juror must make it unmistakably clear that such juror would automatically vote against the death penalty, regardless of the facts, in order to justify a challenge for cause. The State correctly points out that the standard which we must use in reviewing the trial court's granting of a challenge for cause of a prospective juror is whether the juror's views would prevent or substantially impair the juror's performance of duty in accordance with the court's instructions and the juror's oath. Wainwright v. Witt (1985), 469 U.S. 412, 105 S.Ct. 844, 83 LEd.2d 841; Underwood v. State (1989), Ind., 535 N.E.2d 507, cert. denied (1989) 493 U.S. 900, 110 S.Ct. 257, 107 LEd.2d 206. Here, the prospective juror stated that he did not feel that he could judge guilt or innocence irrespective of penalty, and that he might raise the State's burden of proof so high as to not be able to give the State a fair trial. Further, he stated that he could not take an oath to render a verdict based on the law and the evidence, and could not accept the law's definition of reasonable doubt and apply it to the evidence. We agree with the State that these angwers justified a finding that the prospective juror's views substantially impaired his ability to perform the duties of a juror in accordance with the court's instructions and his oath. The trial court did not abuse its discretion in excusing this juror for cause.
Castor also argues that the trial court erred in discharging prospective jurors from sitting on the jury when such jurors made it unmistakably clear that they would either automatically vote against the death penalty in spite of the evidence or that they could not impartially render a judgment at the guilt-innocence phase. He contends that he timely objected to the excusal of these jurors for cause based upon the assertion that the systematic exclusion of such jurors who oppose the death penalty "death qualifies" a jury so that it would be prone to convict and to render a death sentence recommendation. Our review of the transcript convinces us that the trial court properly excused these jurors who stated that they could not follow the law or could not render an impartial verdict in the case. The goal of the jury selection process is to grant to both sides a procedure to obtain an impartial jury that can render a verdict based on the law and the evidence. Here, the trial court's proper exercise of discretion achieved that goal. We see no error.
IV. Castor's Request for Funds for Social Psychiatrist
Counsel for Castor filed four separate motions requesting funds for the appointment of experts in the field of social psychology. The motions requested funds in order to conduct scientific experiments, such as a telephone survey and an audio-trial simulation for a moot jury, in order to demonstrate a difference in the attitudes and characteristics of death-qualified jurors from those who are not death-qualified. These motions were all denied. Castor does not present cogent argument as to why he believes the trial court erred in denying such motions. Therefore, any error in denying such motions is waived. Goliday v. State (1988), Ind., 526 N.E.2d 1174, 1175. Additionally, however, we perceive no error in the trial court's denial of these motions.
V. Constitutional Right to Proceed Pro Se
Toward the conclusion of the guilt-innocence phase of the trial, Castor asserted a request that he be permitted to do a portion of the summation pro se. The trial court, after properly questioning Castor, denied the request. At the beginning *1287of the penalty phase of the trial, Castor again moved for pro se representation and again the trial court denied the request. At the beginning of the sentencing phase, however, the court granted Castor's third request to proceed pro se. We hold that the trial court acted correctly on each request.
Castor, according to the record, finally acquiesed in his counsel's doing the summation. Secondly, Castor concedes on appeal that his request to proceed pro se during final argument of the guilt-innocence phase and during the penalty phase may not have been timely. However, argues Castor, under the peculiar cireum-stances of his case, it was within the trial court's discretion to grant said requests. We agree, but hold that the trial court correctly denied such requests. Broadus v. State (1986), Ind., 487 N.E.2d 1298, 1304; Koehler v. State (1986), Ind., 499 N.E.2d 196, 198.
Castor contends that he should have been allowed to proceed pro se on appeal. There is no citation of authority in support of this argument and, thus, such argument is waived. Goliday, 526 N.E.2d at 1175. Additionally, however, the record reveals that the trial court explicitly referred to defendant's right to file his own pro se motion to correct errors and, in granting counsel's motion for leave to file a belated motion to correct errors, specifical ly stated that defendant could file his own motion pro se. Finally, the court granted both counsel and Castor 90 days from that date to file a motion to correct errors. Castor did not avail himself of the opportunity to file a pro se motion nor did he file a brief or attempt to file one. The record does not support Castor's conclusion that the trial court denied him his right to proceed pro se. As the State correctly points out, Castor's own inactivity denied him this opportunity.
Having previously argued that the court improperly denied him the right to proceed pro se during summation and the penalty phase of the trial, Castor urges us to hold that the court further erred in permitting him to proceed pro se at the sentencing hearing. Because we are reversing the sentence and remanding for a new sentencing procedure, we need not decide whether the trial erred in permitting him to proceed pro se.
VI. Denial of the Right to Present a Defense
Castor urges this Court to find that he was denied a fair trial because the trial court improperly excluded evidence which was germaine to Castor's defense theory. Castor points to the trial court's sustaining objections to Castor's cross-examination of FBI agents concerning whether the FBI agents had "heard" from some source that Castor believed that hit men were after him. Additionally, Castor argues that he should have been allowed to testify about his brother's financial arrangement with Collett Ventures; that in his mind, all of the managerial types at Collett Ventures fit the typical profile of an organized crime type; and about the Col-lett Ventures company records and the facts contained in such records. Castor urges that the court's actions in excluding this evidence deprived him of a fair trial because such evidence was central to his state-of-mind/self-defense/mistake-of-fact defense. In answer to this alleged error, the State correctly points out that almost all of the assertions and statements sought to be proven by Castor's excluded evidence was admitted during Castor's testimony and the testimony of other defense witnesses as well as witnesses called by the State in rebuttal.
In reviewing the totality of the transcript, it is this Court's opinion that the trial judge ruled correctly on excluding this evidence in the manner in which it was offered. Additionally, the transcript reveals that all of the evidence which the trial court may have excluded on crossg-examination was ultimately received by the jury either during Castor's case in chief or the State's rebuttal evidence. Castor was permitted to present evidence supporting his defense that he believed that hit men were pursuing him. Further, he was allowed to introduce evidence regarding the reasons for his misperception. We believe that the *1288jury was well informed concerning all facts of the case and that Castor was not denied the ability to present a defense by the court's exercise of its discretion in controlling the presentation of evidence and the cross-examination of witnesses.
We hold that Castor received a fair trial and that the jury's verdict finding him guilty of murder was based upon a review of the totality of the circumstances surrounding the killing. We deny Castor's assertions to the contrary.
VIL. Denial of Request for Defense Psychologist
Castor, on October 2, 1986, filed an application to employ a defense psychologist. This request was reiterated in a pleading entitled Motion in Support of Defense's Motion to Authorize the Employment of Defense Psychologist filed February 26, 1987. In this motion, counsel for Castor stated that he had discussed the case with a psychologist and had reiterated to the psychologist certain facts which had been revealed by counsel's investigation as well as the discovery materials provided to defense counsel. The motion stated that, based upon this information, the psychologist had indicated that, in her opinion, Castor "may have been under the influence of extreme mental or emotional disturbance when he committed the acts alleged in the information as covered by § 85-5-2-9(C)(2)." The motion additionally set forth the hourly rate and maximum charge of the proposed psychologist. The motion was denied on June 4, 1987.
We begin our analysis of this issue by noting that both the October 2, 1986, and February 26, 1987, motions requested the defense psychologist for the penalty phase of the trial. For the first time, in his brief to this Court, Castor argues that the denial of his request for a defense psycho-ogist affected not only the penalty phase of the trial but also the guilt-innocence phase because, he argues, without a timely inquiry, he was not able to evaluate possible defenses, whether or not to proceed to trial, or whether or not to enter into plea negotiations with the State. We reject the claim that the court's denial of a defense psychologist requires reversal of Castor's conviction for murder because, as this Court has previously stated in Hough v. State (1990), Ind., 560 N.E.2d 511, 516, a trial court does not abuse its discretion in rejecting an indigent's request for appointment of an expert witness when the purpose for such employment appears to be exploratory only. Here, as in Hough, at no time did Castor claim that he was either insane at the time that the crime was committed or that he was incompetent to assist in his defense at trial. Therefore, the trial court did not abuse its discretion in refusing the request for employment of a defense psychologist concerning the guilt innocence phase of the trial.
We are persuaded, however, that the trial court did abuse its discretion in denying Castor's application for a defense psychologist to assist him in defending himself during the penalty phase of the trial. Castor's motion of February 26, 1987, stated in effect that a psychologist had opined that, given the facts as related to her by defense counsel, Castor may have been under the influence of extreme mental or emotional disturbance when he committed the acts alleged in the information. One of the statutory mitigators which both the jury and the trial judge must weigh during the penalty phase of the trial is whether the defendant "was under the influence of extreme mental or emotional disturbance when he committed the murder." Ind.Code Ann. § 35-50-2-9(C)(2) (West Supp.1991). In view of the showing made in the February 26, 1987, motion, it was incumbent upon the trial court to allow Castor appropriate resources to develop the opinion of this expert witness concerning this statutory mitigator. The failure of the trial court to approve the expenditure of the funds necessary to further develop this opinion was erroneous and requires reversal of the death penalty.
The State, during oral argument before this Court, pointed out that following the jury's recommendation that Castor be sentenced to death, but before the trial court conducted the actual sentencing hearing, the trial court did order a psychiatric exam*1289ination of Castor. Therefore, the State argued, any error in refusing the employment of a defense psychologist was cured by such court-ordered psychiatric examination. The record, however, reveals that the trial court only requested a psychiatric examination to determine Castor's present mental competency and legal ability to be sentenced and "retroactively with respect to defendant's ability to have understood these criminal proceedings, particularly the trial of defendant which was conducted from March 14, 1988, to March 27, 1988, and to have assisted in the preparation of the defense thereto." Surely this examination was quite different from that which Castor had requested in his February 26, 1987, motion relating to determining whether he was under the influence of extreme mental or emotional disturbance when he committed the murder. We do not believe that the trial court's pre-sentencing order for a mental examination cured or rendered harmless the earlier error in refusing to allow Castor to employ a defense psychologist under the cireumstances as set forth above.
VIII. Validity of the Charged Aggravating Circumstance Upon Which the Request for Death Sentence Was Premised ~
Castor argues that, in order to impose the sentence of death for the murder of Malcolm Grass, the State must have proven that Castor, in fact, knew that the victim was a law enforcement officer. Castor argues further that the sentence of death could not be imposed on him if he held the good faith belief that Malcolm Grass was not a law enforcement official. The State, on the other hand, cites Moore v. State (1985), Ind., 479 N.E.2d 1264, 1275, cert. den. (1985) 474 U.S. 1026, 106 S.Ct. 583, 88 L.Ed.2d 565, for the proposition that the death penalty can be imposed where the defendant either knew or should have known that his victim was a law enforcement official. Here the jury was instruct ed that it should determine whether the State has proved beyond a reasonable doubt all of the elements of the aggravating circumstances alleged by the State, including whether "at the time the defendant killed Malcolm Grass the defendant knew or reasonably should have known that Malcolm Grass was a law enforcement officer."
It is true that Moore stands for the proposition espoused by the State. However, the facts in this case are markedly different from the facts in Moore. In Moore, the law enforcement officer was wearing his official, distinctively-marked uniform with a badge and radio clipped to the front of his shirt when he knocked on the door and was shot by the defendant. This Court held that the evidence in that case "clearly established that appellant had the ability and a timely opportunity to ascertain that his victim was a law enforcement officer acting in the course of his duty" and that Moore "forfeited his standing to complain that he did not know that his potential victim was a police officer when [he] did not take advantage of the opportunity he had to become so informed." 479 N.E.2d at 1276. Justice DeBruler, in his dissent to Moore, set forth the rationale for requiring that the ultimate sentence of death be imposed only where there is a determination that the defendant knew that his victim was a law enforcement official. Justice DeBruler said:
The policy at the base of the exercise of the police power here is to create a special deterrence to the direction of physical force against police officers and others upon whom the security of the community depends. There are at least two essential states of mind referred to in the provision, the one required for murder plus an awareness of the official status of the target. The first is within the meaning of the term "murder" and the second is within the special official status terms. The purpose of the statute restricts it to instances in which the attacker knows he is dealing with one of the enumerated officials. Such knowledge of official status must be actual. Actual knowledge is, I am convinced, intended by the legislature.... I consider the reasonable discernment test applied by the majority to be contrary to legislative *1290intent and basic precepts of criminal law governing standards to select those who deserve death as a penalty for crime.
Id. at 1283. Further, in Moore, Justice Pivarnik, writing for the majority, held that the majority was deciding that case based upon the facts of that case and stated that "we will not decide this case merely on the basis of his abstract arguments." Id. at 1276.
This case does not present a set of hypothetical facts or abstract arguments, but presents this Court with the question of whether to affirm the imposition of the sentence of death in the case of the murder of an unmarked, plainclothes law enforcement official without a finding from either the jury or the sentencing judge that Castor, in fact, knew that his vietim was a law enforcement official. We believe that the societal rationale for imposing death for one who kills a law enforcement official is promoted only if the defendant knew that the victim was a law enforcement official at the time of the killing. Because the jury was instructed that it could recommend the death penalty if it found that Castor "should have known" that Grass was a law enforcement official, its recommendation to the trial court that death be imposed was premised on an incorrect instruction of law. Additionally, the sentencing court, in its well-reasoned sentencing order did not find beyond a reasonable doubt that Castor, at the time he shot and killed Malcolm Grass, knew that he was shooting at a law enforcement official, The case must be resubmitted for jury recommendation and trial court sentencing utilizing the principle of law that a defendant can only be sentenced to death for murdering a law enforcement officer if the trier of fact is convinced beyond a reasonable doubt that, at the time of the shooting, the defendant knew that he was shooting at a law enforcement officer.
IX. Sufficiency of the Evidence
Castor urges that the evidence was insufficient to support the finding of proof of a sole aggravator beyond a reasonable doubt in violation of the United States and Indiana Constitutions. He argues that the evidence at the trial was insufficient to show that he knew that Malcolm Grass was a law enforcement officer acting in the course of his duty. Although we are reversing the death sentence and remanding for a new sentencing procedure, we still must determine whether the evidence is sufficient to support a determination that Castor knew that Malcolm Grass was, in fact, a law enforcement officer. As we have previously stated, the evidence adduced at trial which was then incorporated into the penalty phase was that the police officers announced themselves as police officers or FBI at the time of the shooting. Additionally, two witnesses who were incarcerated with Castor testified that Castor admitted to them that he knew that Malcolm Grass was, in fact, a law enforcement officer because he had had previous dealings with Grass. We hold that this evidence is sufficient for a jury to determine beyond a reasonable doubt that Castor knew that the victim was a law enforcement officer. Therefore, an order remanding the case for a new sentencing determination as opposed to ordering a term of years is appropriate. Additional arguments have been raised by Castor under this heading, but, in view of our ruling, we need not decide such issues at this time.
CONCLUSION
For the reasons set forth above, we hereby affirm Castor's conviction for murder, but reverse the sentence of death and remand this case to the trial court for a new penalty phase trial and sentencing procedure consistent with this opinion.
DeBRULER and DICKSON, JJ., concur.
SHEPARD, C.J., concurs in affirming conviction, but dissents as to reversing the penalty.
GIVAN, J., concurs and dissents with separate opinion.

=== CASE 9740969 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:46:28.569091+00 ===

GIVAN, Justice,
concurring and dissenting.
I respectfully dissent from the majority opinion's observation that the statement by *1291Justice DeBruler in his dissenting opinion in Moore v. State (1985), Ind., 479 N.E.2d 1264, cert. denied, 474 U.S. 1026, 106 S.Ct. 583, 88 L.Ed.2d 565, is the law in Indiana today. In many instances it is virtually impossible to tell what is in the mind of the perpetrator at the time he acts. The only logical basis upon which the State may proceed in such an instance is to establish the fact that the actor either knew or should have known the person he killed was a police officer.
in the case at bar, as pointed out by the majority opinion, FBI agents testified at the trial that they clearly announced to appellant at the time they confronted him that they were FBI agents. This is certainly a factual situation from which any reasonable person could deduce that appellant should have known they were police officers. I know of no scientific method to pry into appellant's mind as to what he actually believed at the time.
I agree with the majority opinion that appellant should have been afforded a psychologist at the penalty phase of the trial to present evidence as to his mental state at the time of the shooting. I agree that his mental state would not be a defense to the shooting but possibly could be a mitigating circumstance which might avoid the death penalty. I therefore agree that we should remand this case to the trial court for a retrial of the penalty phase.
I would delete from the majority opinion the dictum that the State must present absolute proof.that appellant knew he was shooting at a police officer at the time he fired the shot. The statute is satisfied when the State presents evidence that a defendant should have known he was shooting at a police officer at the time he fired the shot.

=== CASE 9740970 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:46:30.006142+00 ===

BUCHANAN, Judge.
CASE SUMMARY
Plaintiff-appeliant Jo Lynn Dickinson (Dickinson) appeals from the trial court's determination that the funds owed to her by defendant-appellee The Travel Trade, Inc. (Travel) were not "wages" under Ind. Code 22-2-5-2 (1988), and she also claims that the trial court erred when it refused to pierce Travel's corporate veil to reach defendants-appellees M. Monroe Lee (Lee) and the Lee Corporation of Indiana, Inc. (Lee Corp.).1
We affirm in part and reverse in part.
FACTS
The facts most favorable to the trial court's judgment reveal that in October, 1983, Dickinson, Gurnik, Lee and Lee's wife entered into an agreement to organize a corporation to operate as a travel agency. They organized Travel, with the Lees owning 75% of the stock and Gurnik owning the remaining 25%. Lee agreed to provide the capital for the operation of Travel.
Dickinson executed an employment agreement, assuming the role of president of Travel. The agreement provided that she would receive an annual salary of $30,-000, payable in weekly installments, and a minimum annual bonus of $5,800, or a percentage of the net profits for the year. The agreement provided that the bonus would be pro rated if Dickinson was not employed at the end of the year; the bonus was not conditioned on whether Travel was profitable.
The Lee Corp. was a general construction contractor, and Lee was its sole shareholder. Travel operated as a travel agency from October 1983 until 1987. During its operation, Lee personally loaned Travel approximately $191,000 and the Lee Corp. loaned it approximately $200,000.
Dickinson was paid her $5,800 bonus for 1984. She resigned from Travel in October, 1985, and her last day of employment was in December, 1985. Dickinson was not paid her bonus for 1985. Travel never made a profit and ceased operation in 1987. Its Wisconsin office was sold for $30,000 and various pieces of office equipment were sold for $2,000. The funds were applied to Travel's loans with Lee and the Lee Corp.
Dickinson filed a claim against Travel, Lee and the Lee Corp. [hereinafter collectively referred to as Appellees], seeking her 1985 bonus, plus damages and attorney's fees in accordance with IC 22-2-5-2. The trial court granted a partial summary judgment in favor of the Appellees, determining that the bonus was not a "wage" as used in IC 22-2-5-2 and that Dickinson was not entitled to damages and attorney's fees. After a bench trial, pursuant to Dickinson's motion, the trial court entered findings of fact and conclusions of law, incorporating its earlier partial summary judgment, and awarding Dickinson $5,800.
The trial court's initial order provided that Dickinson's judgment was against Lee. After the trial court granted the Ap-pellees' motion to reconsider its findings, it issued new findings and conclusions on March 29, 1990, which provided that Dickinson's judgment was against Travel.
ISSUES
1. Whether the trial court erred when it determined Dickinson's bonus was not a "wage?"
2. Whether the trial court erred when it entered Dickinson's judgment against Travel?
DECISION
ISSUE ONE-Did the trial court properly conclude that Dickinson's bonus was not a "wage?"
*708PARTIES' CONTENTIONS-Dickinson argues that the bonus was part of her regular compensation and was therefore a "wage" as contemplated by IC 22-2-5-2. Travel replies that caselaw provides that bonuses are not "wages" as that term is used in the statutes.
CONCLUSION-The trial court erred when it determined the bonus was not a "wage."
To decide this issue we must gingerly pick our way through two relevant statutes. The first one is IC 22-2-5-2 (1988) [hereinafter referred to as Section 2], which provides:
"'Every such person, firm, corporation, or association who shall fail to make payment of wages to any such employee as provided in section 1 of this chapter shall, as liquidated damages for such failure, pay to such employee for each day that the amount due to him remains unpaid ten percent (10%) of the amount due to him in addition thereto, not exceeding double the amount of wages due, and said damages may be recovered in any court having jurisdiction of a suit to recover the amount due to such employee, and in any suit so brought to recover said wages or the liquidated damages for nonpayment thereof, or both, the court shall tax and assess as costs in said case a reasonable fee for the plaintiff's attorney or attorneys." (Emphasis supplied).
The second one is IC 22-2-5-1 (1988) [hereinafter referred to as Section 1] which provided:
"Every person, firm, corporation or association, their trustees, lessees or receivers appointed by any court whatsoever doing business in this state shall pay each employee thereof at least semimonthly or bi-weekly, if requested, the amount due such employee and such payment shall be made in the lawful money of the United States or by negotiable check, draft or money order and any contract to the contrary shall be void. Such payment shall be made for all wages earned to a date not more than ten (10) days prior to the date of such payment: Provided, That nothing herein shall be taken to prevent payments being made at shorter intervals than herein specified nor to repeal any law providing for such payments: Provided, however, That should any employee voluntarily leave his employment, either permanently or temporarily, such employer shall not be required to pay such employee any amount due until the next usual and regular day for payment of wages, as established by such employer:; Provided, further, That in the event such employee leaves his employment voluntarily, and without his whereabouts or address being known to such employer, such employer shall not be subject to the provisions of IC 1971, 22-2-5-2 [Section 2] of this chapter, unless and until ten (10) days have elapsed, after such employee has made a demand for such wages due him, or has furnished such employer with his address, where such wages may be sent or forwarded to him." (Emphasis supplied).
Unfortunately these statutes do not provide a definition for "wages" as that term is used in Sections 1 and 2. Dickinson relies upon this court's decision in Licocci v. Cardinal Associates, Inc. (1986), Ind.App., 492 N.E.2d 48, trans. denied, to support her claim that the unpaid 1985 bonus constituted unpaid wages as contemplated by Sections 1 and 2.
In Licocci, we considered whether accumulated commissions were wages under Sections 1 and 2. The employees in Licocei received weekly draws from their accumulated commissions, with a year-end draw settlement if the employees' total annual commissions exceeded their weekly draws. Recognizing that Sections 1 and 2 did not define "wages," we looked to other statutory definitions of wages to determine whether the employees were entitled to damages for unpaid commissions. After examining worker's compensation law, employment security law, IC 22-2-9-1, and Black's Law Dictionary's definition of wages, we concluded that the commissions were wages pursuant to Sections 1 and 2.
*709Although not necessarily conclusive, IC 22-2-9-1(b), relating to wage claims, does offer z definition of wages: "The term 'wages' means all amounts at which the labor or service rendered is recompensed, whether the amount is fixed or ascertained on a time, task, piece, or commission basis, or in any other method of calculating such amount."
Also instructive is our decision in Baesler's Super-Valu v. Ind. Comm'r of Labor (1988), Ind.App., 500 N.E.2d 243. There, we determined that the employer's failure to pay the employee's vacation pay warranted damages and attorney's fees in accordance with Section 2. We relied in part on the previous decision in Die & Mold, Inc. v. Western (1983), Ind.App., 448 N.E.2d 44, which decided that vacation pay constituted wages under IC 22-2-4-4. (IC 22-2-4-1 and 22-2-4-4, relating specifically to mining and manufacturing businesses, provide for periodic payment of wages and penalties similar to the provisions of See-tions 1 and 2). In Die & Mold, we concluded that vacation pay was an additional wage, earned each week but deferred until a later time.
Travel attempts to counter Dickinson's arguments with Wilson v. Montgomery Ward & Co. (N.D.Ind., 1985), 610 F.Supp. 1035. In Wilson, the court was faced with a claim for damages and attorney's fees under Section 2 for the employer's failure to pay severance pay. The court characterized the severance pay as a "bonus" that did not constitute regular compensation so that severance pay was not a "wage" within the meaning of Sections 1 and 2 and that "wages" under Sections 1 and 2 were "something akin to the wages paid on a regular, periodic basis for regular work done by the employee...." Id. at 1038. It then observed that the severance pay bore no relation to the time worked and that it was something extra to the employee's regular compensation.
In Jeurissen v. Amisub, Inc. (1990), Ind.App., 554 N.E.2d 12, trans. denied, this court accepted Wilson's definition of "wages" as "appropriate under the facts of this case...." Jeurissen, supra at 13. In Jeurissen, it was decided that a bonus based on the financial success of the employer, and which was not tied to regular work done on a periodic basis by the employee, was not a wage subject to damages and attorney's fees for nonpayment pursuant to Section 2.
However, contrary to Travel's position, the law in Indiana does not exclude a bonus as wages simply because it is denominated as a "bonus." In Todd v. Stewart (1991), Ind.App., 566 N.E.2d 1077, trans. denied, we found that the trial court had erred when it failed to include the employee's May bonus in its calculations of the wages subject to the penalties of Section 2. Our conclusion was not hindered by the fact the compensation was referred to as a "bonus." Further, the mechanical exclusion of all compensation labeled as a "bonus" from the scope of Sections 1 and 2 would allow employers to escape the statutory penalties by merely labeling compensation as "bonuses." So we will look to the substance of the compensation Travel agreed to pay Dickinson to determine whether the 1985 bonus was a wage.
Our examination of the agreement between Travel and Dickinson leads us to conclude that the bonus was a wage as that term is used in Sections 1 and 2. Dickinson's bonus was compensation in addition to her salary, related to the amount of time she worked (as it was to be paid pro rata if she was not employed at the end of the year), which was paid on a regular, periodic basis. It is similar to the vacation pay considered in Die & Mold in that the bonus was a deferred payment of compensation which accrued during Dickinson's tenure with Travel.
Unlike the compensation considered by the courts in Wilson and Jewrissen, Dickinson's bonus related directly to the time she worked. Unlike the severance pay in Wilson, the bonus was paid on a regular, periodic basis. Also, the minimum bonus was not predicated on the financial success of Travel as was the bonus considered in Jewu-rissen. The fact that the bonus was paid on an annual period is similar to the annual draw settlement feature of the commis*710sions considered in Litcocei, and is not inconsistent with the deferred compensation features of vacation pay. In short, Dickinson's bonus was paid on a regular periodic basis for her regular work, and is therefore a "wage" within the scope of Sections 1 and 2.
Thus, Dickinson is entitled to treble damages and attorney's fees in accordance with Section 2. Fardy v. Physicians Health Rehab. Serv., Inc (1988), Ind.App., 529 N.E.2d 879.
ISSUE TWO-Did the trial court err when it entered judgment against Travel?
PARTIES' CONTENTIONS-Dickinson argues that the trial court should have pierced Travel's corporate veil and entered judgment against Lee or the Lee Corp. The Appellees respond that Travel operated as a separate and distinct organization and that piercing its corporate veil is not warranted.
CONCLUSION-Judgment was properly entered against Travel.
Dickinson's desire to own a judgment against Lee or the Lee Corp. rather than Travel, probably arises from the evidence adduced at trial demonstrating that Travel was a business entity without assets that was heavily indebted to Lee and the Lee Corp. She seeks a deep pocket to satisfy her judgment for unpaid wages.
Generally, Indiana courts are relue-tant to disregard corporate entity, but we will do so to protect innocent third parties from fraud or injustice.: Stacey-Rand, Inc. v. J.J. Holman, Inc. (1988), Ind.App., 527 N.E.2d 726; State v. McKinney (1987), Ind.App., 508 N.E.2d 1319, trans. denied; Extra Energy Coal Co. v. Diamond Energy (1984), Ind.App., 467 N.E.2d 439.
A party seeking to pierce the corporate veil bears the burden of establishing that the corporation was so ignored, controlled or manipulated that it was merely the instrumentality of another, and that the misuse of the corporate form would constitute a fraud or promote injustice. See Chicago Florsheim Shoe Store Co. v. Cluett, Peabody & Co., Inc. (7th Cir.1987), 826 F.2d 725, United States v. Van Diviner (10th Cir.1987), 822 F.2d 960; Orloff v. Allman (9th Cir.1987), 819 F.2d 904; 18 C.J.S. Corporations § 18 (1990).
When a trial court decides an issue adversely to a party who has the burden of proof on that issue, we are not free to reweigh the evidence or reassess the credibility of witnesses. We may only reverse the trial court if evidence does not conflict and leads solely to a conclusion opposite that reached by the trial court. Get-N-Go, Inc. v. Markins (1989), Ind., 544 N.E.2d 484; In re Marriage of Wooten (1990), Ind.App., 563 N.E.2d 636.
Dickinson points to the fact that Lee and the Lee Corp. loaned Travel substantial amounts of money and the fact that the proceeds from the sale of Travel's assets were distributed to Lee or the Lee Corp. as supportive of her claim that Travel's separate corporate identity should be pierced. No authority is cited and we have found none even remotely suggesting that the mere loaning of funds by a stockholder to a corporation is sufficient to justify piercing the corporate veil.
In Stacey-Rand, supra, we observed: "While no one talismanic fact will justify with impunity piercing the corporate veil, a careful review of the entire relationship between various corporate entities, their directors and officers may reveal that such an equitable action is warranted." Id. at 728.
Dickinson has presented no evidence that Lee used Travel as his alter ego or that he disregarded its corporate form by casually mixing funds or failing to keep separate records for Travel. The evidence at trial demonstrated that Travel had a board of directors and that regular meetings of the board were held, during which minutes were kept. Record at 1030-31. Travel maintained its own separate bank accounts and filed separate tax returns. Record at 1034. The loans made to Travel by Lee and the Lee Corp. were reflected in Travel's corporate accounting records as well as in Lee's and the Lee Corp.'s separate accounting records. Record at 1035. The evidence here is not unlike that which we *711considered in Extra Energy, supra, when we concluded the appellant had failed to present sufficient evidence to warrant piercing the corporate veil. We cannot conclude that merely loaning funds, with nothing more, is sufficient to disregard a corporation's existence. As Dickinson failed to meet her burden of proof the trial court properly entered judgment for Dickinson against her employer, Travel.
Judgment reversed and remanded for further proceedings consistent herewith.
CHEZEM, J., concurs.
SULLIVAN, J., dissents with opinion.
. Plaintiff-appellant Greg Gurnik (Gurnik) was dismissed as a party on March 12, 1991, after the filing of a stipulation of dismissal.

=== CASE 9740971 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:46:30.013891+00 ===

SULLIVAN, Judge,
dissenting.
It is my view that a bonus, whether or not tied to a particular level of profit, does not constitute wages.
Baesler's Super-Valu v. Indiana Commissioner of Labor (1986) ist Dist.Ind.App., 500 N.E.2d 243, and Die & Mold, Inc., v. Western (1983) 1st Dist.Ind.App., 448 N.E.2d 44, are not to the contrary. Both cases involved vacation pay earned on a regular and periodic basis for each week actually worked.
In reality, the seeds for my dissent are contained within Die Mold itself. Die Mold drew a very clear and very specific distinction between vacation pay and bonuses. The court held that the two are treated differently because vacation pay is part of regular compensation. 448 N.E.2d at 46-47.
Furthermore, it is of significance that our First District which decided both Die Mold and Baesler's Super-Valu, also decided the recent case of Jeurissen v. Amisub, Inc. (1990) ist Dist.Ind.App., 554 N.E.2d 12, trans. denied. Finding no impediments within its earlier Die Mold and Baesler's Super-Valu decisions, the court quoted with approval from Wilson v. Montgomery Ward & Co. (1985) N.D.Ind., 610 F.Supp. 1035, holding that a bonus is the "something extra" referred to in Wilson, not tied to compensation for regular work done on a periodic basis which pursuant to statute would have been payable, if requested, on a twice monthly basis.
Here the bonus was not payable on any periodic basis nor was it tied to any qualitative or quantitative degree of performance by Dickinson. Thus, the bonus payable here is unlike the commissions payable in Licocci v. Cardinal Associates, Inc. (1986) 1st Dist.Ind.App., 492 N.E.2d 48, trans. denied, or the vacation pay involved in both Die Mold and Baesler's Super-Valu. Commissions are directly related to the employee's performance, usually a volume of sales; while, as earlier noted, vacation pay is earned on a periodic and continuing basis and is directly tied to the time worked.
The majority here finds significance in the fact that the bonus was to be pro-rated if Dickinson was not employed at the end of the year, concluding that the bonus was thus tied to the amount of time she worked. I disagree. Dickinson was entitled to the bonus at year's end regardless of the number of hours or days worked during the year of her employment. It is inaccurate to say that the bonus was related to "the amount of time she worked". Maj. opinion at 709. It is accurate, however, to say that the bonus was tied to the fact of Dickinson's employment at year's end. The same may be said to apply to virtually all employee benefits-acerued vacation, insurance, parking privileges and other emoluments-which are not wages.
Although Dickinson's bonus was not tied to profits it was nevertheless not a portion of her wages. The trial court so found from the evidence before it. We should not substitute our categorization of the bonus under the guise that it is solely a question of law. To be sure, what is and what is not a wage is a legal question. But the answer to the question depends upon the surrounding circumstances and the context in which the bonus is to be paid. The trial court here did not unreasonably conclude that the $5,800 was not a wage so as to trigger the punitive and attorney fee provisions of 1.C. 22-2-5-2.
The majority understandably cites Todd v. Stewart (1991) 3d Dist.Ind.App., 566 N.E.2d 1077, trans. denied. Although the issue before the court was whether a "good *712faith dispute" exception exists with respect to the treble damage and attorney fee provisions of 1.C. 22-2-5-2, the court held, by necessary implication, that the bonus there involved, when not paid, gave rise to a claim under I.C. 22-2-5-2. Be that as it may, I believe Jeurissen and Wilson to be more persuasive and would decline to follow Todd.
1 fully concur in the majority's determination that the judgment was properly entered against only Travel Trade, Inc.
I would affirm the judgment in all respects.

=== CASE 2225669 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:52.913178+00 ===

343 Mich. 87 (1955)
72 N.W.2d 216
PEOPLE, for use and benefit of MICHIGAN ELECTRIC SUPPLY COMPANY,
v.
VANDENBURG ELECTRIC COMPANY.
Docket No. 55, Calendar No. 46,542.
Supreme Court of Michigan.
Decided October 3, 1955.
*89 John Brattin, for plaintiff.
Jennings, Fraser, Parsons & Trebilcock, for defendant Michigan Surety Company.
DETHMERS, J.
This action is brought against Vandenburg Electric Company, principal, and Michigan Surety Company, surety, upon 2 statutory labor and material bonds given under CL 1948, § 570.101 et seq. (Stat Ann 1953 Rev § 26.321 et seq.), in connection with 2 contracts between principal and the Union School District of the city of Jackson, under which principal agreed to furnish and install electrical equipment and supplies in 4 schools of the district. Plaintiff furnished equipment and supplies to principal for those and other jobs.
Plaintiff kept in its ledger a single running account with principal, disclosing an indebtedness already due plaintiff at the time the mentioned contracts and bonds were executed. Plaintiff thereafter entered in that account all charges made for materials shipped to principal not only for the school jobs but also for several other jobs not secured by bond. All payments received from principal were credited thereto. Certain payments on the account were, at the direction of principal, applied against specific charges for the school jobs. Most payments on the account were made without directions by principal *90 as to how they were to be applied. Plaintiff's president testified that he credited such payments to the oldest unsecured charges, indicating such application by key letters used in plaintiff's ledger to show to which charges the payments were being applied. Plaintiff submitted monthly statements to principal showing debits for supplies furnished and credits for payments, all as on a running account. These statements were duplicates of plaintiff's ledger sheets, made on its posting machine, but did not contain on them the key letters entered by hand on the ledger sheets showing to which debits the payments had been applied.
If plaintiff had the legal right, in the absence of directions from principal, to apply payments against the oldest unsecured claims and did so, then surety is liable in the amount for which the jury returned a verdict against it. Surety appeals therefrom contending, inter alia, that payments should be considered to have been applied against debits, regardless of whether secured or unsecured, in the order in which the charges were made, with the result that the claims secured by surety's bonds would have been paid.
In support of its contention surety cites Van Sceiver v. King, 176 Mich. 605; Mauro v. Davie, 236 Mich. 309; Pinconning State Bank v. Henry, 258 Mich. 44; Jarecki Manufacturing Co. v. Ragir, 272 Mich. 689. The holding of these cases is that a debtor may direct application of a payment before or at the time it is made, but, if he does not do so, the creditor may apply it as he pleases either at the time of payment or afterwards, if before controversy arises concerning it; and in the absence of such action by either debtor or creditor, if the credit merely appears in the general account and there is no evidence of any understanding to the contrary, the credit will be considered as applied to debits in the order of time in *91 which the debits occurred; and the burden is on the creditor to show by a preponderance of the evidence what application, if any, he made of the amount received. In the case at bar plaintiff's president testified that, except in the case of other directions from principal, he had applied payments to unsecured debits and that this was indicated by key letters on the ledger sheets. This he was permitted to do under the cited cases. Surety points out, however, that the monthly statements submitted to principal did not disclose such application and insists that, accordingly, plaintiff must be held to have applied credits to the account generally as indicated by the statements and that, hence, under the holdings of the above cases, the credits must be held to apply to debits in the order of time in which the latter were made. For this proposition surety cites People, for the Use of C.H. Little Co., v. Grant, 139 Mich. 26; McMullen Machinery Co. v. Grand Rapids Trust Co., 239 Mich. 295 (55 A.L.R. 1157); and also the Jarecki and Pinconning Bank Cases. The holding in the Grant and McMullen Company Cases is that mere entry of credits on a general account without evidence therein of application to specific charges and the rendering to debtor of statements of the same tenor constitutes an election by creditor to apply payments to the extinguishment of items antecedently due in the order in which they stand in the account and, further, that the creditor, once he has so elected and notified the debtor by statements rendered, cannot afterwards make a different application. In the Jarecki and the Pinconning Bank Cases there was no evidence of the creditors' application of payments at any time to specific charges, but only to the account generally. Although the statements rendered to principal in the instant case showed no application of payments to specific charges, the case is distinguishable from those just considered in that there are *92 proofs in the shape of testimony and ledger sheets that plaintiff did apply payments to specific debits. The disparity between the statements and the ledger sheets gave rise, at most, to a question of fact whether application was made as plaintiff claims. That question was resolved in plaintiff's favor by the jury and we cannot say that the finding is against the great weight of the evidence. The cases cited by surety do not hold, nor do we find any that do, that under such circumstances the creditor must be held to be bound by his statements to the debtor and to have made an election to apply payments to the account generally despite affirmative proofs of application thereof to specific debits. In the absence of a showing of prejudice to surety occasioned by failure of the statements rendered to principal to disclose the specific applications, we think it should not be held that the statements were of such binding character on the creditor. No showing of such prejudice was made in this case.
Surety also urges that Gard v. Stevens, 12 Mich. 292 (86 Am Dec 52); Grasser & Brand Brewing Co. v. Rogers, 112 Mich. 112 (67 Am St Rep 389); and R.L. Polk Printing Co. v. Smedley, 155 Mich. 249, are authority for the proposition that, in the absence of contrary directions from debtor, the creditor is required to apply payments first to secured and then to unsecured claims. The noted cases do not so hold. It happened in Gard and in Grasser that the secured claims in question were the first debit items appearing in the accounts and that application of the rule that, in the absence of contrary action by either debtor or creditor, payments must be deemed to be applied against debits in the order that the latter were made, resulted in the secured claims being paid. It was the application of that same rule that resulted in payment of the secured claim in Polk. In none of the 3 cases, nor in any other that we have discovered *93 has this Court said or held that application of payments should be made on the basis of preference for secured claims solely because they are secured. On the contrary, the rule to be applied, as above indicated, is that, in the absence of directions from the debtor, the creditor may apply payments to debits as he pleases. In Wood v. Callaghan, 61 Mich. 402 (1 Am St Rep 597), it was held that the creditor therein, having secured and unsecured debts of the same debtor, might, in the absence of contrary directions by the debtor, apply payment first upon the unsecured debts. See, also, Pinconning State Bank v. Henry, supra.
Surety contends that plaintiff is limited in recovery to the amount it inaccurately stated to be due in the notice it served, as provided in CL 1948, § 570.102 (Stat Ann 1953 Rev § 26.322), on the school district. The court did not err in permitting plaintiff to show that within the 60-day period after furnishing the last materials to principal for the school jobs it informed surety of the error in the notice and of the true amount due. Having such information within that period, it is clear that surety was in nowise prejudiced by the error in the notice. The court did not err in permitting the jury to determine whether surety actually was informed of the true amount of the account within the 60-day period and, if it so found, to hold for plaintiff in that amount. People, for the use of Wheeling Corrugating Co., v. W.L. Thon Co., 307 Mich. 273, cited by surety, is authority in this connection for nothing more than that, where no statutory notice is given, the surety need not show prejudice or damage by reason of such failure in order to raise it as a defense. It does not hold that inaccuracies in the notice as to amount due may not be corrected within the 60-day period.
Surety complains that plaintiff failed to establish which debits in the account related to materials *94 furnished for the school jobs covered by the first contract and bond and which for the ones covered by the second contract and bond. It appears that deliveries for jobs under both were commingled and that no effort was made to keep them or the records at all separate. Surety does not say that, as a result, its liability on either of its bonds might be exceeded. It is equally liable on both bonds. There is no showing of prejudice occasioned by lumping all the debits for the jobs covered by the 2 contracts and bonds into 1 account and holding surety liable therefor under the 2 bonds. It follows that the trial court did not err in permitting the case to go to the jury in that fashion.
Judgment affirmed, with costs to plaintiff.
CARR, C.J., and BUTZEL, SMITH, SHARPE, BOYLES, REID, and KELLY, JJ., concurred.

=== CASE 2225671 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:52.961132+00 ===

72 N.W.2d 312 (1955)
A. S. LUNN, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
Frederick KAISER, Defendant and Appellant.
No. 9526-r.
Supreme Court of South Dakota.
October 7, 1955.
*313 Parnell J. Donohue, Bonesteel, for defendant and appellant.
G. F. Johnson, Gregory, for plaintiff and respondent.
RUDOLPH, Presiding Judge.
This action was brought to cancel an agreement wherein plaintiff leased to defendant certain farm land in Gregory County. By the terms of the agreement each of the parties were to furnish certain cattle, hogs and chickens for the operation of the farm and business. The defendant was to furnish the machinery and perform all labor. Each party was to share equally in the proceeds from the livestock and farming operations. The agreement covered the period from March 1, 1954 to March 1, 1956. This action was brought in January 1955. The trial court entered a judgment cancelling the lease and dissolving the relationship created thereby. The defendant has appealed.
The record discloses that the farming and livestock business conducted under the agreement was highly successful financially for each of the parties. Plaintiff's evidence establishes that defendant was a good farmer and capable in handling the livestock. There is no evidence of fraud or dishonesty on behalf of either party.
It appears that plaintiff owned and operated this land for many years. Prior to 1954 his health had failed and he wished to relieve himself of the work involved in conducting the farm. There are two houses on the farm located about 150 feet apart. Plaintiff lived in the house referred to as the west house. The east house was to be remodeled, and the agreement provided that defendant should move into this east house with the right reserved to plaintiff to change houses when he so elected. Defendant and his family lived in the east house while it was being remodeled, and in the fall of 1954 upon request of plaintiff the exchange of houses was made.
There was no difficulty between these people until May when at the suggestion of plaintiff some sows were moved for weaning purposes. After moving the sows defendant complained about it, and plaintiff testified that thereafter their relationship *314 changed. An argument was had over furnishing certain milk cows, and in the fall the "shop" incident occurred. Under the terms of the agreement the "shop" was reserved for the personal use of plaintiff. It appears that the building consists of an enclosed part in which plaintiff kept his tools and other equipment generally regarded as a part of a farm shop. The other part of the building while covered with a roof is open and used to store machinery when not in use. In the fall defendant ran his tractor into this storage part. The plaintiff complained, said that was a part of the "shop" reserved to him under the contract, and ordered defendant to remove the tractor. Defendant refused and when plaintiff started to remove the tractor he was restrained by defendant grabbing him by the jacket. There was also an argument about changing the pasture, and defendant invited plaintiff to take off his glasses. The evidence also discloses several minor incidents such as arguments about walking across the lawn, the amount of cream furnished plaintiff, the pounding on the house being remodeled while defendant's children were asleep, and perhaps other similar incidents.
It may be conceded that the relationship between the parties was not that of bosom friends but nevertheless the purpose for which the contract was entered into succeeded and the personal animosity, if such it may be called, existing between the parties did not detract from the successful conduct of the business.
It may also be conceded, although not decided, that the relationship existing between the parties was that of a joint adventure, and that such relationship may be dissolved by a decree of court upon the same basis as a partnership. SDC 49.0604.
The contract by its terms contemplates that the defendant operate this farm. The land is leased to him, and the contract provides that he is to furnish all "labor and cost of the normal and full operation of this unit". The trial court found that "the management of the business would be the responsibility of the plaintiff and defendant." As we read the record the only evidence in support of such finding is the testimony of plaintiff, to which defendant objected, regarding conversations leading up to the execution of the contract. Plaintiff testified "Wellwell, we was supposed to both have something to say about how the stock was handled, because he admitted himself he hadn't had much experience with it and he wanted some advice, or my opinion and suggestions, * * *". Accepting this testimony at its full value, the only disputes among these partners concerning the handling of the stock related to moving the sows which were moved as plaintiff suggested and changing the pastures upon which issue the record is very brief. The record is replete with instances where plaintiff made suggestions about the livestock which were complied with, and these instances were not only at the outset of the relationship but at least to the time the hogs and calves were sold.
We find nothing in the record to support any determination that plaintiff was deprived of any right of direction he had under the contract. The real dispute here relates to discord over trivial matters, for which both parties were responsible. No doubt the bringing of this action only added to the discord, as plaintiff testified the parties were only on speaking terms during the two months preceding the trial, but defendant cannot be charged with commencing these proceedings.
The agreement expires by its own terms on March 1, 1956. It does not clearly appear that the plaintiff will suffer any loss by the continuation of the relationship during the existence of the agreement. The trial court stated in his memorandum opinion, "I am unable to determine that one is more responsible for this situation than the other, * * *". Under these circumstances we believe the harsh remedy of dissolution is unnecessary. We are inclined to agree with the Pennsylvania court,
*315 "Differences and discord should be settled by the partners themselves by the application of mutual forebearance rather than by bills in equity for dissolution. Equity is not a referee of partnership quarrels. A going and prosperous business will not be dissolved merely because of friction among the partners; it will not interfere to determine which contending faction is more at fault." Potter v. Brown, 328 Pa. 554, 195 A. 901, 904, 118 A.L.R. 1415.
The judgment appealed from is reversed.
All the Judges concur.

=== CASE 9740972 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:46:33.593604+00 ===

Abrams, J.
At issue is the appropriate discipline to impose on an attorney who deliberately misused client funds, and thereby caused his client to be temporarily deprived of his liberty pursuant to a capias. The Board of Bar Overseers (board) filed an information in the Supreme Judicial Court for the county of Suffolk recommending (by a five-to-four vote)1 that the respondent, Reuben S. Dawkins, be publicly *91censured. A single justice entered a judgment publicly censuring the respondent. Bar counsel appeals. We reverse. We order a six-month period of suspension.
Facts. Dawkins was retained by Kevin Miranda to represent him in connection with an injury incurred in an automobile accident. Dawkins represented Miranda on a contingent fee basis, under which he was to retain one-third of the recovery as his fee. Dawkins settled the case, receiving two checks in the amount of $10,000 each from two insurance companies. Dawkins deposited the $20,000 into his client funds account, and sent to Miranda a check for $2,692.67, as well as an accounting showing payment to Miranda’s medical providers, including payment of $3,300 to Cape Cod Hospital.2
Contrary to the representation in the accounting, Dawkins had not paid Miranda’s medical bills. Instead, he used the funds to pay “personal and business related expenses.” He later testified that he had hoped to replace Miranda’s funds with a fee he expected to receive from a client in a criminal matter, but was unable to do so because the fee was never paid.
In late 1987, Cape Cod Hospital commenced a collection action against Miranda for the unpaid medical bill. Miranda *92was brought before the court on a capias.3 At his appearance, he produced Dawkins’s accounting showing payment to Cape Cod Hospital and other medical providers. The District Court judge continued the case and attempted unsuccessfully to communicate with Dawkins. About one month later, Dawkins learned that the judge was concerned about his disposition of Miranda’s funds. Even after so learning, Dawkins did not communicate with either the court or Miranda, and did not pay over the funds. In late March, the judge requested that bar counsel investigate Dawkins’s conduct. Dawkins subsequently received a letter from bar counsel asking for Dawkins’s comments on the complaint. Dawkins turned the letter over to his attorney. His attorney, not his counsel on this appeal, did not respond to bar counsel. About one month later, bar counsel sent Dawkins another letter, directing him to respond to the complaint within ten days. Once again, Dawkins turned the letter over to his attorney, and, once again, his attorney failed to respond. Dawkins finally appeared at the office of bar counsel in response to a subpoena.
Cape' Cod Hospital commenced a civil action against Dawkins in July, 1988. Dawkins defaulted in that action, and judgment was entered against him. Cape Cod Hospital filed an action for supplementary process, and, after Dawkins again failed to appear, a capias issued. Dawkins then appeared in court and was ordered to make payments on the judgment. Dawkins paid the judgment in full on September 19, 1989.
A period of suspension is the appropriate discipline. Bar counsel relies on Matter of the Discipline of an Attorney, 392 Mass. 827 (1984), for his contention that a period of *93suspension is required. In that case, we emphasized the serious nature of commingling and converting client funds, practices which “violate [ ] one of the most fundamental precepts of our profession,” id. at 836, and “erod[e] public confidence in the Bar.” Id. at 837. We stated that, although we would not “adopt a posture of mandatory sanctions in such cases [of commingling and misusing client funds] ... an offending attorney, in any case where the misconduct occurs after the date of this opinion, will have a heavy burden to demonstrate to the court that sanctions as recommended here by the Board and Bar Counsel [public censure for unintentional, careless use of client funds; term of suspension of appropriate length for intentional use with no intent to deprive and no actual deprivation; and disbarment or indefinite suspension for intentional use with intent to deprive or actual deprivation] should not be imposed.” Id. at 837. There is no dispute that Dawkins deliberately misappropriated Miranda’s funds, and temporarily deprived Miranda of those funds. Since Matter of the Discipline of an Attorney, supra, suspension, rather than public censure, has been the sanction for deliberate misuse of client funds.4 Dawkins thus bore the heavy bur*94den of showing that he should not be suspended for some period.
In meeting his burden, Dawkins relies on three cases to support his claim that public censure is the appropriate sanction: Matter of Driscoll, 410 Mass. 695 (1991), Matter of Deragon, 398 Mass. 127 (1986), and Matter of McDermott, S.J.C. No. 86-41BD (Jan. 10, 1989). We think that these cases are not controlling and clearly are distinguishable. In none of these cases did the client suffer actual harm. Further, in McDermott, neither the hearing committee nor the board found that McDermott intentionally had used client funds. Rather, the record filed with the information and the panel both characterize McDermott’s use of the funds as “careless.” Dawkins, on the other hand, was found to have intended to deprive his client of funds, albeit temporarily. Further, in Matter of Driscoll, supra at 702, there was no actual deprivation of funds, and no harm came to Driscoll’s clients as a result of Driscoll’s actions. In marked contrast, in this case there was actual deprivation, and Dawkins’s client suffered nontrivial harm (e.g., being subjected to lawsuits and issuance of capias). In the Deragon case, the attorney’s delay in disbursing funds was not “designed in order to benefit the respondent.” Id. at 130. Dawkins admits that he used Miranda’s funds to pay “personal and business related expenses.” Driscoll and Deragon, unlike Dawkins, never had “been the subject of any other Bar complaint.” Matter of Driscoll, supra at 697. Matter of Deragon, supra at 133. Whereas Deragon made restitution before the initiation of the complaint, Matter of Deragon, supra, Dawkins not only *95ignored the judge’s inquiries and failed to restore the funds promptly, but also did not pay the hospital until more than two and one-half years after the hospital should have been paid and after bar counsel filed a petition for discipline. Cf. Matter of Martin, 5 Mass. Att’y Discipline Rep. 238, 239 (1988) (“The fact that restitution has been made, but only after the attorney was caught, carries no weight ... in demonstrating that the attorney had reformed his ways”). Finally, at the time of Deragon’s offenses, “this court ‘had not yet spoken to the seriousness of . . . rules dealing with clients’ funds’ or their ‘true import,’ ” Matter of Deragon, supra, quoting Matter of the Discipline of an Attorney, supra at 835, and accordingly was reluctant to impose stricter sanctions.
We permit more lenient sanctions in cases in which “special” mitigating circumstances exist. Matter of Alter, 389 Mass. 153, 156-157 (1983). The board found circumstances which militated against imposing the sanction of suspension. These circumstances included: (1) Dawkins promptly paid Miranda the money due him from the tort claim settlement; (2) Dawkins at all times acknowledged his liability for payment of the sums due Miranda’s medical providers; (3) Dawkins had never before been charged with conversion of funds; (4) Dawkins did not intentionally fail to cooperate with bar counsel’s investigation;5 (5) Miranda did not complain about Dawkins’s behavior; and (6) Dawkins had devoted his practice to assisting disadvantaged clients.
None of these factors mitigates the harm in this case so as to warrant public censure rather than a period of suspension. At best, they are neutral. In Matter of Pike, 408 Mass. 740, 745 (1990), citing Matter of Alter, 389 Mass. 153, 157 *96(1983), we noted that the “absence of prior misconduct by the attorney carries little or no weight.” The fact that Dawkins paid Miranda promptly is irrelevant. We do not expect attorneys to withhold money due their clients, lie, convert client funds, or obstruct investigations; we are not so pessimistic about the ethics of lawyers as to conclude that a lawyer who conforms to the expected standard of conduct in some respects thereby has established mitigating circumstances.
Further, because Miranda may not have had the incentive to lodge a formal complaint, we do not consider the absence of such a complaint a mitigating factor. By the time Miranda became fully aware of Dawkins’s misdeed when he was brought into court on a capias, he already had suffered the worst consequences of that misdeed. At that point, when Miranda produced Dawkins’s accounting, the judge properly focused the inquiry on Dawkins rather than on the client. Moreover, disadvantaged persons like those served by Dawkins often may not have the resources to pursue a formal complaint.
The board believed it irrelevant that Dawkins had been publicly censured for unrelated matters. Matter of Dawkins, 3 Mass. Att’y Discipline Rep. 52, 53 (1983). That was error. The existence, of prior discipline, unlike the absence of prior discipline, is a “substantial factor in selecting the level of discipline.” See Matter of Bryan, 411 Mass. 288, 291 (1991), and cases cited. We consistently have considered a record of past misconduct, even if unrelated to the current charges, in determining the appropriate sanction. See, e.g., Matter of McInerney, 389 Mass. 528, 532-533 (1983) (prior improper argument to jury, fee in divorce case, and trial tactics considered in discipline matter involving allegation that attorney wrongfully procured execution of deed from woman under conservatorship); Matter of Aronson, 3 Mass. Att’y Discipline Rep. 12, 18 (1982) (single justice considered record of private reprimand for unrelated matter in rejecting respondent’s motion to revise and revoke indefinite suspension); Matter of Saab, 406 Mass. 315, 327 (1989) (endorsing sin*97gle justice’s consideration of respondent’s prior multiple violations of disciplinary rules); Matter of Paris, 5 Mass. Att’y Discipline Rep. 286, 288 (1987) (public censure for unrelated conduct “relevant to the appropriate sanction”). See also ABA Standards for Imposing Lawyer Sanctions § 9.22 (a) (1986) (prior record of discipline is factor in aggravation).
As for the last mitigating factor, while it is to Dawkins’ credit that he largely devoted his practice to disadvantaged clients, that fact alone does not overcome the harm he visited upon on the particular client involved in this case.
In this case, imposing any sanction less severe than a period of suspension would “undermine [ ] the clear standards of the [Matter of the Discipline of an Attorney] case, and, in the process . . . diminish [ ] the court’s credibility in an area where the public interest requires steadfast protection of clients’ rights.” Matter of Driscoll, supra at 705 (Greaney, J., dissenting). Public censure also would be markedly disparate from similar cases. Dawkins has not established any reason why discipline in his case should be markedly disparate. We therefore conclude that the board erred in its recommendation of public censure and the single justice should not have entered a judgment consistent with the board’s recommendation. Accordingly, we reverse the judgment and direct that a judgment be entered in the Supreme Judicial Court for the county of Suffolk ordering a six-month period of suspension from the practice of law.6
So ordered.
*98Appendix to the Opinion of the Court.
Supreme Judicial Court Rule 3:07, Canon 1, DR 1-102 (A) (1) and (6), as appearing in 382 Mass. 769 (1981), states that “[a] lawyer shall not [v]iolate a Disciplinary Rule [or] [e]ngage in any other conduct that adversely reflects on his fitness to practice law.”
Supreme Judicial Court Rule 3:07, Canon 9, DR 9-102 (A) and (B), as appearing in 382 Mass. 795 (1981), states: “(A) All funds of clients paid to a lawyer or law firm, other than advances for costs and expenses, shall be deposited in one or more identifiable bank accounts maintained in the State in which the law office is situated and no funds belonging to the lawyer or law firm shall be deposited therein except as follows:
“(1) Funds reasonably sufficient to pay bank charges may be deposited therein. •
“(2) Funds belonging in part to a client and in part presently or potentially to the lawyer or law firm must be deposited therein, but the portion belonging to the lawyer or law firm may be withdrawn when due unless the right of the lawyer or law firm to receive it is disputed by the client in which event the disputed portion shall not be withdrawn until the dispute is finally resolved.”
“(B) A lawyer shall:
“(1) Promptly notify a client of the receipt of his funds, securities, or other properties.
“(2) Identify and label securities and properties of a client promptly upon receipt and place them in a safe deposit box or other place of safekeeping as soon as practicable.
“(3) Maintain complete records of the handling, maintenance and disposition of all funds, securities and other properties of a client coming into the possession of the lawyer from the time of receipt to the time of final distribution; preserve such records for a period of ten years after final distribution of such funds, securities or other properties; and render appropriate accounts to the client regarding them.
“(4) Promptly pay or deliver to the client as requested by a client the funds, securities, or other properties in the possession of the lawyer which the client is entitled to receive.”
Supreme Judicial Court Rule 4:01, § 3, as amended by 382 Mass. 820 (1981), states, in pertinent part: “Each act or omission by an attorney, individually or in concert with any other person or persons, which violates any of the Canons of Ethics and Disciplinary Rules Regulating the Practice of law (see rule 3:07) . . . shall constitute misconduct and shall be grounds for appropriate discipline even if the act or omission did not occur in the course of an attorney-client relationship or in connection with proceedings in a court. A violation of this Chapter 4 by an attorney, including without limitation the failure without good cause to . . . respond to requests for information by the Bar Counsel or the Board of Bar Overseers *99made in the course of the processing of a complaint; or to comply with procedures of the Board consistent herewith for the processing of a petition for discipline or for the imposition of private reprimand or informal admonition . . . shall constitute misconduct and shall be grounds for appropriate discipline.”
Bar counsel initiated disciplinary proceedings against the respondent, Reuben S. Dawkins, in September, 1989. The hearing committee of the Board of Bar Overseers (board) conducted a hearing on the petition for discipline in February of the next year. In its findings of fact, conclusions of law, and recommendation for discipline, filed on April 4, 1990, the hearing committee concluded that, although Dawkins had violated S.J.C. Rule^ *913:07, Canon 1, DR 1-102 (A) (1) and (6), as appearing in 382 Mass. 769 (1981), S.J.C. Rule 3:07, Canon 9, DR 9-102 (A) and (B), as appearing in 382 Mass. 795 (1981), and S.J.C. Rule 4:01, § 3, as amended by 382 Mass. 820 (1981) (see Appendix), in light of certain mitigating factors, a private reprimand was the appropriate sanction. The hearing committee also demanded acceptable proof within three months of the reprimand that Dawkins was managing his client fund accounts in conformity with the disciplinary rules.
Bar counsel appealed from the hearing committee report, and the parties presented oral argument to the appeal panel of the board. The appeal panel endorsed the hearing committee’s recommendation, with one dissenting member calling for Dawkins’s temporary suspension. The board voted five to four in favor of adopting the panel’s report with the recommendation that Dawkins be publicly censured. The dissenting members believed a period of suspension was required.
Shortly thereafter, Dawkins sent Miranda a check for $6,666.66, representing the amount recovered from the second insurance company, less Dawkins’s fee.
Although a capias had issued in Cape Cod Hospital’s supplementary process action against Miranda, Miranda’s appearance in court was pursuant to a capias issued in a separate proceeding brought by Cape Cod Anesthesia Associates, another of Miranda’s medical providers who had not been paid due to Dawkins’s withholding of the funds. The lawyer for Cape Cod Hospital simply happened to be in court on the day that Miranda appeared in the Cape Cod Anesthesia proceedings.
See, e.g., Matter of Worthen, S.J.C. No. 90-2BD (Mar. 1, 1990) (indefinite suspension for converting bail funds with intent temporarily to deprive and for delaying repeated requests and agreement to repay; offered as mitigation death of father, dissolution of marriage, and failure of his private practice at time of misconduct); Matter of Silvey, S.J.C. No. 89-33BD (Oct. 26, 1989) (indefinite suspension for conversion of $3,000 and failure to cooperate with bar counsel despite full restitution and respondent’s alcoholism at the time of the events); Matter of Martin, 5 Mass. Att’y Discipline Rep. 238 (1988) (two-year suspension for commingling and converting client funds with no intent permanently to deprive, even though full restitution had been paid and respondent suffered from alcoholism); Matter of Munroe, 4 Mass. Att’y Discipline Rep. 103 (1985) (temporary deprivation of estate funds warrants indefinite suspension despite full restitution and no prior record of discipline); Matter of Coughlin, 1 Mass. Att’y Discipline Rep. 79, 80-81 (1978) (indefinite suspension appropriate for temporary deprivation of funds, even if there has been full restitution and respondent has “otherwise unblemished record at bar”).
Intentional use of client funds, even without actual deprivation, generally has been enough to warrant suspension. See, e.g., Matter of Cardia, S.J.C. No. 90-48BD (Dec. 30, 1991) (two-year suspension for mishandling cases and intentional use of client funds with no intent to deprive, even *94though lawyer had ability to meet obligations to client and substantial personal difficulties); Matter of Elliot, S.J.C. No. 90-3BD (Feb. 23, 1990) (three-month suspension imposed on attorney who intentionally used client funds, even though he had no intent to deprive); Matter of Callahan, 5 Mass. Att’y Discipline Rep. 49 (1988) (two-year suspension for commingling).
We recognize that some of the above cases involve multiple offenses; nevertheless, we do not believe that a misdeed as serious as intentional use of client funds must be repeated before a period of suspension is warranted.
The board found that Dawkins’s failure to cooperate was unintentional: Dawkins “turned the matter over to his counsel . . . who due to his own illness failed to respond to Bar Counsel on respondent’s behalf.’’ Bar counsel does not argue that the board should have considered this factor in imposing discipline. We therefore do not discuss this failure. We note, however, that attorneys under investigation are required to cooperate with bar counsel.
In view of our decision, we deny Dawkins’s request that he be awarded costs. See G. L. c. 211, § 10 (1990 ed.).

=== CASE 9740974 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:46:35.503412+00 ===

Fairchild, C. J.
We have only the question of the sufficiency of the petition to deal with. The court should not refuse to hold that the facts on which the purpose of the petition is based be fully presented so as to advise the objecting party of the essential elements claimed to exist and of the issues which must be met with relation to the existence or nonexistence of those essential elements. The preliminary proceedings, such as preparation of maps, survey, notice, and filing of petition were properly alleged and are not seriously challenged here. The sufficiency of the petition seeking the incorporation as a village of the area involved is challenged because respondents have failed to bring to the court by allegation a claim that such area exists presently as a village or to allege such characteristics as would show that it is a village. Having alleged compliance with the two elements of a village prescribed by statute, i. e., area and population, respondents contend that they do not have to allege, in addition, that the area they seek to incorporate is a village in fact, or to allege characteristics of a village.
The incorporation of a village can occur only when the affected territory and population constitute a village in fact, as distinguished from an area which has not developed its conveniences and social and domestic life to village purposes. State ex rel. Holland v. Lammers, 113 Wis. 398, 86 N. W. 677, 89 N. W. 501. The legislature can grant recognition to and confer village status and authority upon a community which is a village in fact.
*533Sec. 3, art. XI, and sec. 23, art. IV of the constitution originally directed, respectively, that:
“It shall be the duty of the legislature, and they are hereby empowered, to provide for the organization of cities and incorporated villages,” and that—
“The legislature shall establish but one system of town and county government, which shall be as nearly uniform as practicable.”
The first statute enacted in accordance with those constitutional mandates was ch. 52, sec. 1, R. S. 1849. Since 1849 that statute has been amended and renumbered at various times until it now appears as sec. 61.01, Stats. It presently reads:
“61.01 Incorporation: area and population. Any part of any town or towns not included in any village, lying in the same county or in two or more adjoining counties, not more than one half square mile in area, with a resident population of not less than 150; or of a greater area than one half square mile and a population of not less than 200; or not less than one square mile in area, with a population of at least 400 persons to every square mile thereof, may, upon application therefor by not less than five taxpayers and residents of such territory and upon compliance with the conditions of this chapter, become incorporated as a village by such name as may be designated in the order of the court for its incorporation with the ordinary powers of a municipal corporation, and such as are conferred by the statutes, except that no territory used principally for tourist or summer resort purposes, shall be so incorporated where one half or more thereof, in area, is owned by persons who are not qualified, because of nonresidence, to vote in the state or in the township in which is located the land so owned; unless the majority of the nonresident owners, by petition, consent to the incorporation thereof.”
In 1901, the constitutionality of sec. 854, Stats. 1898 (corresponding to the present sec. 61.01, Stats.), was at*534tacked for the first time in State ex rel. Holland v. Lammers, supra. In that case, there was an attempt to incorporate a portion of a town of about two square miles, situated entirely within one county and having a resident population of 317. The statute (sec. 854, Stats. 1898) then provided that any part of any town or towns, not less than one-half square mile in area and not included in any village and all lying in the same county, which contained a resident population of not less than 300 might, on compliance with ch. 40, Stats. 1898, become incorporated as a village. The problem arising in that case was whether certain distinctly rural, sparsely settled, agricultural lands were entitled to be included, under the statute and the constitution, in the territory sought to be incorporated as a village. The constitutionality of the general law was attacked on the grounds that it did not limit the size of the territory to be incorporated by prescribing a restriction as to density of population in proportion to area. The court there determined that such a restriction was to be implied from the use in the constitution of the words “cities and incorporated villages,” and held as its final conclusion that (p. 415) :
“With the implied limitations we have mentioned surrounding each attempt to incorporate villages under the general law, it may be upheld as a valid enactment, and impervious to the attack upon it that it violates the constitutional rule of uniformity of town government.”
In reaching this conclusion, the court reasoned that many of the framers of our constitution came from New England and New York, and that when they framed our constitution they used the word “village” in the sense of a village as it existed in the older parts of the country at that time, that is, in the sense of an urban, developed community. Upon this basis, the court determined that a territory proposing to incorporate as a village must be a village in fact. It was stated in the opinion that (p. 414) :
*535“When the law says that any district containing a population of 1,500 or over may become incorporated as a city, it means that any district having the ordinary and usual characteristics of a city may thus become incorporated. . . . The same limitations must be held to apply to the incorporation of villages. . . . Under the law in question the territory seeking incorporation as a village must be harmonious with the idea of what a village actually is.”
Respondents argue, in effect, that the 1939 amendment of the statute, which gives us our present law, destroyed the “village characteristics” test applied in the Lammers Case. They urge that there it was necessary for the court to use that test of village-characteristics requirements in order to supply by implication the lack in the general law resulting from the failure of the legislature to indicate a ratio of density of population to area. The assumption is that the population-to-area ratio having since been expressed by legislative will, there are no further constitutional limitations to be implied. However, area and population are not the only attributes of a village. The opinion in the Lammers Case, among other things, states that a village must have a “reasonably compact center or nucleus of population,” and its territory must be “distinctly urban in character, with such adjacent lands as are. naturally connected with, and are reasonably appurtenant and necessary for future growth, in view of the surroundings and circumstances of location and prospects of future prosperity.” Confining ourselves to these descriptions alone, does the statute, as now amended, determine whether a territory is distinctly urban in character, and. whether the adjacent lands are naturally connected with it and reasonably appurtenant and necessary for future growth? Does it determine the surroundings and circumstances of location and prospects of future prosperity? The answer clearly must be in the negative, for the broad aspects contained in the foregoing recognized and time-honored definitions of a village cannot be circumscribed within the narrow confines of a statute *536which does no more than set up minimum standards for villages by prescribing a modicum of inhabitants per square mile.
The implied constitutional requirement is basic and cannot be read out of the statute, but must be considered as underlying the legislative enactment. A loosely composed structure made up of given areas lumped together merely because they contain given populations does not satisfy the constitutional concept of a village. If an area is not a village, as conceived by the framers of the constitution, then area and density of population per se do not make it so, and it cannot be incorporated as a village. The verb “to incorporate” in itself implies a blending into a consistent, harmonious whole. A village is a political, sociological, and geographic unit.
Respondents urge further that “the functions of the court are exclusively judicial and ministerial- — i. e., ascertaining compliance with the specified procedural steps and area-population requirements and setting in motion the machinery for the incorporation election,” and cites the case of In re Incorporation of Village of North Milwaukee, 93 Wis. 616, 67 N. W. 1033. In Fenton v. Ryan, 140 Wis. 353, 359, 122 N. W. 756, it was stated that: “The statement in the North Milwaukee Case that a court could not determine whether lands embraced in a petition for incorporation should justly be included in the proposed village was made in reference to a subject not directly before the court for determination and can hardly be considered a part of the decision of the court. Besides, the constitutional question raised and decided in State ex rel. Holland v. Lammers was not raised, passed upon, or considered in the North Milwaukee Case.” Even where the statutory requirements, including area and population, have been complied with, it is nevertheless the duty of the courts to determine in each case whether the territory seeking to be incorporated as a village is a village in fact. As pointed out by appellant, “Any other rule will open the door *537to all sorts of gerrymandering and manipulations for objectives apart from the fundamental purpose of incorporation which is to give the advantages of village government to an existing community which is a village in fact.”
That the courts have continued to consider village-characteristics requirements in addition to the statutory requirements is evident from the opinion in In re Incorporation of Village of St. Francis, 209 Wis. 645, 245 N. W. 840. There the court considered such matters as adequate means of communication between the parts of the proposed village, existence of an obstruction such as a railroad right of way, and the absence of highways. Furthermore, the court took up the matter of whether the area proposed to be incorporated would ñt more harmoniously with the existing scheme of government as a part of the old community or political unit and how it would function as a separate and distinct unit. Other cases which may be referred to are: In re Town of Hallie, 253 Wis. 35, 33 N. W. (2d) 185; Incorporation of Village of Biron, 146 Wis. 444, 131 N. W. 829, and In re Village of Elm Grove, 267 Wis. 157, 64 N. W. (2d) 874. In the case of In re Village of Elm Grove, supra, decided after the 1939 amendment to sec. 61.01, Stats., the lower court was reversed for error in excluding evidence on village characteristics, and the case was sent back for retrial.
The question of village characteristics was not reached in In re Village of Oconomowoc Lake, 264 Wis. 540, 59 N. W. (2d) 662, because the petition in that case did not comply with the statutory requirements as to area and population and did not conform to the rule of contiguity.
We do not on this appeal determine whether the territory involved is a village. We hold merely that any area sought to be incorporated as a village must be a village in fact; and that respondents’ pleadings are deficient because they fail allegations that the area sought to be incorporated is a village in fact or allegations of such facts as would show the existence *538of a village. The appellant town of Summit has an adverse interest and has the right to demur. The order appealed from should be reversed with directions that the demurrer be sustained. The petitioners have leave to amend their petition within thirty days from the time of the remittitur.
By the Court. — The order overruling the demurrer is reversed. Cause remanded for further proceedings according to law.

=== CASE 9740975 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:46:35.50781+00 ===

Currie, J.
(dissenting). The majority opinion places the court’s stamp of approval upon the procedure followed here by the appellant town in demurring to the petition for incorporation. The result is that an order overruling such a demurrer constitutes an appealable order under the provisions of sub. (3), sec. 274.33, Stats.
This issue was not before us on the prior appeal of In re Village of Oconomowoc Lake (1953), 264 Wis. 540, 59 N. W. (2d) 662, because, while the town of Summit therein attacked the sufficiency of the petition by an instrument entitled “Demurrer and Motion to Dismiss,” the order of the trial court did dismiss the petition as insufficient. Such an order was an appealable order under the provisions of sub. (1), sec. 274.33, Stats., as its effect was to terminate the action, which an order holding the allegations of the petition to be sufficient would not.
Sec. 263.06, Stats., authorizes demurrers to be interposed to “complaints” and sec. 263.01 makes it clear that ch. 263, Stats., relates to the forms of pleadings in “civil actions.” Proceedings to incorporate a village are special statutory proceedings and not civil actions. However, sec. 260.01 provides :
“Title XXV relates to civil actions in the circuit courts and other courts of record, having concurrent jurisdiction therewith to a greater or less extent, in civil actions, and to special proceeding's in such courts except where its provisions *539are clearly inapplicable or inappropriate to special proceedings.” (Italics supplied.)
Demurrers are “clearly inapplicable and inappropriate” to village incorporation proceedings. Secs. 61.01 to 61.08, Stats., govern such proceedings and do not require that the petition be served on anyone but merely that it be filed with the court. Sub. (1) of sec. 61.07 confers upon a majority of 'the freeholders residing in the territory sought to be incorporated, or the owners of more than one half of the property by assessed value in such territqry, the right to file a petition subscribed by them in opposition to the incorporation. If such opposition petition is filed the court is required to deny the petition for incorporation. Sub. (2) of sec. 61.07 provides that if such an opposition petition is not filed “the court shall hear all parties interested for or against such application who shall seasonably appear.”
This prescribed procedure is in marked contrast to such a special statutory proceedings as condemnation where the property owner whose land is sought to be taken by a municipal corporation is expressly given the right to serve and file an answer (sub. (1) of sec. 32.07, Stats.) and where the proceeding is adversary in character. The instant village incorporation proceedings are nonadversary in character because directed against no one, and the town out of whose territory the village is sought to be incorporated merely has the right to appear and affirmatively object if the statutory procedure for incorporation is not complied with. The village incorporation statutes do not contemplate that the town or anyone else shall file an answer or demurrer to the petition.
By holding that such a petition is not demurrable, an objecting property owner or town would in nowise be prejudiced because the sufficiency of the petition can always be reviewed on appeal from the order granting the incorporation. On the other hand, by according the right of demurrer to an object*540ing town, a temptation is provided to use it, together with the concomitant right of appeal from an order overruling the demurrer, for purposes of delay so as to gain at least one year more of taxes from the territory sought to be incorporated.
The proper disposition to make of this appeal would be to hold that the objecting town had no right to demur to the petition, and, therefore, the order overruling such so-called demurrer is not an appealable order.
Turning now to the merits, I must respectfully dissent from the conclusion of the majority that the petition was insufficient. It must not be lost sight of that this incorporation proceeding is purely statutory in character. The petition contains every allegation required by the express wording of secs. 61.01 to 61.06, Stats. If this court by implication reads into such statutes the requirement that the described territory must have the characteristics of a village, then in construing the instant petition, which contains all the allegations expressly required by the statutes and requests that such territory be incorporated "as a village,” the same reasonable inference should be drawn therefrom that it does allege that such territory does possess the characteristics of a village.
I am authorized to state that Mr. Justice MartiN and Mr. Justice Steinle concur in this dissent.

=== CASE 9740976 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:46:36.14882+00 ===

Garfield, J.
Plaintiff, insurer under the Workmen’s Compensation law (chapters 85, 86, Codes, 1950, 1954) of Michael-Leonard Co., brought this law action under Code section 85.22 as subrogee of P. II. Underwood, employee of Michael-Leonard, to recover from third parties for personal injuries to him. The petition was dismissed on defendants’ motion. From judgment of dismissal plaintiff has appealed.
The appeal involves the construction of Code section 85.22, especially subsection 5 thereof, chapter 64, Acts of Fifty-second General Assembly (1947). We have never before considered the meaning of subsection 5. Some provisions of section 85.22 were before us in Iowa National Mutual Ins. Co. v. Chicago, B. & Q. R. Co., 246 Iowa 971, 68 N.W.2d 920.
In addition to the matters above stated plaintiff’s petition alleges: an automobile operated by defendant Tracy North, owned by defendant Sears North, struck the rear of a car in which Underwood was seated; the resulting injuries to Underwood arose out of and in the course of his employment by Michael-Leonard and were compensable; plaintiff has paid for medical, hospital and nursing care furnished Underwood and as compensation to him about $1500 and will be required tO' make additional payments therefor in the future; plaintiff served written notice on Underwood to bring action against defendant Norths as they caused said injuries under circumstances creating a legal liability but Underwood failed to bring said action within 90 days after receipt of the notice, stating he, had executed a covenant not to sue said Norths; defendant Sears North carried automobile liability insurance in defendant State Automobile Insurance Association; representatives of the three defendants negotiated a settlement with Underwood SO' that upon payment of $22.90 they received from him three months after he was injured a covenant not to sue, copy of which was attached; plaintiff claims under the Workmen’s Compensation law it is subrogated to all rights of Underwood to maintain this action to recover for his injuries; said covenant not to sue creates a legal liability upon defendants for said injuries; plaintiff is en*1297titled to recover from defendants the money it was and will be required to pay Underwood for said injuries; Underwood was damaged by said injuries to the extent of $35,000.
Defendants’ motion to dismiss alleges the petition is insufficient because: it states no grounds of negligence against them which were the proximate cause of Underwood’s injuries nor that he was free from contributory negligence; Code section 85.22 is designed merely to provide an insurance carrier a remedy against an injured employee, not a third party, and to enable the carrier to collect from the employee any payments made to him by a third party; it is not shown a previous action had been commenced against defendants by plaintiff or Underwood to recover for his injuries or that defendants ever admitted any legal liability therefor; the petition is an attempt to do something unconstitutional since it is designed to deny defendants their right to defend and prove themselves free from negligence which caused the injuries.
The trial court sustained the motion to dismiss upon the above grounds.
Code section 85.22 under which this action is brought, so far as now material, provides:
“Liability of others — subrogation. When an employee receives an injury for which compensation is payable * * * anwhich injury is caused under circumstances creating a legal liability against some person other than the employer to pay damages, the employee * * * may take proceedings against his employer for compensation, and * * * also maintain an action against such third party for damages. When an injured employee * * * brings an action against such third party * * * the following rights and duties shall ensue :
“1. If compensation is paid the employee * * * the employer by whom the same was paid, or his insurer which paid it, shall be indemnified out of the recovery of damages to the extent of the payment so made, * * *.
“2. In case the employee fails to bring such action within ninety days, * * ® after written notice so to- do given by the employer or his insurer, * * * then the employer or his insurer shall be subrogated to the rights of the employee to maintain the *1298action against such third party, and may recover damages for the injury to the same extent that the employee might. In case of recovery, the court shall enter judgment for distribution of the proceeds thereof as follows:
“a. A sum sufficient to repay the employer for the amount of compensation actually paid by him to that time.
“1. A sum sufficient to pay the employer the present worth * * * of the future payments of compensation for which he is -liable, * * *.
“c. The balance, if any, shall be paid over to the employee.
“3. Before a settlement shall become effective between an employee or an employer and such third party who is liable for the injury, it must be with the written * * * consent of the employer or insurer, in case the settlement is between the employee and such third party; or on refusal of consent, * * * then upon the written approval of the industrial commissioner.
«4 # « *
“5. For subrogation purposes, hereunder, any payment made unto an injured employee, * * * by or on behalf of any third party, his or its principal or agent liable for, connected with, or involved in causing an injury to such employee shall be considered as having been so paid as damages resulting from and because said injury was caused under circumstances (Treating a legal liability agamst said third party, whether such payment be made under a covenant not to sue, compromise settlement, denial of liability or otherwise.” (Italics added.)
Subsection 5 was added as an amendment to the statute by chapter 64, Acts 52d General Assembly (1947). The title to chapter 64 reads: “An Act to amend section eighty-five point twenty-two (85.22), Code, 1946, by adding at the end thereof a separate subsection prescribing the force and effect for subrogation purposes under the workmen’s compensation law of payments made unto an injured employee, * * * by any third party, his or its principal or agent liable for, connected with, or involved in causing the injury to such employee.”
Plaintiff in effect concedes that if it were not for subsection 5 it has not stated a cause of action since it has not alleged the *1299injuries to Underwood were caused by the negligence of the driver North nor that Underwood was free from contributory negligence. Such concession seems called for by our decisions under what is now section 85.22 prior to the addition of subsection 5 thereto in 1947. Southern Surety Co. of New York v. Chicago, R. I. & P. Ry. Co., 215 Iowa 525, 531, 245 N.W. 864 (“This court cannot hold * * * the agreement made between the employee and the railway company was an admission of liability on the part of the railway company, nor that the payments made under such agreement were for damages.”) ; Renner v. Model Laundry, Cleaning & Dyeing Co., 191 Iowa 1288, 1293, 1294, 184 N.W. 611, 613; Disbrow v. Deering Implement Co., 233 Iowa 380, 387, 389, 9 N.W.2d 378, 382.
Other courts, in the absence of a statutory provision such as subsection 5 of section 85.22, hold a settlement between an alleged third party wrongdoer and an injured employee is not an admission of the former’s liability for the injury. United States Fid. & Guar. Co. v. New York, N. H. & H. R. Co., 101 Conn. 200, 205, 125 A. 875, 877 (“Defendant’s settlement with the employee cannot be taken as an acknowledgment by it of its legal liability.”); Whitney v. Louisville & N. R. Co., 296 Ky. 381, 177 S.W.2d 139; Western Maryland Ry. Co. v. Employers Liability Assur. Corp., 163 Md. 97, 161 A. 5; Texas Employers Ins. Assn. v. Fort Worth & D. C. Ry. Co., Tex. Civ. App., 181 S.W.2d 828; 71 C. J., Workmen’s Compensation Acts, section 1609.
Plaintiff maintains, however, that under subsection 5, quoted above, for subrogation purposes the payment to Underwood by or on behalf of defendants “shall be considered as having been so paid as damages resulting from and because said injury was caused under circumstances creating a legal liability against said” defendants, even though such payment was mad? under a covenant not to sue and that it was therefore error to sustain defendants’ motion to dismiss.
We see no escape from the conclusion that, as against defendants’ motion to dismiss, the petition states a cause of action under section 85.22, as amended by the addition of subsection 5. The statute now plainly provides, as plaintiff contends, that for subrogation purposes such a payment as plaintiff alleges *1300defendants made the injured employee shall be considered as having been paid because the injury was caused under circumstances creating a legal liability against them.
The title to the amending Act (chapter 64, Acts of 52d General Assembly), above quoted, indicates the legislature intendéd to make some change in the existing law and to prescribe the force and effect for subrogation purposes of such a payment as plaintiff alleges defendants made Underwood. We think the amendment was intended to have the force and effect plaintiff contends for it. No other reasonable or plausible meaning of subsection 5 has been suggested.
Since the petition, in view of section 85.22, alleges a legal liability against defendants for the injuries to Underwood plaintiff was not required to assert grounds of negligence against them nor Underwood’s freedom from contributory negligence. Defendants’ contention that section 85.22 as now amended is designed merely to provide an insurance carrier a remedy against an injured employee, not a third party, and to enable the carrier to collect from the employee any payments made to him by a third party is obviously without merit and contrary to the plain language of the statute. This is defendants’ principal suggestion as to the meaning and effect of subsection 5.
Defendants argue subsection 5 applies only to rights between the employer or his insurer and the injured employee, not to any rights of the employer or insurer against the third party. The argument is that under the facts here the only effect of subsection 5 is to enable plaintiff-insurer to recover from Underwood, the injured employee, the $22.90 paid him by representatives of defendants. Nothing in subsection 5 so provides.
The first words of subsection 5, “For subrogation purposes hereunder,” clearly refer back to subsection 2 which states “the employer or his insurer shall be subrogated to the rights of the employee to maintain the action against such third party, and may recover damages for the injury to- the same extent that the employee might.” (Emphasis added.) Section 85.22 contains no other reference to subrogation.
The meaning of subsection 5 evidently is that for purposes of an action by the employer or his insurer as subrogee of the *1301injured employee against the third prniy to recover damages for the injury any payment made to employee by or on behalf of the third party shall be considered as having been paid as damages resulting from and because the injury was caused under circumstances creating a legal liability against the third party. It is not questioned that this is such an action as provided for by subsections 2 and 5.
It is apparent that an action by the employer’s insurer to collect from the injured employee a payment received by him from representatives of the third party would not be such an action as referred to in subsections 2 and 5. It would not be against the third party at all. He would have no interest in it. The only parties interested in such an action would be the insurer and the employee. Nor would the insurer bring the action against the employee as his subrogee. No rights of subrogation would be involved. In such an action the insurer would merely be seeking partial reimbursement or indemnity for the compensation paid.
It is evident from subsections 1, 2 and 5 of section 85.22 the legislature was aware of the distinction between indemnity and subrogation. Subsection 1 provides the employer or his insurer “shall be indemnified out of the recovery of damages to the extent of” compensation paid. As before explained, subsections 2 and 5 refer to rights of subrogation. 27 Am. Jur., Indemnity, section 2, page 457, states: “Indemnity is clearly distinguishable from the right of subrogation * * * whereby an employer is entitled to recover his loss resulting from the injury of an employee by the negligence of a third person.”
Renner v. Model Laundry, Cleaning & Dyeing Co., 191 Iowa 1288, 184 N.W. 611, Southern Surety Co. of New York v. Chicago, R. I. & P. Ry. Co., 215 Iowa 525, 245 N.W. 864, and Disbrow v. Deering Implement Co., 233 Iowa 380, 9 N.W.2d 378, heretofore referred to, did not involve the statutory subrogation rights of the employer or his insurer to recover from a third party damages for injury to an employee. The third party was not a defendant in the Renner and Disbrow cases in which the employer or its insurer was denied recovery against representa*1302lives of the injured employee of payments received from a third party.
Altho, the third party was a defendant in the Southern Surety Company case, supra, we there said at page 530 of 215 Iowa: “It is nowhere shown * * * the insurer or the employer availed themselves of the provisions of Subsection 2 of Section 1382. There is no evidence that any demand was made by the employer or insurer that Wills must bring suit for damages. * * * there has been no subrogation of the rights of the employee to maintain an action.”
If, as defendants contend, subsection 5 was intended merely to permit the employer or his insurer to recover from the injured employee a payment made to him by a third party, the legislature failed to express such intent. The opening language of the subsection, “For subrogation purposes hereunder,” rebuts any such intent. In fact nothing in subsection 5 indicates the legislature thereby intended to take anything away from the injured employee.
Other grounds of defendants’ motion to dismiss are also without merit. Nothing in section 85.22 required plaintiff or Underwood to commence a previous action against defendants to recover for Underwood’s injuries. The effect of the payment defendants made Underwood under his covenant not to sue, if subsection 5 is to be given its plain meaning, is in the nature of an admission of liability against defendants which plaintiff now seeks to enforce.
As previously stated, the motion to dismiss asserts “the petition is an attempt to do something unconstitutional since it is designed to deny defendants their right to defend and prove themselves free from negligence which caused the injuries.” Defendants do not allege that any part of section 85.22 is unconstitutional, nor point out the particular constitutional provision they claim is violated by what plaintiff is attempting to do, nor the manner or respect in which it is violated. Defendants’ assertion of unconstitutionality is therefore insufficient. Doyle v. Kahl, 242 Iowa 153, 156, 46 N.W.2d 52, 54; Dickinson v. Porter, 240 Iowa 393, 399, 35 N.W. 2d 66, 71, appeal dismissed 338 *1303U. S. 843, 70 S. Ct. 88, 94 L. Ed. 515, and citations; Martin Bros. Box Co. v. Fritz, 228 Iowa 482, 492, 292 N.W. 143.
Moreover defendants have not argued any claim of uneonstitutionality. No such question is properly before us and we decline to decide it. Indeed we express no opinion upon any matter not presented to us.
Nor will the ruling on the motion to dismiss be upheld here upon a ground not asserted in the trial court. No conclusion is expressed as to whether the motion to dismiss should have been sustained if additional grounds had been urged in support of it. Gross v. Hocker, 243 Iowa 291, 296, 51 N.W.2d 466, 468, 469, and citations; Stickleman v. Synhorst, 243 Iowa 872, 876, 52 N.W.2d 504, 507.
It may be conceded subsection 5 of section 85.22 is a drastic statute. However, subsection 3 of 85.22 provides a simple method by which defendants could have proceeded to make a settlement with Underwood that would be effective against plaintiff-insurer. Defendants could have sought the consent of the insurer to the settlement (doubtless they could have done so in the absence of a statute) or, upon plaintiff’s refusal of consent, that of the industrial commissioner. Presumably the commissioner would approve a reasonable settlement to which the insurer refused to consent. If neither the insurer nor the commissioner would consent to the proposed settlement, defendants, in effect, had the option not to make it or to settle with the employee charged with knowledge that under subsection 5 for subrogation purposes it would be “under circumstances creating a legal liability against” them.
Evidently the representatives of defendants who negotiated this settlement with Underwood made no attempt to procure the consent of plaintiff or the commissioner thereto but proceeded to make it charged with knowledge of the force and effect it would have under subsection 5 for subrogation purposes.
Traders & General Ins. Co. v. West Texas Utilities Co., 140 Texas 57, 165 S.W.2d 713, lends-support to our decision.- — Reversed.
Bliss, Wennerrtrum, Smith, Hays, Thompson, and Larson, JJ., concur.
*1304Mulroney, J., and Oliver, C. J., dissent.

=== CASE 9740977 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:46:36.1543+00 ===

Mulroney, J.
(dissenting) — I respectfully dissent from the opinion of the majority.
It is almost an understatement to say the construction placed by the majority on subsection 5 of section 85.22, Code, 1954, results in a “drastic statute.” It means the employer’s insurer can recover full damages in a negligence action without allegation or proof of negligence. One could expect the legislature to spell out such legislative intent in rather clear language. I feel the plain simple construction of subsection 5 gives no such right to the plaintiff here.
Prior to the enactment of subsection 5 this court held in a number of cases that where the injured employee settled with a third party, under circumstances where there was no admission of liability, the subrogation rights of the employer or his insurer did not extend to the fruits of the settlement, without allegation and proof that the third party was legally liable for the employee’s injury and damage. Renner v. Model Laundry, Cleaning & Dyeing Co., 191 Iowa 1288, 184 N.W. 611; Southern Surety Co. of New York v. Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific Ry. Co., 215 Iowa 525, 254 N.W. 864; Disbrow v. Deering Implement Co., 233 Iowa 380, 9 NW.2d 378. In the cited cases the employer or his compensation insurer sought to have credited on the amount it was to pay the injured employee the amount the latter received from a third person involved in the injury to the employee. In all of them we held there could be no credit allowed until the employer or his insurer established the legal liability of the third party.
All that subsection 5 was designed to do, and, in my opinion all that it does, is give the employer or his insurer that which was denied in our decisions in the cited eases. In other words the earlier paragraphs of section 85.22, Code, 1954, gave the employer and his insurer the right to a credit in the amount of the sum recovered by the employee from a third party by litigation. The new section (subsection 5) gives the employer or his insurer the same credit in the event of settlement of the litigation however accomplished. The employer or his insurer is entitled to the credit of the settlement sum without necessity *1305of proving legal liability. This seems to me perfectly clear for subsection 5 states it is “any payment made” by way of settlement that is to be considered as damages resulting under circumstances creating a legal liability. In effect subsection 5 merely makes the settlement sum the same as a judgment recovery by the employee.
Of course the employer or his insurer is not limited to the settlement sum. That is all he can secure as a credit on the compensation liability without pleading and proof of legal liability. No agreement between the injured employee and third party will deprive the employer or his insurer of the right to recover in a subrogation action where legal liability is alleged and established. Renner v. Model Laundry, Cleaning & Dyeing Co., supra. I would affirm.
Oliver, C. J., joins in this dissent.