=== CASE 9737712 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:32:54.674739+00 ===

RATLIFF, Judge.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
Donald E. and Margaret F. Snider (Sni-ders) appeal the decision of the trial court which granted plaintiffs-appellees’, Clyde R. and Irene Gaddis’ (Gaddises’) motion for relief from judgment under Ind. Rules of Procedure, Trial Rule 60(B)(8).
We reverse.
STATEMENT OF THE FACTS
The facts are not in dispute. Gaddises filed a complaint in ejectment and damages on June 9,1977. The complaint alleged the Gaddises were the owners in fee of certain real estate. Sniders denied the allegations in the complaint and counterclaimed for a judgment declaring them to be the owners in fee simple. Sniders also filed a third party complaint alleging that the third party defendant had conveyed title to the real estate to them prior to conveying title to Gaddises. The trial court entered judgment on May 12,1978, declaring Sniders to be the owners in fee simple. No motion to correct *324errors was filed and no appeal was taken from this judgment.
Sniders filed a motion to correct judgment pursuant to Ind. Rules of Procedure, Trial Rule 60(A) on August 7, 1978, to correct a typographical error in the description of the real estate. The motion was granted that same day. On October 23, 1979, Gad-dises filed a motion for relief from the judgments of May 12, and August 7, 1978. Gaddises, who had retained new counsel for this motion, requested the trial court modify its judgment to show that Sniders owned a limited life estate in the real estate described rather than a fee simple interest. On December 6, 1979, the trial court set aside the judgment entered on May 12, 1978, and found for the Gaddises on their complaint and declared them to be the fee simple owners of the real estate. Donald E. Snider was given a limited life estate based on an “Agreement” executed June 12,1950, and recorded on July 25, 1967. It is from this order that Sniders appeal.
Sniders contend that the trial court abused its discretion by granting Gaddises relief under either subpart (A) or (B) of T.R. 60. As Gaddises concede T.R. 60(A) is not applicable, we proceed to the merits of Sniders’ T.R. 60(B) contention.
STATEMENT OF ISSUES
The only issue presented for our decision in this case is whether or not the trial court abused its discretion in granting the T.R. 60(B)(8) motion for relief from judgment.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
Trial Rule 60(B) provides eight clauses under which relief can be granted. The first four clauses of (B) are clearly not applicable as this action was commenced more than one year after the judgment was entered. Additionally, clauses (5), (6) and (7) have not been argued and are inappropriate nevertheless. Therefore, only clause (8) can serve as a basis for relief. Trial Rule 60(B)(8) allows a court to relieve a party from a final judgment for “any other reason justifying relief from the operation of the judgment.” The one year time limit is not applicable to clause (B), the only requirement being that the action be brought within a reasonable time.
The question in this case is whether it was appropriate to grant a T.R. 60(B)(8) motion for the purpose of correcting an allegedly erroneous decision on the evidence when no motion to correct errors was filed and no appeal taken.
It is firmly established that a motion for relief from judgment under T.R. 60(B) may not be used as a substitute for a direct appeal based upon a timely motion to correct errors under Ind. Rules of Procedure, Trial Rule 59. Toller v. Toller, (1978) Ind.App., 375 N.E.2d 263; In re Marriage of Robbins, (1976) 171 Ind.App. 509, 358 N.E.2d 153; York v. Miller, (1975) 167 Ind.App. 444, 339 N.E.2d 93; Moe v. Koe, (1975) 165 Ind.App. 98, 330 N.E.2d 761; Warner v. Young America Volunteer Fire Dept., (1975) 164 Ind.App. 140, 326 N.E.2d 831. Neither can a T.R. 60(B) motion be employed to revive an expired attempt to appeal. York v. Miller, supra. The proper function of T.R. 60(B) is to afford relief from circumstances which could not have been discovered during the sixty day period in which a T.R. 59 motion to correct errors could have been filed with the trial court. In re Marriage of Robbins, supra.
In Irmiger v. Irmiger, (1977) 173 Ind.App. 519, 364 N.E.2d 778, the appellant Donald Irmiger filed a motion to correct errors under T.R. 59. However, he did not perfect his appeal by filing a praecipe within thirty days of the overruling of his motion to correct errors, and did not file a transcript of the proceedings within the time provided by the appellate rules. Donald thereafter filed a motion for relief from judgment under T.R. 60 asserting the same issues as his T.R. 59 motion. His T.R. 60 motion being denied, Donald filed a motion to correct errors and then appealed. This court, in an opinion by Judge Lowdermilk, dismissed the appeal saying:
“In the case at bar Donald failed to perfect his appeal .... His subsequent motion for relief from judgment was in*325effective in preserving those issues which were or could have been raised in his original motion to correct errors because such motion for relief from judgment was an attempt on Donald’s part to revive certain issues after the time to perfect his appeal, the only means by which the trial court’s rulings on those issues could have been reviewed at that time, had passed.
“Donald contends that the trial court’s denial of his motion for relief from judgment was a final judgment to which a motion to correct errors can be addressed and from which an appeal can be taken. It is correct that the denial of a motion for relief from judgment is a final judgment from which an appeal can be taken. However, where the allegations of error raised in that motion have been or could have been raised in a previous motion to correct errors or have been raised in a previous motion for relief from judgment, then those errors are waived and cannot be alleged on appeal.” (Footnotes omitted.)
364 N.E.2d at 780.
In Warner v. Young America Volunteer Fire Dept., supra, this court stated the rule that a T.R. 60(B) motion may not be used as a substitute for a timely appeal and held that the use of a T.R. 60 motion to raise errors which could have been asserted by a motion to correct errors is limited to those not discoverable in time to be raised in a T.R. 59 motion to correct errors. This court stated at 326 N.E.2d 834-35:
“Rule TR. 60 permits an attack on a judgment by motion, and an appeal following the ruling on the motion. However, the relief afforded by Section B of this rule is not a substitute for a timely appeal. Our research does not disclose an Indiana case so holding, but the language of the rule itself indicates such an intention. Subsection (2) of Section (B) provides:
‘(2) any ground for a motion to correct error, including without limitation newly discovered evidence, which by due diligence could not have been discovered in time to move for a motion to correct errors under Rule 59,’ ([Original] emphasis)
“Dean Harvey also points out that the right to raise errors which could be raised by a motion to correct errors is limited to errors which could not have been discovered in time for a motion to correct errors under Rule 59.
“Appellant Warner did not allege any facts in his Motion for Relief from Judgment which would entitle him to relief under TR. 60(B) subsections (1), (3), (4), or (5). Because he did not allege that the four new allegations of his Motion for Relief from Judgment could not have been discovered in time to move for a motion to correct errors under Rule 59, he cannot obtain relief under subsection (2). This leaves for our consideration subsections (6) (judgment is void), that part of subsection (7) which reads ‘it is no longer equitable that the judgment should have prospective application,’ and subsection (8) (any other reason justifying relief from the operation of the judgment).
“Clause (6) of the federal rule 60(b) is the same as subsection (8) of Indiana TR. 60(B). The federal courts have held that relief under Rule 60(b)(6) is not a substitute for an appeal. In Wright and Miller, Federal Practice and Procedure, Vol. 11, § 2864, pp. 214 and 215, the authors state:
‘The broad power granted by clause (6) is not for the purpose of relieving a party from free, calculated, and deliberate choices he had made. A party remains under a duty to take legal steps to protect his own interests. In particular, it ordinarily is not permissible to use his motion to remedy a failure to take an appeal. However, this is not an inflexible rule and in unusual cases a party who has not taken an appeal may obtain relief on motion.’ ([Original] emphasis)
“There are numerous federal decisions interpreting federal Rule 60(b)(6). The common thread running through these decisions is that Rule 60(b)(6) affords a means for extraordinary relief, to be granted at the discretion of the court only upon a showing of exceptional cir*326cumstances, and that the remedy thus afforded is not a substitute for an appeal, nor can it be used to revive the right to an appeal after the time for appeal has expired.
“See: Expeditions Unlim. Aquatic Ent., Inc. v. Smithsonian Inst., 163 U.S.App.D.C. 140, 500 F.2d 808, 809 (1974); Horace v. St. Louis Southwestern Railroad Company, 8 Cir., 489 F.2d 632, 633 (1974); Lubben v. Selective Service System Local Bd. No. 27, 1 Cir., 453 F.2d 645, 651 (1972); Martella v. Marine Cooks and Stewards Union, Seafarers, Int’l Union of North America, AFL-CIO, 9 Cir., 448 F.2d 729 (1971); Demers v. Brown, 1 Cir., 343 F.2d 427 (1965); Swam v. United States, 7 Cir., 327 F.2d 431 (1964); Wagner v. United States, 2 Cir., 316 F.2d 871 (1963); Flett v. W. A. Alexander & Company, 7 Cir., 302 F.2d 321 (1962); Morse-Starrett Products Co. v. Steccone, 9 Cir., 205 F.2d 244 (1953).
“This sampling of cases covering the span of twenty-two years clearly shows that the intent of the federal courts as expressed in the cases interpreting their Rule 60(b) is, that if one intends to appeal a judgment, he must do so within the time allowed. One cannot sit idly by and let the time for appeal elapse, thereafter file a 60(b) motion and thereby revive his expired remedy of appeal. This is reasonable and logical, and we believe we should so interpret our Rule TR. 60(B).
“Having arrived at this point, we again examine the appellant’s Motion for Relief from Judgment, and we hold that all of those allegations of that motion which are duplications of the allegations contained in the original Motion to Correct Errors are waived because of appellant’s failure to perfect his appeal from the denial of the original Motion to Correct Errors.”
Thus, it seems clear that any matter which was known to or discoverable by a party within the period when a timely motion to correct errors could have been filed must be raised in a motion to correct errors under T.R. 59 and made the subject of a proper and timely appeal if appellate review is to be had. Any such issue which was raised by, or could have been raised by a timely motion to correct errors and a timely direct appeal may not be the subject of a motion for relief from judgment under T.R. 60.1
*327With the foregoing rules in mind the T.R. 60(B)2 motion filed in this case must be examined. It is readily apparent from a reading of Gaddises’ motion for relief from judgment that no new issues are raised. Rather, the essence of the motion is that based upon the facts as shown at the original trial,3 the decision of the court was erroneous. Such a contention under the authorities cited in this opinion could be raised only by a timely motion to correct errors pursuant to T.R. 59. It is obvious that a claim of error based on the facts of the case revealed at trial is predicated upon matters which were known to Gaddises within the time to file a T.R. 59 motion to correct errors. Consequently, there is no showing of any exceptional circumstances justifying extraordinary relief.
We agree that the granting of a T.R. 60 motion for relief of judgment is reviewable only for an abuse of discretion since such a motion is addressed to the equitable discretion of the court. In re Marriage of Jones, (1979) Ind.App., 389 N.E.2d 338. However, the movant in such a case carries the burden of affirmatively establishing a right to relief. Id. The cases previously cited demonstrate that in order to sustain that burden, the movant must clearly establish that it was not possible to raise the claimed error by a timely T.R. 59 motion to correct errors. This burden has not been met in this case. The motion merely asserted that the judgment was erroneous. Neither allegation nor proof of any exceptional circumstances which were not known in time to have been included in a timely motion to correct errors was made which would justify such extraordinary relief. The trial judge in granting the motion simply reconsidered the trial record, changed his mind, and corrected his judgment.4 This would have been proper under a T.R. 59 motion to correct errors. It is not a proper basis for a T.R. 60 motion for relief from judgment. The trial judge simply allowed the T.R. 60 motion to be used as a substitute for a T.R. 59 motion. The Gaddises sought to revive a lost appeal by way of a T.R. 60 motion. This is clearly improper, and for the trial court to allow such use of a T.R. 60 motion in the face of the clear holdings of this court that such is not permissible constitutes an abuse of discretion.
Therefore, we reverse the judgment.
ROBERTSON, P. J., dissents with opinion.
NEAL, J., concurs.
. In Covalt v. Covalt, (1976) 171 Ind.App. 37, 354 N.E.2d 766, some seventy-six (76) days after entry of a judgment of dissolution of marriage, the wife (Karen) filed a motion under T.R. 60(B)(8). The trial court granted the motion and entered a judgment amending its decree by granting Karen the sum of $5,000. This court reversed basing its decision solely on the provisions of the Indiana Dissolution of Marriage Act. However, Judge Buchanan, the writing judge, stated in footnote 3, 354 N.E.2d at 768-69:
“3. The writer of this opinion would also reverse the trial court’s judgment because there is no indication in the record that Karen, the appellee, could not have discovered the error on which she relied in her TR. 60(B)(8) motion within the sixty (60) day period, so as to have timely filed a Motion to Correct Errors as required by TR. 59... .
“My rationale for reversal on this ground is that from aught that appears in the record Karen could have filed a Motion to Correct Errors within the required sixty (60) day period, and the burden should be on the party seeking the extraordinary relief of TR. 60 to demonstrate adequate cause for not fulfilling the ‘condition to appeal’ by filing a Motion to Correct Errors ... a jurisdictional requirement of which we will take notice sua sponte. In effect Karen has used TR. 60 as ‘a vehicle to avoid normal appeal procedures.’ Moe v. Koe (1975), Ind.App., 330 N.E.2d 761, 765. See also Warner v. Young America Volunteer Fire Dept. (1975), Ind.App., 326 N.E.2d 831.
“The danger of such a circumlocution is recognized by Dean Harvey and Professor Townsend:
“The right to raise errors which could be raised by a motion to correct errors is limited to errors which could not have been discovered in time for a motion to correct errors, under Rule 59.’
4 W. Harvey & R. Townsend, Indiana Practice § 60.23(5)(d), at 222 (1971).
“Once the Motion to Correct Errors is accepted as the keystone of the arch of appellate review, its relation to TR. 60 is relatively easy. TR. 60 is expected to provide extraordinary relief of an equitable nature after the passage of the 60 day period within which to file a Motion to Correct Errors....
“Thus, it seems an inevitable conclusion that TR. 60 relief cannot be resorted to unless *327there is a positive showing in the record that a TR. 59 Motion to Correct Errors could not have been filed within the sixty (60) day period. Otherwise chaos will prevail in the appellate process.” (Original emphasis.)
We find the reasoning of Judge Buchanan compelling and consistent with the holdings in Warner v. Young America Volunteer Fire Dept., supra, and Irmiger v. Irmiger, supra.
. It is clear that the motion here was filed pursuant to T.R. 60(B)(8).
. No evidence was heard on the motion for relief from judgment. The court heard arguments on questions of law concerning the propriety of the T.R. 60 motion and on the correctness or error of its original judgment.
. We do not question the trial judge’s sincerity of purpose in attempting to correct what he undoubtedly believed to be an erroneous decision. However, well-intentioned his action, we simply do not believe such an option was available to him on the record in this case. Gaddis-es let their right to file a motion to correct errors and to take a timely direct appeal expire through inaction. They failed to sustain their burden of establishing exceptional circumstances justifying the extraordinary relief of the granting of a T.R. 60 motion. Had they filed a timely motion to correct errors the court could have reconsidered the trial record and if then convinced the judgment was wrong, could have corrected it. They did not file a timely motion to correct errors. They raised no issue which was not known or discoverable by them in time to file a motion to correct errors. Consequently, the court could not take the action taken on the T.R. 60 motion.

=== CASE 9737713 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:32:54.683072+00 ===

ROBERTSON, Presiding Judge,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent.
Although I agree with the majority opinion with respect to the need to timely file a motion to correct errors and perfect an appeal I believe the intent of Indiana Rules *328of Procedure, Trial Rule 60(B)(8), was to provide an avenue whereby the trial judge in his discretion can vacate a previous judgment in order to achieve justice.
Dean Harvey has characterized Trial Rule 60(B)(8) as a catchall provision allowing the court to vacate a judgment within the residual power of a court of equity to do justice. Further, the provision is to be liberally construed to grant relief to a party on broad equitable grounds, where, under all the circumstances, a need for relief is clearly demonstrated. 4 W. Harvey, Indiana Practice § 60.17 at 215, 216 (1971).
The majority recognizes that a trial court’s decision concerning a Trial Rule 60(B) motion can only be reversed for a clear abuse of discretion. Discretion is a privilege accorded a judge within the confines of justice to act in accordance with what is fair and equitable. State on Relation of Thrasher v. Hayes, (1978) Ind.App., 378 N.E.2d 924. Such an abuse of discretion has been described as an erroneous conclusion and judgment, clearly against the logic and effect of the facts and circumstances before the court, or the reasonable, probable, and actual deductions to be drawn therefrom. Campbell v. Campbell, (1979) Ind.App., 396 N.E.2d 142.
Given the trial court’s broad discretion in the matter, specific decisions must turn on the facts of a particular case. The trial judge should be given the requisite latitude to act on such a motion in a liberal fashion with an eye toward doing what is just. The fact that a motion to correct errors was not filed should be a factor for the trial judge to consider when ruling on the Trial Rule 60 motion, but once the trial court’s determination is made, this court should not second-guess the decision. Rather, we should look to determine if there is evidence to support the trial judge’s action, and if so, it should be affirmed. If, however, the facts of the particular ease do not reveal that a just result would be reached, then the granting of the Trial Rule 60 motion, when it is being used as a substitute for a timely appeal, would be an abuse of discretion.
Here, the trial judge recounted the dilemma faced in his prior decision, caused in part by Gaddis’s attorney’s failure to file findings of fact and conclusions of law as requested by the court. The extraordinary circumstances relied on by the trial judge in granting the motion included the facts that: there was error manifest on the face of the record; the parties would stand in the same position in which they stood immediately prior to the judgment entered on May 12, 1978; correction of the May 12, 1978 judgment would not injure any innocent third parties, and; the administration of justice would be served by the court granting the relief prayed for.
I believe the record reveals a just reason for the trial judge’s decision. Hence, under the factors of this case, I would not find his action to be an abuse of discretion. While I recognize the importance of certainty as it relates to the finality of a judgment, I am cognizant that at times, the overriding interest of the administration of justice requires the renewed scrutiny of an action once thought decided. I find that such an interest is served by the trial judge’s decision in this case. Therefore, I would not find his actions to be an abuse of discretion and consequently, I would affirm the trial court’s judgment.

=== CASE 2211762 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:11.405889+00 ===

244 Cal.App.2d 301 (1966)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
DONALD ALEXANDER, Defendant and Appellant.
Crim. No. 278.
California Court of Appeals. Fifth Dist.
Aug. 17, 1966.
Donald Alexander, in pro. per., and Benjamin M. Davis, under appointment by the District Court of Appeal, and Paul Briefer for Defendant and Appellant.
Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, Raymond M. Momboisse and Craig G. McIntosh, Deputy Attorneys General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
CONLEY, P. J.
The defendant was charged in an amended information with two crimes and a prior conviction; count one accused him of violating section 593c of the Penal Code in that he maliciously interfered "with a Meter used in connection with a pipe or main maintained by proper authority for the purpose of transporting gas approximately Three (3) Miles South of Rio Vista Bridge" in Sacramento County; count two charged him with burglary in that he did "willfully and unlawfully and feloniously enter that certain Pumping Station owned by the Pacific Gas & Electric Company located approximately Three (3) Miles South of Rio Vista Bridge, with intent to commit theft therein." The prior conviction was for violation of section 593c of the Penal Code, malicious interference with a gas main alleged to have occurred in Colusa County on or about the 5th day of May, 1964, and which resulted in a prison sentence. The defendant entered a plea of not guilty to each of the two crimes charged in the amended information but admitted the prior conviction. By stipulation the defendant waived a jury trial, and the evidence produced by the People was heard by the judge alone as the trier of fact; the defense presented no evidence; the defendant was found guilty of both of the crimes charged, but the sentence *303 was restricted to burglary of the second degree only. (Pen. Code,  654.)
[1] The evidence of the anti-social acts of the defendant is overwhelming. Very early in the morning of August 4, 1965, the defendant and the young woman with whom he was living left their place of habitation in Berkeley for the purpose of getting some mercury. They went to the gas field near Rio Vista at which are located Peter Cook Gas Well No. 7 and other wells. At daybreak, the defendant entered the surface portion of the gas well property and went into a small building designed to guard from the weather that part of the apparatus needed to measure the flow of gas from the well. From the meter in this housing, the defendant removed several pounds of mercury necessarily used in the functioning of the meter and took it out to the car where the young woman was seated. He there poured the mercury taken by him into a larger jar. His companion, acting as a lookout, had noticed an automobile nearby on the river levee road and had told the defendant of this fact. It turned out that the car seen by her was occupied by two deputy sheriffs of Sacramento County, Officers Wilkins and Baroni, who had received a radio call to check the gas wells in the area.
The deputy sheriffs saw the defendant coming out of the gas well area and finally getting into the car in which the young woman was seated. The defendant's automobile took off at a rapid rate of speed, which at times was more than 100 miles per hour. The sheriffs pursued the fleeing car with their red light flashing and their siren turned on full blast. Finally, the defendant lost control of his car and it overturned; when he crawled from the wrecked vehicle, he was arrested. It turned out that the Fox Boro flow recorder at the well had been robbed of its mercury contents. The fluid metal was found near where the defendant's car had been parked during the burglary; it was ascertained that it had been dumped out on the ground by the defendant's woman companion. Not only did the police testify, but the woman herself took the stand; the illegal actions of the defendant were proven beyond all reasonable doubt.
Charles La Fever, Jr., a measurement inspector for the Pacific Gas & Electric Company, testified that that company was responsible for the maintenance and operation of the Fox Boro flow recorder and related equipment in the measurement of gas purchased by that company from the Amerada Petroleum Company. The recorder measured the flow from the well *304 to the transmission main of the Pacific Gas & Electric Company. Charts showing the measurement of the gas are changed every 24 hours. The charts are marked by two pens, one writing in blue and one in red ink, which are connected to a bearing which in turn is connected to a float in mercury. Without the component parts of the meter, properly assembled including the mercury, the instrument fails to show the actual gas purchased. At about 6:15 a.m. on the morning of the commission of the crimes, Mr. La Fever was called to the well and found that the mercury was missing from the Fox Boro recorder; the meter tube extends inside the housing hereinbefore referred to and the flow of gas passes through the pipe in connection with the meter and is then measured.
The appellant presents three arguments on the appeal:
1) The "chart house" from which the mercury was stolen was not a building or structure within the meaning of section 459 of the Penal Code;
2) The defendant did not violate section 593c of the Penal Code, as there was no interference with the flow of gas through any main or pipeline, and
3) Section 593c of the Penal Code is unconstitutional, because it is too vague.
Appellant argues that because the little meter building did not have walls completely covering the entire four sides of the housing, the building, therefore, was not such that it could be burglarized. The history of burglary shows a continuing process of enlarging the scope of the original common law crime of breaking into a "dwelling-mansion." This marked extension of the crime covers many variations. (See 1 Witkin, Cal. Crimes (1963) Crimes Against Property,  455, pp. 417-418; 13 Am.Jur.2d, Burglary,  1-7, pp. 320-324.) But it is frequently reiterated that a structure subject to being burglarized must have a roof and four walls. (People v. Gibbons, 206 Cal. 112 [273 P. 32].) However, it has been made clear that there are vital differences in many particulars between the old common law crime of burglary and the present offense. For example, the building or room does not have to be occupied (People v. Stickman, 34 Cal. 242; People v. Searcy, 153 Cal.App.2d 799 [314 P.2d 1002]); a chicken house (People v. Coffee, 52 Cal.App. 118 [198 P. 213]), a pop-corn stand (People v. Burley, 26 Cal.App.2d 213 [79 P.2d 148]), a telephone booth (People v. Miller, 95 Cal.App.2d 631 [213 P.2d 534]), and show cases connected with a store (People v. Franco, 79 Cal.App. 682 [250 P. 698]) have been held to be subject to *305 burglary; a garage is said to be a building in which burglary may be committed even though the door was wide open at the time of the alleged crime (People v. Picaroni, 131 Cal.App.2d 612 [281 P.2d 45]); and a powder magazine constructed in a hill side with a door that did not constitute the entire front wall may also be burglarized (People v. Buyle, 22 Cal.App.2d 143, 148 [70 P.2d 955].)
There is an alternative definition of a building subject to the commission of the crime approved in the Buyle case, supra; it is taken from the opinion in Clark v. State, 69 Wis. 203 [33 N.W. 436], which quotes Justice Paine in La Crosse & Milwaukee R.R. Co. v. Vanderpool, 11 Wis. 121 [78 Am.Dec. 691] as follows: " 'The well-understood meaning of the word [building] is a structure which has a capacity to contain, and is designed for the habitation of, man or animals, or the sheltering of property.' " [2] Unquestionably, this four-walled construction with a roof and a wide doorway that was open was designed for sheltering property. The trial judge thought that it was subject to being burglarized. (See 9 Cal.Jur.2d, Burglary,  8, pp. 457-460; 12 C.J.S., Burglary,  23, p. 684; 78 A.L.R.2d 778.) It is not necessary, however, for us to pass on this question inasmuch as there can be no possible doubt that a reading of other portions of the Penal Code section relating to burglary establishes the crime. Section 459 of the Penal Code is in pertinent part as follows: "Every person who enters any ... mine ... with intent to commit grand or petit larceny ... is guilty of burglary."
The gas well in question is included in the definition of a mine. Public Resources Code, section 2200, describes "mine" and "mineral" and explains "mineral" as including, for the purposes of the chapter, "all mineral products both metallic and nonmetallic, solid, liquid or gaseous. ..."
In People v. Silver, 16 Cal.2d 714, 721 [108 P.2d 4], entry upon the surface premises of a mine with intent to commit theft was clearly held to be burglary: "There are many reasons for believing that the legislature intended by the addition of the words 'mine, or any underground portion thereof' to Penal Code, section 459, to make the entering of the surface of mining property with the intent to commit grand or petit larceny or any felony thereon burglary. One reason is undoubtedly the fact that much of the equipment used in the operation of a mine and mine plant of necessity must be left out of doors unenclosed by four walls and a roof. The greater portion of such equipment such as hose, pipes, flumes, *306 compressors, railway tracks and other tools from the nature of their use and because of their bulk cannot be kept in enclosed buildings. Another reason is that mining property is most frequently located in areas of relative isolation somewhat apart from thick settlements of population and the security of police protection. These circumstances obviously render such property susceptible of appropriation by those who are inclined to steal or misappropriate the property of others where the likelihood of their apprehension is slight or the penalty for their conduct is mild. It is probable, therefore, that the legislature, by the addition of the word 'mine' to the statute had in mind the imposing of this rather severe penalty to act as a deterrent to those who might be inclined to take advantage of the isolation of mining claims, especially in the absence of the owners thereof or of adequate police protection, to enter and appropriate property which may lay there in the open necessarily unenclosed."
[3] Appellant's second point is that, because there was no "interference" with the flow of gas, section 593c was not violated. That section provides: "Every person who wilfully and maliciously breaks, digs up, obstructs, interferes with, removes or injures any pipe or main erected, operated, or maintained by proper authority for the purpose of transporting, conveying or distributing gas for light, heat, power or any other purpose, or any part thereof, or any valve, meter, holder, compressor, machinery, appurtenance, equipment or apparatus connected with any such main or pipeline, or used in connection with or affecting the operation thereof or the conveying of gas therethrough, or shuts off, removes, obstructs, injures, or in any way interferes with any valve installed on, connected to, or operated in connection with any such main or pipeline, or controlling or affecting the flow of gas through any such main or pipeline, is guilty of a felony." (Italics added.)
The Fox Boro flow recorder which was impaired at Peter Cook No. 7 well is used to measure the flow of gas from the well into the Pacific Gas & Electric collection system and ultimately its transmission line; it is a meter. Removal of the mercury from the recorder interferes basically with the operation of the meter. Appellant is obviously attempting to interpret the code section in a too restrictive fashion; the acts of the defendant were forbidden by the express wording of the applicable code section.
[4] The third argument advanced by appellant is equally fallacious. He attacks the constitutionality of section 593c, *307 claiming that the statute does not inform those who read it what is meant by "proper authority." It seems clear to us that the wording refers to the management of a standardized well and transmission line and that there cannot be any question that this particular complex of gas transmission apparatus, including the meter, was erected, operated and maintained by the "proper authority," that is to say, the Pacific Gas & Electric Company. Furthermore, the use of the phrase "used in connection with" does not offer any problem. The words are clear and the meaning is not veiled in doubt. As is said in section 4 of the Penal Code: "... All its provisions are to be construed according to the fair import of their terms, with a view to effect its objects and to promote justice."
Appellant argues too narrowly that the meaning of the section is restricted to interference with the flow of gas through pipes or mains. As shown by the previous quotation of the section, the wilful and malicious interference with, removal or injury of any meter used in connection with gas transmission is a breach of the law, and there can be no question that this is exactly what was done by the defendant. There is nothing vague in the statute as it applies to appellant, and it seems obvious that he may not be heard to complain. (In re Cregler, 56 Cal.2d 308, 313 [14 Cal.Rptr. 289, 363 P.2d 305].)
The judgment is affirmed.
Stone, J., and McMurray, J. pro tem.,  [fn. *] concurred.
NOTES
[fn. *]  *. Assigned by the Chairman of the Judicial Council.

=== CASE 9737714 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:32:58.631522+00 ===

MILLER, Judge.
Plaintiff-appellant Attlin Construction, Inc. (Attlin) appeals the judgment of the Delaware Circuit Court in favor of the defendants-appellees, Muncie Community Schools and the Board of Trustees of Mun-cie Community Schools (Muncie Schools), Jacobs-Maze and Associates (Jacobs-Maze), Dale L. Jacobs and Ronald G. Maze (the individual partners), entered upon the ap-pellees’ motions for an involuntary dismissal pursuant to Ind.Rules of Procedure, Trial Rule 41(B).
After Muncie Schools rejected all of Att-lin’s bids on 23 of 27 different construction projects at each addition to the Garfield and Sutton Elementary Schools in Muncie, Attlin sued Muncie Schools alleging it had violated the bidding statute in effect at that time, Ind.Code 5-16-1-1 (1976), by failing to let for bid the construction management contract it awarded Jacobs-Maze of Richmond, Indiana. Rather than let this contract for bid, in late 1975 Muncie Schools conducted a series of interviews with various architectural and engineering firms before contracting the engineering firm of Jacobs-Maze to serve as the “construction manager” supervising the design and construction of the two additions. Under the terms of its contract Jacobs-Maze received a fee of 4% of the total construction contracts for the 27 individual projects at each addition.
On appeal, Attlin seeks reversal of the trial court’s judgment presenting for our consideration the sole question of whether the trial court erred in finding that Muncie Schools possessed the power to enter into a construction manager contract without submitting it for bids pursuant to IC 5-16-1 — 1 which required that all public construction contracts in excess of $5,000 be let for public competitive bids. For the reasons stated *283below we affirm the decision of the trial court.
DECISION AND DISCUSSION
At the bench trial of Attlin’s complaint, Attlin did not present any evidence but relied on the evidence it had introduced previously at a hearing on its unsuccessful request for a temporary injunction. Neither at the hearing nor the trial did the defendants present any evidence; rather, they each moved for an involuntary dismissal of the complaint pursuant to T.R. 41(B).1 The trial court granted these motions and entered judgment accordingly. Attlin appeals, arguing the court’s ruling was contrary to the law as the evidence demonstrated that Muncie Schools hired Jacobs-Maze as the construction manager of the two additions despite lacking the power to do so without submitting the construction manager contract to public competitive bidding. Appellees argue that Attlin failed to establish a prima facie case that Muncie Schools lacked such power.
Building Systems, Inc. v. Rochester Metal Prods., Inc. (1976), 168 Ind.App. 12, 340 N.E.2d 791, enunciates our scope of review for deciding the issue presented in this appeal.
“The language of [T.R. 41(B)] requires the trial court to consider only the evidence and inferences most favorable to the non-moving party in ruling upon such a motion. The trial court may not weigh the testimony of one witness against the conflicting testimony of another witness, nor may it weigh conflicting portions of the testimony of the same witness. Ohio Casualty Ins. Co. v. Ver-zele et al. (1971), 148 Ind.App. 429, 267 N.E.2d 193. Thus, our Trial Rule 41(B), supra, differs from Federal Rule 41(b) in that under the Federal Rule the trial court need not consider only the evidence and reasonable inferences therefrom most favorable to the non-moving party, but is free to determine whether the plaintiff (or party with the burden of proof) has established a right to recovery by a preponderance of the evidence during his case-in-chief. Emerson Electric Co. v. Farmer, (5th Cir., 1970), 427 F.2d 1082; Ellis v. Carter (9th Cir., 1964), 328 F.2d 573, 577; Motorola, Inc. v. Fairchild Camera and Instrument Corp. (D.C.Ariz., 1973), 366 F.Supp. 1173, 1176. See also; 9 Wright and Miller Federal Practice and Procedure, § 2371, at 224-225; Moore’s Federal Practice, Vol. 5, § 41.13[4], 1155-60.
Because the trial court may consider only the evidence and inferences favorable to the non-moving party in ruling upon a motion for involuntary dismissal, this Court must determine whether there was evidence introduced which could have been sufficient to support a recovery by such party when the granting or denial of such a motion is an issue on appeal. In the case at bar, then, the issue is whether the trial court properly found that there was no substantial evidence of probative value which would have supported the material allegations of the contractor.”
168 Ind.App. at 13-14; 340 N.E.2d at 703.
The facts most favorable to Attlin contained in the record of this cause, derived from its witnesses and exhibits, are as fol*284lows:2 Recognizing the need to construct additions to the Garfield and Sutton Elementary Schools, in November, 1975 Muncie Schools began interviewing architectural and engineering firms to design and oversee the construction of these additions. On December 9, 1975 Muncie Schools signed the Muncie firm of Graham, Love & Taylor (Graham, Love) as the architect for both additions. Rather than employ a general contractor, Muncie Schools contracted Jacobs-Maze, an engineering firm, as the construction manager for both additions on January 9, 1976.3 Utilization of the con-*285struetion manager process saved Muncie Schools 4-5% in professional fees since Jacobs-Maze charged only 4% of the construction cost as its fee while the testimony at the trial revealed that a general contractor would have realized a profit equal to 8-9% of the construction cost. Over the next four months information concerning the specifications for all 27 projects on each addition was made available to prospective contractors. This information included Muncie Schools’ intention to utilize the construction manager method rather than the general contractor method for building the additions. Attlin’s president testified that by the end of April, 1976 he knew the construction manager method was going to be utilized by Munice Schools. Attlin, a general contractor, bid on 23 of the 27 projects at each elementary school; however in May, 1976 all their bids were rejected and other contractors were awarded those jobs. Construction began shortly thereafter in early June, 1976.
Attlin introduced into evidence the construction manager contract between Jacobs-Maze and Muncie Schools. This contract required Jacobs-Maze to perform services in two different phases: (1) the design phase; and (2) the construction phase.4 Jacobs-Maze did not have to actu*286ally construct any part of either addition. Rather, through coordinating the solicitation and acceptance of bids for the 27 projects at each school during the design phase and sharing with the architect general supervisory authority over the work performed in the construction phase, Jacobs-Maze synchronized the entire construction package.
IC 5-16-1-1 required a public body to submit for competitive bidding any contract for construction in excess of $5,000.5 This statute must be read in conjunction with Ind.Code 20-5-2-2 which specifies the powers possessed by the governing bodies of school corporations in Indiana. Specifically, Muncie Schools possessed the power:
“(1) ... to enter into contracts in matters permitted by applicable law.
(2) ... to establish, locate and provide the necessary schools, ... other buildings, facilities, property and equipment therefor.
(3) To acquire, construct, erect, maintain, hold, and to contract for such construction, erection or maintenance, of such real estate, or real estate improvements, or any interest in either, as the governing body deems necessary for school purposes, including but not limited to buildings, parts of buildings, [and] additions to buildings, ....
(7) To employ, contract for and discharge superintendents, supervisors, principals, teachers, librarians, business managers, superintendents of buildings and grounds, janitors, engineers, architects, physicians, dentists, nurses, accountants, teacher aides performing non-instructional duties, educational and other professional consultants, data processing and computer service for school purposes, ..., and such other personnel or services, all as the governing body considers necessary for school purposes; .
(19) To exercise any other power and make any expenditure in carrying out its general powers and purposes provided in sec. 201 or in carrying out the powers delineated in this sec. 202 which is reason*287able from a business or educational standpoint in carrying out school purposes of the school corporation, including but not limited to the acquisition of property or the employment or contracting for services, even though such power or expenditure shall not be specifically set out herein; and the specific powers set out in this section shall not be construed to limit the general grant of powers provided in sec. 201 except where a limitation is set out in this act by specific language or by reference to other law.” (Emphasis added)
On appeal, Attlin concedes that since Muncie Schools elected to utilize the construction manager building process instead of the general contractor process, it was necessary to hire someone to oversee the work on each addition. Additionally, Attlin does not argue that Muncie Schools lacked the power pursuant to IC 20-5-2-2(7) to enter into the architect’s contract without letting it for public bids. Most significantly, Attlin does not suggest that if Muncie Schools had contracted with an architect or engineer by means of a standard professional contract to perform the construction manager’s duties, such a contract would have been subject to the public bidding statute. (IC 5-16-1-1). Thus, Attlin implicitly agrees that an architect’s or engineer’s contract specifying duties the same as appear in the construction manager’s contract contested herein would not have been subject to IC 5-16-1-1.
Remaining is Attlin’s sole contention that Muncie Schools’ power to employ architects and engineers pursuant to IC 20-5-2-2 does not create an exception to IC 5-16-1-1 allowing it to enter into a construction manager contract without submitting such a contract for public bids. This contention presents an issue of first impression in Indiana.
As a general rule, contracts for personal or professional services entered into by a public body with a private organization or individual are not governed by public competitive bidding laws and need not be submitted for public competitive bids. Annot., 15 A.L.R.3d 733 (1967). Applying this general rule to public works contracts, its rationale is that competitive bidding laws are applicable to public works construction contracts only where the material and work must conform to specifications allowing the performance of the contract to be measured by relatively objective standards. Consequently, it is presumed that the legislature intended the lowest price to be the ultimate determining factor in awarding the contract. However, with public contracts calling for professional and/or personal services requiring aesthetic, business or technical judgment, and/or professional or scientific skills and experiences, it is assumed that the legislature could not have intended the lowest price to be the ultimate determining factor as the performance of the contract can not be evaluated objectively.6 Because the nature of personal and/or professional service contracts makes it unlikely that bids would provide any advantage to the public body in awarding the contract, advertising for such bids would be undesirable, impossible or impractical. Kennedy v. Ross, supra; Graydon v. Pasadena Redevelopment Agency, (1980) 104 Cal.App.3d 631, 164 Cal.Rptr. 56. In accordance with the foregoing general rule, numerous jurisdictions have applied it to professional and/or personal service contracts with engineers,7 construction *288superintendents,8 construction inspectors,9 and architects.10
In Cress v. State (1926), 198 Ind. 323, 152 N.E. 822, the township advisory board for the Ervin School Township gave notice by publication and posting of its intent to issue bonds to pay for: 1) the purchase of a school site; 2) the construction of a school house; 3) an architect; and 4) other necessary expenses related to construction. The Board authorized issuance of bonds totaling $95,000 and employed an architect. Shortly thereafter, a taxpayer sued to enjoin construction of the building and issuance of the bonds but lost his law suit. However, after a change in the officers on the board, the township officers refused to issue the bonds.
In deciding the primary issue on appeal (whether township officers possessed the discretionary power to abandon a project approved by their predecessors), the Court considered the authority of the board to contract with the architect for plans and specifications without submitting that contract to the public competitive bidding laws. To resolve this question the Court examined the competitive bidding law in effect at that time which provided:
“If a trustee finds it necessary to erect a new schoolhouse, he shall procure suitable specifications therefor to be used by the bidders in bidding and in the construction of such house. Section 12071, Burns’ 1926; section 9598, Burns’ 1914; section 9, c. 105, Acts 1899, pp. 150, 156.”
Cress v. State, 198 Ind. at 335-36, 152 N.E. at 827. The Court interpreted the statute as not requiring an architect’s contract to be submitted to competitive bidding. Although the Indiana Supreme Court did not recite the general rule exempting professional service contracts from public bidding requirements, the holding suggests that the rule is applicable in cases .such as the one before us involving construction manager contracts.
In examining the applicability of the professional service contract rule to the Jacobs-Maze contract we note two significant facts. First, the contract with the architectural firm of Graham, Love included the provision that Graham, Love had responsibility for supervising the construction of the additions. Second, Jacobs-Maze, the construction manager, was an engineering firm and, in compliance with Ind.Code 25-31-1-18,11 at least one of its partners (Dale Jacobs) was an engineer licensed in Indiana. With these facts in mind we observe that our licensing statutes, specifically the ones applicable to architects (Ind.Code 25-4-1-*28929)12 and engineers (Ind.Code 25-31-1-19),13 required Muncie Schools to employ either an architect or an engineer to both prepare the plans, specifications and estimates and supervise the construction of the additions. As the evidence disclosed, both Jacobs-Maze and Graham, Love assigned a full-time representative at the additions to *290carry out their contractual responsibilities. Both representatives were designated “field engineers” even though they were not licensed as an architect or engineer. Although the contract with Jacobs-Maze was stylized a “construction management contract,^” careful examination of its provisions does not reveal any duties or responsibilities which would not otherwise be required of a licensed engineer. Thus, in substance, Muncie Schools hired an engineer to perform engineering duties (the authority for which is specifically set out at IC 20-5-2-2(7)) while only the form of the contract designated the engineer as a “construction manager.” By employing both an architect and an engineer Muncie Schools doubly satisfied the statutory requirements for supervision of the construction.
Even had Jacobs-Maze not been an engineering firm with a licensed engineer as one of its partners (or an architectural firm owned by licensed architects), we would still reject Attlin’s contention that IC 20-5-2-2(7) does not exempt construction manager contracts from our public bidding laws in light of the fact that Muncie Schools employed Graham, Love as the architect responsible for supervising the construction. Its responsibilities included being the final interpreter of any contractual language involving the projects’ contractors, in addition to possessing final approval of shop drawings and design change orders, acceptance of work and certification of work completion. A comparison of Graham, Love’s contract with Jacobs-Maze’s contract demonstrates Graham, Love had supervisory authority over the contractors and Jacobs-Maze as noted in footnote 4, supra. We again observe that subsection 7 of IC 20-5-2-2 specifically empowers a school board to employ certain named professionals, including engineers, architects and school personnel. Admittedly, this same statute is silent on construction manager contracts. However, subsection 7 supplies a school board with the power to contract for ... “such other personnel or services, all as the governing board considers necessary for school purposes; .... ” Furthermore, subsection 19 allows the school board to make any expenditure “which is reasonable from a business or educational standpoint in carrying out school purposes of the school corporation; including but not limited to the ... contracting for services even though such power or expenditure shall not be specifically set out herein; .... ”
Jacobs-Maze was required to perform services similar to that of an architect or engineer so as to make the contract insusceptible to an objective evaluation. It had extensive duties of an engineering nature in two phases: (1) the design phase; and (2) the construction phase. It was Jacobs-Maze’s responsibility to bring together all the construction projects at both additions by coordinating the solicitation and acceptance of bids for the various projects at each addition during the design phase and by sharing with the architect the general supervision of the work performed in the construction phase. The actual construction was not to be performed by Jacobs-Maze. It was employed to utilize its professional engineering skills and experiences as insurance that both additions would be timely completed. Significantly, it did not guarantee that the total cost of each addition would be at or below the total value of the bids. It was not a general contractor; rather, its actions and decisions were subject to the supervision and approval of Graham, Love.
We do not believe the Legislature contemplated that our bidding statute would govern contracts for professional services like the one before us which provide for the performance of duties similar to those of an architect or engineer and are entered into under IC 20-5-2-2(7), (19). These contracts are not susceptible to objective evaluation of their performance so as to make the price the ultimate determining factor. Furthermore, the nature of such contracts makes advertisement for bids impractical and undesirable. Where, as here, a contract requires the construction manager to perform duties similar to that of an architect or engineer, the rationale for exempting the architect or engineer's contract from the bidding laws is equally applicable to the *291construction manager’s contract. See Cress v. State, supra.
Our comments in this regard are supported by the decision in Mongiovi v. Doerner (1976), 24 Or.App. 639, 546 P.2d 1110, where the court held a contract. between Douglas County and a construction manager to supervise the solicitation and acceptance of bids on a construction project was exempt from the Oregon bidding law. The court in Mongiovi observed that the construction manager’s position was necessary since there was to be no general contractor on the construction of the county courthouse as the county adopted the “fast track” construction method (similar to the one employed by Muncie Schools); therefore there was no one to synchronize all the work. The construction manager performed this service “by coordinating the solicitation and acceptance of bids for various parts on the construction project, and by sharing with the architect general supervisory authority over the work performed.” Id., 240 Or.App. at 644; 546 P.2d at 1113. He did not perform any construction work on the courthouse nor did he supply any of the materials. Instead, the county purchased his professional services involving peculiar skills, knowledge and expertise. Consequently, the court held that because his contract involved professional and personal services, which could be evaluated solely by subjective criteria, it was not subject to the Oregon competitive bidding laws.
Attlin places heavy reliance upon the case of City of Inglewood—Los Angeles Cty. Civic Center Auth. v. Superior Court, (1980) 7 Cal.3d 861, 103 Cal.Rptr. 689, 500 P.2d 601, where the California Supreme Court concluded that the construction management contract was invalid since it had not been let for bids pursuant to California’s competitive bidding law. The challenged contract involved the management of the construction of civic center buildings owned by the Los Angeles County Civic Center Authority and provided generally that the management contractor was to supply services and to lend experience in the preparation of the final plan. However, controlling the California Supreme Court’s decision was a consideration Of one specific responsibility not present in Jacobs-Maze’s contract. The management contractor guaranteed the outside (maximum) price for the project based upon the sub-contractor’s bids thereby making the contract more closely akin to the traditional lump sum general construction contract rather than to a contract for the services of an engineer or an architect. Consequently, the management contract could be evaluated by objective criteria making the price the ultimate determining factor. An examination of the Jacobs-Maze contract makes it apparent that it has the characteristics of the Mongiovi professional service contract rather than the general contractor agreement in City of Inglewood.
For the reasons stated above we affirm the trial court’s judgment.
CHIPMAN, J., concurs.
YOUNG, P. J., dissents with opinion.
. T.R. 41(B) provides:
Involuntary dismissal: Effect thereof. After the plaintiff or party with the burden of proof upon an issue, in an action tried by the court without a jury, has completed the presentation of his evidence thereon, the opposing party, without waiving his right to offer evidence in the event the motion is not granted, may move for a dismissal on the ground that considering all the evidence and reasonable inferences therefrom in favor of the party to whom the motion is directed, to be true, there is no substantial evidence of probative value to sustain the material allegations of the party against whom the motion is directed. The court as trier of the facts may then determine them and render judgment against the plaintiff or may decline to render any judgment until the close of all the evidence. If the court renders judgment on the merits against the plaintiff or party with the burden of proof, the court, when requested at the time of the motion by either party shall make findings if, and as required by Rule 52(A). Unless the court in its order for dismissal otherwise specifies, a dismissal under this subdivision or subdivision (E) of this rule and any dismissal not provided for in this rule, other than a dismissal for lack of jurisdiction, operates as an adjudication upon the merits.
. Attlin presented nine witnesses at the temporary injunction hearing including three members of the Muncie Community School Board, two architects (one from Graham, Love & Taylor and one from Attlin), Attlin’s owner and three contractors who worked on the two additions to the two schools.
. In an informative and useful amicus curiae brief, Geupel Demars’ attorneys explained the purpose of utilizing the construction manager method and the function a construction manager serves in a building project as follows:
“Public agencies are under increasing pressure to save time and money in developing new public facilities. Factors such as inflation, the energy crunch, strikes and generally more complex facility requirements, however, have made these goals more difficult to achieve.
Construction Management (CM) has been developed as an alternative to the traditional public building process. Construction management seeks to save an owner time and cost primarily through better activity coordination and project management. Many private developers and major Federal agencies, including the General Services Administration (GSA) and the Department of Health, Education and Welfare-along with many state and local jurisdictions-have found that construction management can help to save time, money, and aggravation for the building owner.
Savings with construction management have been impressive in many instances. GSA reports design and construction time savings of up to two years on certain projects. Several public agencies report time savings of more than six months. These savings [are] developed by reducing the impact of inflation, cutting costs for interim construction loans, reducing contingency amounts in contractor bids, and shortening rental periods for temporary agency quarters, prior to occupancy. Each of these factors saves real dollars. Certain techniques available through the use of construction management make a major contribution to these savings. Value Management, for instance, can be used effectively by the construction manager in this system and has produced consistent savings of 8-to-l over the cost of its use....
The construction management technology centers on utilization of a construction manager who coordinates and manages the building process. The construction manager acts as a fiduciary for the owner, a fact which makes the project a cooperative team effort rather than a proceeding among adversaries, a situation which is not uncommon in public sector construction. These relationships are backed up by Critical Path Method (CPM) or PERT scheduling, detailed cost estimating, and cost accounting. These techniques are often computer-based, and a competent construction manager will use them with great effectiveness to control a project.
The usefulness of construction management increases in proportion to project complexity and’ cost. The total construction management approach can be used on a cost-effective basis for complex projects with construction costs of $3 million and above. On the other hand, individual parts of construction management technology, such as Value Management, may be applicable and can yield real cost benefits on projects costing $1 million and often less.
Several public developers report that they perform construction management functions in-house. Most, however, obtain this service from an outside firm under a professional service contract. ...
“Construction Management (CM) refers to a type of contractual and professional working relationship initiated by a building owner for project design professionals and the construction manager. The approach can be applied to construction of a particular facility or for construction of several related facilities within an overall construction program. The construction manager may be an individual or a group of individuals on the owner’s staff. More frequently, however, the construction manager represents an outside firm or joint venture working as an agent of the jurisdiction acting in the owner’s best interest under a professional services contract on a specific construction project.
Many variations of the construction management approach have been used by private developers and public construction agencies. Because of the special characteristics of each major building project and rules and regulations specific to each jurisdiction, no single form of construction management relationship will best suit the particular needs of all jurisdictions....
Construction management is most effective when employed from a project’s predesign stage through construction until final occupan*285cy. It is possible, however, to employ construction management services for only a single phase of a project, but the benefits of the approach may not be fully realized.
Quoted from PUBLIC TECHNOLOGY, INC., U SING CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT FOR PUBLIC AND INSTITUTIONAL FACILITIES, 1-2, 9-12 (Washington, D.C., March, 1976.)
.Within each phase Jacobs-Maze’s general duties can be summarized as follows:
A. Design Phase:
1. Consult with Muncie Schools and Graham, Love during the projects’ development and review conceptual designs to assist in designing the projects.
2. Develop and update the projects’ time schedules, coordinating and integrating into it the architect’s services with construction schedules.
3. Prepare and update the projects’ budgets for the owner’s approval, basing the budgets upon the drawings and specifications.
4. Review drawings and specifications as they are prepared, recommending alternative solutions whenever design details affected construction feasibility schedules.
5. Determine applicable equal employment opportunity program requirements for inclusion in contract documents.
6. Prepare pre-qualification criteria for bidders and develop contractor interest in the projects.
7. Establish bidding schedules and conduct pre-bid conferences to familiarize bidders with the bidding documents and management techniques as well as with any special systems, materials or methods.
8. Receive bids, prepare bid analyses and make recommendations to Muncie Schools for awarding contracts or rejecting bids.
9. Conduct pre-award conferences with successful bidders.
10.Assist Muncie Schools in preparing construction contracts.
B. Construction Phase:
1. Coordinate the contractors’ work with the activities and responsibilities of Muncie Schools and Graham, Love to complete the additions within the cost, time and quality objectives.
2. Schedule and conduct pre-construction and progress meetings at which Muncie Schools, Graham, Love, Jacobs-Maze and the contractors jointly discussed construction procedures, progress, problems and scheduling.
3. Revise and refine the approved estimate of construction costs, incorporating approved changes as they occur and developing cash flow reports and forecasts as needed. Additionally, advise Muncie Schools and Graham, Love whenever projected costs exceed the budgets or estimates.
4. Review requests for design changes, recommending necessary or desirable design changes to Muncie Schools and Graham, Love, and assist in negotiating change orders.
5. Develop and implement a procedure for reviewing and processing contractor’s applications for progress and final payments. Also, make recommendations to Graham, Love for certification to Muncie Schools for payment.
6. Assist in obtaining all building permits and special permits for permanent improvements, excluding those permits required to be obtained directly by the various contractors.
7. Verify that Muncie Schools has paid all applicable fees and assessments for permanent facilities.
8. If required, assist Muncie Schools in selecting and retaining professional consultants for surveying and testing laboratories as well as coordinating such services.
9. Inspect the contractors’ work to assure that it conformed to the contract requirements.
*28610. In collaboration with Graham, Love, establish and implement procedures for expediting the processing and approval of shop drawings and samples.
11. Record the progress of the projects, submit written progress reports to Muncie Schools and Graham, Love as well as maintain a daily log for Muncie Schools and Graham, Love.
12. Maintain at the project site, on a current basis all documents and revisions which arise out of the contract or the work.
13. Accept delivery and arrange storage, protection and security for all owner-purchased materials, systems and equipment.
14. Prepare a list of incomplete or unsatisfactory items along with a schedule for their completion after a contractor substantially completes his work or a designated portion thereof. After Graham, Love certifies the work to be completed, supervise the correction and completion of the work.
15. With the Muncie Schools’ maintenance personnel, direct the check out of utilities, operational systems and equipment for readiness and assist in their initial start-up testing.
16. Determine final completion, providing written notice to Muncie Schools and Graham, Love that the work was ready for final inspection.
17. Secure and transmit to Graham, Love required guarantees, affidavits, releases, bonds and waivers.
18. Turn over to Muncie Schools all keys, manuals, record drawings and maintenance starts.
19. Develop and implement a procedure for the review and processing of applications by contractors for progress and final payments.
. IC 5-16-1-1 (1976) provides in pertinent part:
“When any public building or any other public work or improvement of any character whatsoever is to be constructed, ... at the expense of ... any ... school corporation, ..., and when the estimated cost of such work or improvement will be five thousand dollars ($5,000) or more, it shall be the duty of the . .., school corporation, ... to adopt plans and specifications and award a contract for such public work or improvement to the lowest and best bidder who submits a bid for the performance thereof: ... . ”
1978 Acts, Pub.Law 15, § 2 raised the limit from $5,000 to $25,000. This modification is codified at 1C 5-16-1-1 (1980 Supp.)
. Waste Management, Inc. v. Wisconsin Solid Waste Recycling Authority, (1967) 84 Wis.2d 462, 267 N.W.2d 659; Kennedy v. Ross, (1946) 28 Cal.2d 569, 170 P.2d 904; Barnard v. Kandiyohi Cty., (1942) 213 Minn. 100, 5 N.W.2d 317; Flottum v. City of Cumberland, (1940) 234 Wis. 654, 291 N.W. 777; Krohnberg v. Pass, (1932) 187 Minn. 73, 244 N.W. 329; Hibbs v. Arensberg, (1923) 276 Pa. 24, 119 A. 727; Leonard's v. Bunnell, (1977) 147 N.J.Super. 417, 371 A.2d 365; Gulf Bitulithic Co. v. Nueces Cty., (1928) Tex.Com.App., 11 S.W.2d 305; Franklin v. Horton, (1922) 97 N.J.L. 25, 116 A. 176, aff'd. Franklin v. City of Millville, (1922) 98 N.J.L. 262, 119 A. 29; Vermeule v. City of Corning, (1919) 186 App.Div. 206, 174 N.Y.S. 220, aff’d. (1920) 230 N.Y. 585, 130 N.E. 903.
. City of Hazard v. Salyer, (1949) 311 Ky. 667, 224 S.W.2d 420 (contract with an engineering firm to prepare and submit preliminary plans and estimates for improving the city’s water works system and erecting a municipal gym *288with a swimming pool); Kennedy v. Ross, supra (contract with an engineer to furnish engineering and architectural plans for a proposed sewage and sludge treatment and disposal plant); Flottum v. Cumberland, supra (contract with an engineer to survey and prepare plans and specifications for rebuilding and extending the city’s electrical and utility plant); Krohnberg v. Pass, supra (contract with an engineer to lay out plans and specifications for the heating, plumbing and other mechanical equipment in constructing a school building); Franklin v. Horton, supra (contract with an electrical engineer to prepare plans and specifications for an electrical light distribution system to provide public lighting).
. Krohnberg v. Pass, supra (contract with superintendent of construction to be on the work site daily to see that the plans are carried out with proper materials furnished); Gulf Bitulithic Co. v. Nueces Cty., supra (contract with a company to supervise the construction of a Highway built by employees of the county).
. Hibbs v. Arensberg, supra (contract with an inspector to inspect a new building as was being erected on behalf of the school district).
. Krohnberg v. Pass, supra (contract with an architect to furnish preliminary sketches, plans and specifications for construction of a school building); Cress v. State (1926), 198 Ind. 323, 152 N.E. 822 (contract with architect to prepare plans and specifications for the construction of a school building).
. IC 25-31-1-18 provides in pertinent part: “A registration certificate for a professional engineer ... may be issued only to a natural person. No partnership, firm or corporation doing business in the state of Indiana may be engaged in the practice of professional engineering ... unless such practice is carried on under the responsible direction and supervision of a registered professional engineer ... who is a principal of the firm or partnership or officer of the corporation.”
. IC 25-4-1-29 provides in pertinent part:
“(a) Except as hereinafter otherwise provided, the state of Indiana, nor any board, department or agency thereof, nor any county, city, town, township, school corporations or other political subdivision of this state shall engage in the construction, alteration or maintenance of any public building or public work involving the practice of architecture for which plans, specifications and estimates have not been prepared, certified and sealed by, and the construction, alteration or maintenance executed under the direct supervision of an architect, which architect shall be the holder in good standing of a certificate of registration from the board of registration for architects entitling him to practice architecture in this state.
(b) No official of this state, nor any city, town, county, township or school corporation thereof, now or hereafter charged with the enforcement of any law, ordinance or regulation relating to the construction or alteration of buildings or structures, shall use or accept or approve any plans or specifications that have not been prepared by, or under the supervision of, and certified by a registered architect: Provided, That the provisions of this subsection shall not apply if such plans or specifications have been prepared by, or under the supervision of and certified by a professional engineer who is registered under the laws of the state of Indiana: . ..(Emphasis added).
An architect is a person conducting “the practice of architecture” who is registered by the State of Indiana as such pursuant to Ind. Code 25 — 4-1-1. “The practice of architecture” is defined as:
“... the performance of professional services embracing the safe, healthful, scientific, aesthetic or orderly coordination of the planning, designing, erection, alteration or enlargement of any public or private buildings, structure or structures, project or projects, or any part thereof, or the equipment or utilities thereof or the accessories thereto, when such professional services require the application of the art and science of construction based upon the principles of mathematics, aesthetics, or the physical science acquired by education or training, and when such services are performed through the media of consultation, evaluation, investigation, preliminary study, plans, specifications, contract documents, or supervision of construction. Any one, or any combination of the foregoing services by a person shall constitute the practice of architecture....”
. IC 25-31-1-19 provides in pertinent part:
“(a) Except as hereinafter otherwise provided, no county, city, town, township, school corporation or other political subdivision of this state shall engage in the construction or maintenance of any public work involving the practice of engineering for which plans, specifications and estimates have not been prepared, certified and sealed by, and the construction and maintenance executed under the direct supervision of, a professional engineer. Any contract executed in violation of this section shall be null and void.
(c) No official of this state, or of any city, town, county, township or school corporation thereof, now or hereafter charged with the enforcement of any law, ordinance or regulation relating to the construction or alteration of buildings or structures, shall use or accept or approve any plans or specifications that have not been prepared by, or under the supervision of and certified by, a registered professional engineer: Provided, That the provisions of this subsection shall not apply if such plans, or specifications have been prepared by, or under the supervision of and certified by, an architect who is registered under the laws of the state of Indiana: .. .. ” (Emphasis added.)
Ind.Code 25-31-l-19(c) also provides that alterations of public buildings costing less than $10,000 are exempt from the provisions of IC 25-31-1-19. The additions by Muncie Schools totalled approximately $3,000,000.
An engineer is a person conducting the “practice of engineering” who is registered by the State of Indiana as such pursuant to Ind. Code 25-31-l-2(b). The “practice of engineering” is defined as meaning:
“... any professional service, or creative work, requiring engineering education, training, and experience, and requiring the application of special knowledge of the mathematical, physical, and engineering sciences to such professional services, or creative work, such as consultation, investigation, evaluation, planning, design, and supervision of construction for the purpose of assuring compliance with specification and designs, in connection with any public or private utilities, structures, buildings, machines, equipment, processes, works, or projects. The term ‘practice of engineering’ shall not include the work ordinarily performed by persons who operate or maintain machinery or equipment.”
Id. at 25-31-l-2(d).

=== CASE 9737715 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:32:58.640022+00 ===

YOUNG, Presiding Judge,
dissenting.
I dissent.
The majority opinion ignores the threshold question presented in this appeal. That is whether the school corporation can legally enter into a contract with a construction manager. I would hold such a contract is invalid because of the absence of statutory authority in the school corporation. State v. Meiser, (1929) 201 Ind. 337, 168 N.E. 185. School corporations are creatures of the General Assembly and only possess such power as is expressly given them or such power as may be implied from the power given. State v. School City of Anderson, (1957) 236 Ind. 649, 142 N.E.2d 914.
The persons which school corporations may contract with for services are spelled out in the following statute:
“In carrying out the school purposes of each school corporation, its governing body acting on its behalf shall have the following specific powers:
(7) To employ, contract for and discharge superintendents, supervisors, prin*292cipals, teachers, librarians, business managers, superintendents of buildings and grounds, janitors, engineers, architects, physicians, dentists, nurses, accountants, teacher aides performing noninstructional duties, educational and other professional consultants, data processing and computer service for school purposes, including but not limited to the making of schedules, the keeping and analyzing of grades and other student data, the keeping and preparing of warrants, pay-roll, and similar data where approved by the state board of accounts as provided below, and such other personnel or services, all as the governing body considers necessary for school purposes; to fix and pay the salaries and compensation of such persons and such services; to classify such persons or services and to adopt schedules of salaries or compensation; to determine the number of such persons or the amount of services thus employed or contracted for; and to determine the nature and extent of their duties.”
I.C. 20-5-2-2(7).
“Construction managers” are not named and neither may such be implied. Thus the school corporation may not employ one or contract with one. Had the General Assembly wished to grant school corporations the power to contract for such services it could easily have done so. The omission is indicative of its desire not to do so.
The General Assembly’s intent regarding authorization to hire a project consultant/construction manager is exhibited by attempts to pass just such legislation. In 1979 Senate Bill 245 was introduced and would have amended Ind.Code 5-16-1-1 to allow hiring of project consultants for public buildings thereby including a project consultant as one who could be hired under Ind.Code 20-5-2-2(7). S.B. 245, 101st General Assembly 1st Sess. (1979). The amendment would permit the hiring of such a consultant and such hiring may be without submission of bids. The bill defined a “project consultant” as one employed to advise on and consider the budget and cost prior to commencement of construction as well as manage construction. The bill would not prevent the architect or engineer acting on behalf of the local entity to ensure compliance with the contract. The General Assembly, in proposing such an amendment, must not have believed the previously enacted statutes included such authorization. The failure of this bill as well as others, see e. g. H.B. 1217, 101st General Assembly 2d Sess. (1980) and H.B. 1246, 100th General Assembly 2d Sess. (1978), to become law also is some indication that the General Assembly does not yet intend to permit such hiring in the public works projects of this state. Even aside from this negative indication, the General Assembly’s recent and continuing consideration of this issue is sufficient reason to restrain from judicially enlarging the power given school corporations.
Analysis of I.C. 5-16-1-1, the public bidding statute, lends support to this dissent. By approving the use of a “construction manager” the majority obviates the statutory scheme for the construction of buildings by school corporations.
School corporations are authorized to construct school buildings by awarding a contract to the person with the lowest and best bid. The school corporation and the public are thereby assured that one person will be bound to construct the building for a sum certain, performance being guaranteed by a bond in the amount of the contract. I.C. 20-2-9-1 and I.C. 5-16-1-1. It is contemplated that the building will be completed by one person who contracts to do so rather than a number of separate tradesmen performing separate tasks such as plumbing, masonry, electrical work, etc. It is a “turnkey” project. The method approved here will not ensure completion of any project. Neither will it ensure completion at a specified contract price.1 School corporations are not authorized to act as their own gen*293eral contractor in such projects but must contract with others to do so.
. The majority states that money is saved the school corporation by use of the construction manager. However, under the terms of the contract, the fee to be paid the construction manager is not fixed, but rather, is a percentage of each construction bid awarded.

=== CASE 9737716 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:32:59.977196+00 ===

ROTH, P. J.
This appeal from a declaratory judgment comes to us by way of an agreed statement pursuant to rule 6 (a) of the California Rules of Court. The essential facts are not in dispute.
Karl Frederick, Jr. (Frederick), appellant herein, owned a 1960 half-ton pickup truck, which was licensed as a eommer*778cial vehicle but which he used for personal purposes. He owned no other vehicle. He testified that the truck “was used . . . solely to drive to and from work, for camping trips and to carry [his] skindiving equipment. ’ ’ The truck was not used in his work.
On August 26, 1961, Frederick, being an occupant, permitted Paul 0. Edwards III (Edwards) to drive the truck. Frederick and Edwards were injured when Edwards drove the truck off the road into an embankment.
Frederick was the named insured under a public liability automobile insurance policy covering the truck. The policy had been issued to him by Farmers Insurance Exchange (Farmers). Edwards’ father had a policy covering Edwards’ liability substantially similar to the Farmers policy issued by Factory Mutual Liability Insurance Company of America, (Factory Mutual). This latter policy was limited in coverage to a “private passenger automobile.” Both companies had denied liability to Frederick or Edwards.
Farmers brought this action for declaratory relief against Frederick and Edwards seeking a judicial determination of its responsibilities under its policy. Frederick cross-complained against both companies and Edwards, seeking a declaration of coverage as to him under both policies. Edwards cross-complained against both companies and Frederick for the same purpose. Judgment went against both on their respective cross-complaints. Edwards does not appeal.
On the Frederick cross-complaint the judgment was in favor of Farmers against Frederick on the Farmers policy on the theory that he was specifically excluded from coverage as a “named insured.” The trial court also held that the Factory Mutual coverage for an uninsured motorist did not include Frederick because its policy covered only a “private passenger automobile” and that the truck here involved did not come within that definition.
This appeal is by Frederick.
We treat first the Farmers policy. In part I thereof under coverages A and B, Farmers contracted liability insurance for “(A) Bodily Injury Liability, . . . which the insured becomes legally obliged to pay because of (A) bodily injury to any person, . . . arising out of the ownership ...” with respect to the described vehicle and in the same part 1 proceeds as follows under caption of “Definition of ‘Named Insured’and‘Insured’. . . .
“ (1) If the insured named in Item 1 of the [policy] is an *779individual, the term ‘named insured’ includes his spouse if a resident of the same household ;
“(2) The unqualified word ‘insured’ includes .... the named insured and his relatives, (b) with respect to the described automobile, any other person . . . , provided the actual use of the automobile is by the named insured or with his permission, . . . ;
“(3) The term ‘the insured’ is used severally and not collectively, but the inclusion herein of more than one insured shall not increase the limits of the Exchange’s liability.”
Under the caption “Exclusions” in paragraph II of said exclusions, the policy reads:
‘ ‘ This policy does not apply under part 1:
“11. To bodily injury to the insured or any member of the family of the insured residing in the same household as the insured. ’’ (Italics added.)
It need hardly be added that thereafter in approximately 11 closely printed pages of the policy the word “insured” is used many times. However, in portions of various contextual subject matter, the word “insured” is departed from and the designation “named insured” is used. Thus, in the paragraph on “Assignment” policy reference is to the legal representative of the “named insured.” Under paragraph on “Cancellation,” reference is “This policy may be cancelled by the named insured. . . .”
The use and repeated use of the word “insured” in the Farmers policy demonstrates that it is used as a word of art. It has an artificially definite contractual meaning which is of considerable convenience to the drafting and reading of the insurance contract.
We start with the assumption that any interpretation of the Farmers policy is governed by the settled rule that where there are two possible constructions of an insurance policy, the one more favorable to the insured should be adopted. (Continental Casualty Co. v. Phoenix Constr. Co., 46 Cal.2d 423, at p. 437 [296 P.2d 801, 57 A.L.R.2d 914] ; Norton v. Farmers Automobile Inter-Insurance Exchange, 40 Cal.App.2d 556 [105 P.2d 136].)
In respect of its liability to Frederick, Farmers argues that Frederick, the named insured, is by definition an “insured” within the meaning of the exclusion “. . . bodily injury to the insured or any member of the family of the insured . . . ,” and as such he cannot, even though he is an injured claimant, *780sue himself and seek damages under the policy. If Frederick were driving, no one could quarrel with this construction.1
Frederick’s position is that a proper construction of the exclusion clause read in the full context of the insurance contract, with settled rules of construction in mind, and considered in the light of the settled public policy of this state (see Atlantic Nat. Ins. Co. v. Armstrong, 65 Cal.2d 100 [52 Cal.Rptr. 569, 416 P.2d 801]) impels the conclusion that . the unqualified word insured . . .’’in the policy does by definition refer to the person who actually drives the vehicle, whether such driver be the named insured or some other who drives with the permission of the named insured. Thus, the exclusion quoted does not prevent the named insured from a recovery for bodily injuries suffered as a consequence of negligent operation when someone other than the named insured is properly driving his vehicle.
Frederick argues that Edwards, who was driving his truck, was the insured and that any injuries Frederick suffered as the result of negligent operation of his truck by Edwards, who drove it with his permission, must be compensated for under the policy.
It is clear, we think, without any ambiguity, that when Frederick purchased the policy, and Farmers issued and sold it to him, that both parties contracted not only that it would insure Frederick against public liability, but that it would in addition insure anyone who drove the vehicle with Frederick’s permission. Frederick therefore is not suing himself. He is suing Edwards, a third person, for whom he also contracted and for whose liability Farmers agreed to become responsible.
Farmers ’ claim of exclusion has a complexion of plausibility because Frederick was an occupant of the truck at the time of the accident. It is not suggested that Frederick was in control of the truck directly or indirectly. However, if Frederick or *781his spouse or both were negligently hit by their insured truck, which was being driven by Edwards with their permission, while either or both were walking through a pedestrian zone in another part of town, any semblance of plausibility would vanish. (See Armstrong, supra.)2
If Farmers intended to exclude Frederick or his spouse by contract from claiming benefits to which any member of the public is automatically entitled, then it seems to us that its policy must do more than use a word of art such as “insured,” which, when read in the context of the whole policy, has an ambiguous application to the facts at bench and to many other situations which can be posed. The exclusion at bench, assuming that public policy is not involved,3 might *782have reached appellant if its language were as specific as it is in the policy construed in the ease of Armstrong, supra.
In our opinion, if Farmers, by the exclusion meant to include within its operative effect injuries to the named insured even though some other insured was driving, the language of the exclusion must be such as to leave no doubt that the definition of “insured” is not merely for contractual convenience, but that the named insured can never recover under the policy, or recover only in certain situations, irrespective of who drives. The exclusion at bench is not that certain.
We note too that the policy, following section 16451 of the Vehicle Code, contracts to insure against “. . . bodily injury to any person. ...” (Italics added.) This language is analyzed at length in Bachman v. Independence Indem. Co., 214 Cal. 529 [6 P.2d 943] and in Travelers Ins. Co. v. Norwich Union Fire Ins. Soc., 221 Cal.App.2d 150 [34 Cal.Rptr. 406], In Norwich, the court discussing said phrase in respect of whether a named insured is covered by the phrase “bodily injury to any person, ’ ’ says at page 152:
“The question has not been determined in California. One case (Bachman v. Independence Indem. Co., 214 Cal. 529 [6 P.2d 943]) holds that similar policy language indemnifies the *783additional insured against wrongful death claim by heirs of the named insured. But it expressly leaves open the question whether a like result would follow if the named insured were himself seeking damages for injuries.
“Norwich argues that its policy, viewed as a whole, should not be construed to require it to pay or to defend against claims of the named insured arising from his own injuries. It points to conflicts which could arise under the cooperation clause if the coverage be so broad, and argues that the purpose of the policy is to indemnify against liability, rather than to insure against injury.
“But the policy on its face undertakes to indemnify either the named or the additional insured against liability for bodily injury ‘sustained by any person.’ To construe this as meaning ‘any person except the named insured’ would be to rewrite the policy. Other jurisdictions have uniformly held comparable policy language to cover claims of the named insured against the additional insured [citing eases].” (See Armstrong, supra.)
We recognize that in Bachman and in Norwich the court was not called upon, nor did it apply its construction of “any” to a specific situation such as we have at bench. However, our construction does no violence to the clear exclusion in the policy. If Frederick had been driving and Edwards had been the passenger, Edwards and not Frederick would have the cause of action.
We conclude that the language of the policy at bench excludes only the one who actually drives the insured vehicle and the resident members of his family. This construction is fortified by Armstrong, supra, and Globe Indem. Co. v. Universal Underwriters Ins. Co. (1962) 201 Cal.App.2d 9 [20 Cal.Rptr. 73], In the latter case property damage instead of bodily injury was involved. The court held the permissive driver to be the insured rather than the owner and allowed the owner to recover for damages to his own vehicle. At pages 18, 19, the court said:
“We do not believe that the provision in the policy excludes liability as to property owned by the named insured necessarily when the automobile is operated by a permissive user. The exclusion reads: ‘This policy does not apply: . . . (f) under coverage B, to injury to or destruction of (1) property owned by or rented to the insured. . . . ’ But, here, Moore, the permissive user, did not own the car. He became an additional assured under the policy by operation of law. Moore damaged *784Hacker’s car; Moore is liable; the policy protects him because the damaged car was not ‘property owned’ by him but by Hacker. We construe the policy against the insurer because it ‘ “prepared the policy” ’ [citation] ; the ‘presumption favors’ the insured [citation]. Universal cannot invoke the language of the exclusion, which it limited to the insured’s ‘owned’ property, to embrance property not owned, but borrowed by, an additional insured. ’ ’
Frederick also appeals the judgment of the court denying liability under the Factory Mutual policy issued to Edwards’ father. That policy, as pointed out, insures a . . private passenger automobile.” It states in part: “The following are insureds under Part I: ... (b) with respect to a non-owned automobile, ... (2) any relative, but only with respect to a private passenger automobile or trailer provided the actual use thereof is with the permission of the owner. ’ ’
The sole question on this portion of the appeal is whether Frederick’s one-half-ton pickup truck was a private passenger automobile within the meaning of the policy. The policy defines “private passenger automobile” as follows:
“ ‘ [P]rivate passenger automobile’ means a four wheel private passenger, station wagon or jeep type automobile; . . . ‘ utility automobile ’ means an automobile other than a farm automobile, with a load capacity of fifteen hundred pounds or less of the pick-up body, sedan delivery or panel truck type not used for business or commercial purposes. ’ ’
On the admitted facts it would appear that the pickup truck here involved was a utility vehicle.
Frederick contends, however, that the actual use of the vehicle, as well as its construction, is the test, citing Poncino v. Sierra Nevada Life & Casualty Co., 104 Cal.App. 671, 674-675 [286 P. 729]. The vehicle involved had a commercial license. The court in Poncino discusses the interpretation of the insurance clause “private passenger motor-driven car” and says “the manner in which a vehicle is used, as well as its construction, is an important factor in determining its character, . . .” (Id. p. 674.) The court’s quoted statement was in respect of the validity of instructions to the jury which required the jury to determine the character of the vehicle. The question, therefore, was one of fact, not one of law for the court. This conclusion is supported by Gaumnitz v. Indemnity Ins. Co. of North America, 2 Cal.App.2d 134 [37 P.2d 712], wherein the court allowed the jury to determine on the basis of expert evidence whether a particular vehicle was an “automobile truck” within the meaning of the policy. The vehicle *785involved was a Ford pickup truck. The type of license is not disclosed by the opinion. Mattson v. Maryland Casualty Co., 100 Cal.App. 96 [279 P. 1045] (hearing denied) poses a situation similar to the one at bench. “Automobile truck” was specifically excluded from an insurance policy. The vehicle consisted of a Model T chassis upon which was constructed a rectangular body. It was used among other things for delivery and it had a commercial license, but it was also used for personal purposes. The defense was that plaintiff was driving an automobile truck.
This case is before us, as pointed out in the beginning, on an agreed statement. Attached to the statement as Exhibit C is a transcript of the evidence taken as to the manner in which the truck was used and a stipulation that it had a commercial license.
Thus, there was before the trial court a definite question of fact. In this age of rubber wheels, in which autos of all description, irrespective of age or type, are used by the mass of the population, it is probable that many so-called trucks, even though they have a commercial license, are exploited solely for personal transportation by large segments of the working population, because they are within economic reach. It is probable too for similar reasons, that passenger vehicles with passenger licenses may be used for commercial purposes. However, since there is no specific finding on this facet of the case, we must assume, since there is a conflict and the judgment was in favor of Factory Mutual, that the trier of fact found that the vehicle in question was what it looked like, and what it was licensed for, to wit: a pickup truck and not a ‘ ‘ private passenger automobile. ’ ’
The judgment is reversed as to Farmers and affirmed as to Factory Mutual.
Fleming, J., concurred.
The ease at bench involves only a question of policy construction. We are not confronted with any question which might be raised under section 17158 of the Vehicle Code, to wit:
“§17158. Liability to ‘Guest’. No person riding in or occupying a vehicle owned hy him and driven hy another person with his permission and no person who as a guest accepts a ride in any vehicle upon a highway without giving compensation for such ride, nor any other person, has any right of action for civil damages against the driver of the vehicle or against any other person legally liable for the conduct of the driver on account of personal injury to or the death of the owner or guest, during the ride, unless the plaintiff in any such action establishes that the injury or death proximately resulted from the intoxication or willful misconduct of the driver.’’
We concede the logic of the dissent that a liability policy such as at bench is not a ‘'Health and Accident” policy. ” [I]t does not provide compensation for injuries, per se, but merely provides indemnity coverage for [others] . . . [and that] ... no legislative act would be required to demonstrate that no recovery under such conditions would be possible.” We agree with the statement: “If the limitation provided in section 16454 means anything, it means that a motor vehicle liability policy need not cover any third person’s liability for injury to the named insured ’ ’ on the assumption the insured means the driver.
Arguendo, we concede too, (though it is not settled), that section 16454 may extend beyond workmen’s compensation eases, and that if exclusions in the policy at bench were limited to a named insured and/or his relatives while riding in their insured vehicle which is being operated with the permission of the named insured, such limited exclusions may be consistent with public policy.
The public policy of this state, as codified by section 16451 of the Vehicle Code, is that a policy of public liability insurance covering any vehicle shall insure not only the owner but also ”... any other person . . . using any described motor vehicle with the express or implied permission of said assured.” (Section 16451, Veh. Code.)
We do not decide that it is against public policy for an insurance company to clearly exclude a named insured or members of his family from recovering for injuries suffered by the negligent operation of the vehicle owned by such named insured, but lawfully driven by another. We hold only that if such exclusion is intended, the contract must be without ambiguity. Thus, in the recent ease of Travelers Indemnity Co. v. Colonial Ins. Co., 242 Cal.App.2d 227 [51 Cal.Rptr. 724], it was held that a named insured who was injured on his truck while engaged in a joint operation with a forklift truck, could not recover from his insurer and that the specific exclusion which prevented such recovery, was not against public policy. In Travelers, supra, one David Boss rented a forklift truck from Converse Trucking Service (Converse) to use in demolition work. David had a comprehensive liability policy issued by Travelers. Converse, owner of the forklift truck, had an occupational comprehensive liability and a comprehensive automobile damage policy from Transport.
David hired one Jasper Payne to operate the forklift truck, which, insofar as pertinent here, consisted of lifting steel beams and depositing them on a separate truck, owned by Ralph Ross. In the course of this process, Payne so negligently loaded one of the steel beams, as to cause it to fall upon the truck owned by Ralph Ross, as a consequence of which *782Ralph suffered personal injuries. Ralph had a commercial vehicle policy covering his truck with Colonial. Ralph brought an action for damages and named as defendants therein David (insured, as noted above, by Travelers) and his employee Payne.
In Travelers, the exclusionary clause construed was “. . . (1) Coverage A—Bodily Injury or Death suffered by any person or persons, other than the insured or his employees, as the result of an accident occurring while this policy is in force; . . .’ (Italics added.) ”
The court in Travelers at page 234 said:
“Did the italicized portion of the above provision effectively exclude from coverage under Colonial’s policy a claim made by Ralph Ross, its named insured (Insured), as distinguished for example from a claim made by a third person? We believe it did. Section 415 subdivision (e) (now § 16454) as in effect at the time of the accident provided: ‘Any liability policy issued hereunder need not cover any liability for injury to the assured or any liability of the assured assumed by or imposed upon said assured under any workmen’s compensation law . . .’ (Italics added.) Thus the above exclusion from coverage was not violative of any public policy; indeed it was expressly sanctioned by the very section which required coverage for permissive users.”
In Armstrong, supra, the policy in question specifically said “This policy does not apply to: (B) any liability of the renter or driver . . . with respect to bodily injury to . . . or death of . . . (2) any person sustained while riding in, alighting from or getting into or upon any of the automobiles insured hereunder. ’ ’ In the case at bench the policy does not specifically exclude the named insured who would be comparable to the ‘ ‘ renter ’ ’ in Armstrong, while ‘ ‘ riding in ’ ’ the truck. The situation at bench is therefore stronger than Armstrong.

=== CASE 9737717 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:32:59.983691+00 ===

HERNDON, J.
I concur in the affirmance of the judgment as to Factory Mutual but I disagree with the opinion of the majority with respect to the liability of respondent Farmers Insurance Exchange under its contract of insurance with appellant Frederick, the named insured. The judgment of the trial court should be affirmed in my opinion because it correctly decides that appellant is validly and effectively excluded from indemnity coverage for his own personal injuries.
*786
Statement of Issues
The determinative questions presented by this appeal with respect to respondent Farmers are clear-cut and may be stated and answered very simply:
First, does the law of California permit an insurance carrier to exclude liability to the insured for his own bodily injuries from the coverage of a policy of automobile insurance? Yes, section 16454 of the Vehicle Code expressly authorizes this specific exclusion and California precedents are consistent with the decisions of other jurisdictions which uniformly recognize the validity and effectiveness of policy provisions limiting coverage to this extent.
Secondly, does the insurance contract here involved effectively invoke this legally permissible limitation upon the extent of its coverage ? Yes, it plainly provides in simple language that “This policy does not apply ... to bodily injury to the insured. ’ ’
In Part I of the contract under the heading “Exclusions Under Part I,” the following provision appears: “This policy does not apply ... to bodily injury to the insured . . .” Appellant contends (1) that this exclusionary provision does not apply in this case because Edwards, the driver, is an additional insured under the policy and entitled to its protection; and (2) that the exclusion is contrary to public policy and “is invalid and void under Vehicle Code section 16451. ’ ’
Although the majority opinion expressly refrains from deciding that such an exclusionary provision is invalid if expressed with sufficient clarity, I deem it appropriate to indicate the reasons for my conclusion that appellant’s contentions in this regard are untenable.
California Law Provides That a Motor Vehicle Policy Need Not Cover Any Liability for Injury to the Insured.
As noted in Atlantic Nat. Ins. Co. v. Armstrong, 65 Cal.2d 100, 107 [52 Cal.Rptr. 569, 416 P.2d 801], former Vehicle Code section 415, now Vehicle Code sections 16450 et seq., defined not only the persons who must be covered by every motor vehicle liability policy issued in this state, but also the risks which must be covered. “Thus interpreted, the section appears to prohibit insurance policies from excluding liability to a person who is injured by the negligence of an insured driver unless such an exclusion is permitted by some other provision of law. [Citing Vehicle Code section 16454.] ” That is to say, liability to an injured person may be excluded only *787to the extent permitted by law but to that extent such exclusion does not constitute a violation of public policy.
As originally added by Statutes 1929, chapter 259, section 2, page 564, the predecessor section of present section 16454 provided for only two permissible exclusions; i.e., the carrier was not required to insure (1) against liability for injuries to persons whose injuries were covered by any workmen’s compensation law, and (2) against liability for damage to property of others where the property was in charge of the insured or the insured’s employees.1
These two permissible exclusions were retained in all later amendments to the section and in 1937 an additional exclusion relating to 11injury to the assured” was expressly authorized. (Stats. 1937, ch. 840, § 5, p. 2356.) To me the conclusion is unavoidable that this additional statutory provision was designed and intended to permit contractual exclusion of the named insured from coverage for his own injuries resulting from the operation of the described vehicle whether by himself or by another with his permission.
Section 16454, effective at all times material to this case, provides: “Any motor vehicle liability policy need not cover any liability for injury to the assured or any liability of the assured assumed by or imposed upon the assured under any workmen’s compensation law nor any liability for damage to property in charge of the assured or the assured’s employees or agents.”
It is to be noted that the sections immediately preceding section 16454 clearly indicate that by “the assured” the Legislature definitely had in mind the person to whom the policy is issued rather than someone who might become an additional insured by reason of using a vehicle owned by the *788assured with the latter’s permission. Thus, section 16450 at the time of the accident here involved provided:
“A ‘motor vehicle liability policy,’ as used in Chapters 2, 3, and 4 of this Division, means an owner’s policy or an operator’s policy or both, of liability insurance, certified as provided in Section 16431 as proof of ability to respond in damages, issued by an insurance carrier authorized to transact such business in this State to or for the benefit of the person named therein as assured.” (Italics added.) Similarly section 16451 provided:
“An owner’s policy of liability insurance shall ... (b) Insure the person named therein and any other person, as insured, using any described motor vehicle with the express or implied permission of said assured, . . .” (Italics added.)
Although it might appear too fundamental to require express observation, it is important to remember that by definition a “liability policy” is not a “health and accident policy,” i.e., it does not provide compensation for injuries, per se, but merely provides indemnity coverage for persons who have become liable for injuries to others. In the abstract many persons may be potential “insureds” under a liability policy but in practice “the insured” will be the person or persons against whom liability is being asserted in any given instance. For example, the owner of an automobile holding an owner’s policy of liability insurance is always “the insured” when he is operating the automobile himself, or when his agent or employee is operating it, or when liability is being asserted against him under section 171502 by reason of the operation of the automobile by another with his permission. On the other hand, the owner’s agents or third parties to whom he may give permission to operate the vehicle will be “insureds” only when liability is being asserted against them as the result of their own actual operation of the vehicle.
To contend that the Legislature intended by section 16454 to provide only that a motor vehicle liability policy need not cover any liability of any insured for injuries he inflicted on himself is to impute to this body the desire to guard against the impossible. If the party injured is also “the insured,” in the sense that his is the liability which is being asserted and to *789which the carrier is being asked to respond, no legislative act would be required to demonstrate that no recovery under such conditions would be possible. If the limitation provided in section 16454 means anything, it means that a motor vehicle liability policy need not cover any third person’s liability for injury to the named insured. It certainly does not mean that the policy need not cover the named insured’s liability to himself for his own injuries or the liability of a permissive user to himself for his own injuries.
Recognizing this fact, appellant herein does not contend that such an interpretation may be given to section 16454 but rather argues that the additional provision added by the 1937 amendment did not actually change the prior act and should be considered merely as a meaningless and ungrammatical extension of the previously authorized exclusion relating to liability for injuries covered by the workmen’s compensation law. That is, appellant contends that when section 16454 speaks of “injury to the assured,” it means injuries covered by the workmen’s compensation law.
In my view, for the reasons heretofore discussed, such construction is logically impossible since the workmen’s compensation law, like a policy of liability insurance, covers only the liability of an “insured” for injuries sustained by others, not by himself. In addition, the clause in section 16454 providing that a motor vehicle liability policy need not cover ‘1 any liability of the assured assumed by or imposed upon the assured under any workmen’s compensation law” is in itself sufficient to fully and intelligibly cover this limitation.
Appellant argues that the editorial caption “Workmen’s Compensation” preceding the legislative language of section 16454 requires that the provisions of that section be construed as limited to the subject matter indicated by the caption.
This argument is fallacious for two reasons: First, the suggested construction is grammatically and logically impossible. Manifestly the provision of section 16454 relating to “liability for damage to property in charge of the assured or the assured’s employees or agents” has nothing whatever to do with the workmen’s compensation law. Secondly, the caption is not a part of the legislative enactment. (See Stats. 1937, ch. 840, p. 2356.) As stated in paragraph 5 of the preface to volume 66 of West’s California Codes, “The Code as enacted by the Legislature did not contain section headings. ”
On the question of public policy and the proper interpretation of section 16454, the following language used in the *790recent case of Travelers Indem. Co. v. Colonial Ins. Co., 242 Cal.App.2d 227, 234 [51 Cal.Rptr. 724], is equally apposite here:
“Section 415 subdivision (e) (now § 16454) as in effect at the time of the accident provided: ‘Any liability policy issued hereunder need not cover any liability for injury to the assured or any liability of the assured assumed by or imposed upon said assured under any workmen’s compensation law. . . .’ (Italics added.) Thus the above exclusion from coverage was not violative of any public policy; indeed it was expressly sanctioned by the very section which required coverage for permissive users. Absent any statute or public policy prohibiting them, provisions of an automobile liability policy excluding from coverage liability for bodily injury or death of a named insured have been held valid and effective and have been enforced according to their terms. [Citations.] ”
In the Travelers Indem. Co. decision, the court was required to determine whether Colonial Insurance Company was obligated to defend and indemnify David Ross and Jasper Payne, permissive users of the vehicle in question, in an action brought against them by Ralph Ross, the named insured, for personal injuries sustained by their alleged negligent use of the vehicle. The exclusionary words in Colonial’s policy were found in their agreement to indemnify the insured from claims against him “if such claims are made on account of (1) Coverage A—Bodily Injury or Death suffered by any person or persons, other than the insured or his employees, as the result of an accident occurring while this policy is in force; . . (Italics added in part.) The court in Travelers Indem. Co. disposed of this question in the following manner (p. 235):
“We reject as unmeritorious Travelers’ arguments that the exclusionary provision is without effect. These are advanced in the alternative from the factual basis that Ralph Ross is the Insured named in the declarations of Colonial’s policy and that, as already noted in the policy’s insuring agreements, Colonial agrees to indemnify the Insured named in the declarations ‘and herein called the insured’ against the loss thereafter indicated. Travelers argues that the policy repeatedly distinguishes between ‘named insured’ and ‘insured’ and that whether the terms are considered as interchangeable or totally distinct in either event the exclusionary provision does not apply. The argument may be summarized thusly: First, if the policy does distinguish between ‘named insured’ and ‘insured,’ the exclusion is inoperative because had Colonial *791intended to exclude coverage for Ralph Ross’ injuries it should have used the language ‘other than the named insured’ (italics added) and failing to do so intended to exclude coverage only for injuries of ‘insured’ (e.g., David Ross and Payne). Secondly, if the two terms are used interchangeably, then Colonial intended its policy to cover Ralph Ross’ liability in the first place, that the exclusion was operative only where Ralph was liable and that it was not intended to apply where an additional insured ‘might come into the picture by operation of law. ’ The arguments are completely specious and lead to absurd results. An examination of the insuring agreement set forth above satisfies us that Ralph was always in fact the named insured under the policy and that the italicized language of exclusion refers to Ms claims for injuries.
“We are of the opinion that the policy excluded from coverage claims by its named insured Ralph Ross. In view of this conclusion we need not discuss the issue raised by Travelers as to whether Colonial’s coverage was primary or excess. ’ ’
By the same process of reasoning, I am convinced that the policy here under consideration clearly manifests the same intent to exclude recovery by the named insured for his own personal injuries as expressly permitted by section 16454 of the Vehicle Code.
A similar result was reached in Rollo v. California, State Automobile Assn., 159 Cal.App.2d 172 [323 P.2d 531], which dealt with that portion of section 16454 permitting a limitation in instances where the injuries involved were compensable under the workmen’s compensation law. Rollo and one Vanelli were coemployees of the Broadway Plumbing Company. Rollo was injured while a passenger in a car owned by Broadway and being driven by Vanelli. Rollo obtained a judgment against Vanelli and thereafter sought to enforce it against the insurance company that had issued a motor vehicle liability policy to Broadway covering the automobile driven by Vanelli. Rollo argued that since Vanelli was an additional insured under the policy, and was not Rollo’s employer, the exception regarding injuries covered by the workmen’s compensation law should not apply. Such contention was rejected. The court held that under the omnibus clause in the policy, Vanelli was an additional insured as to the whole world, except that there was excepted from the whole world an injured fellow employee injured by Vanelli when both were acting in the course of their employment with the named insured, and such exception *792was not violative of the spirit or intent of the financial responsibility laws.
In the case at bench, it may be conceded that Edwards, as operator of the vehicle involved in the accident, is an additional insured whose liability for injuries to everyone except the named insured, is covered by the policy in question, but the indicated exception is expressly permitted by section 16454 and therefore is not violative of the spirit or intent of the financial responsibility laws.
The decision in Atlantic Nat. Ins. Co. v. Armstrong, supra, 65 Cal.2d 100, does not undertake to determine the proper construction to be given to section 16454. It was sufficient to the determination of the issue there presented to hold that a general provision designed to exclude coverage of liability for injuries to the occupants of the car was void and could not be construed as limited to the permissible exclusion of the named insured in the fortuitous event that he happened to be an occupant.3 In the instant case “the insured” is expressly excluded whether injured in or out of the car and, as we have shown, the provision can have no possible relevant meaning other than that it is restricted to the named insured.
I am in full sympathy with judicially enunciated rules of public policy which favor the extension of monetary protection to persons who are injured in automobile accidents through no fault of their own. This is quite appropriate when the right to such protection is reasonably grounded. In the present case, however, the Legislature has declared the applicable rule of public policy in such clear language that our failure faithfully to apply it would be impermissible for obvious reasons. As stated in Wisdom v. Eagle Star Ins. Co., 211 Cal.App.2d 602, 605 [27 Cal.Rptr. 599] :
“We recognize that the purpose of financial responsibility laws is to give monetary protection to the persons lawfully using the highways, and that they are to be construed liberally. [Citations.] This proposition, however, does not vitiate the elementary principle that the judicial function is simply to ascertain and declare what is in terms or in substance con*793tained in the statute, not to insert what has been omitted, or omit what has been inserted. ’ ’
It appears that contractual limitations upon coverage of the precise species here involved have been held valid and effective by numerous decisions from various states of the union. The following statement is found in volume 7 of Appleman, Insurance Law and Practice, section 4409:
“The results reached by the courts in situations where the named insured is injured by the negligence of a person operating the insured automobile, such operator claiming protection under the omnibus clause, must be considered with reference to the policy provisions themselves. In many policies which have been issued, a direct policy exception prohibits recovery for injury or death of a named insured, and where such an exclusion is contained in the policy, it is enforced according to its terms. ’’
Appleman cites in support of the foregoing text decisions from the states of Georgia, Illinois, Louisiana, Missouri, Minnesota, Wisconsin, New York, Virginia and the District of Columbia. In addition, other cases not cited in Appleman upholding this type of exclusion are: Munsert v. Farmers Mut. Automobile Ins. Co. (1938) 229 Wis. 581 [281 N.W. 671]; Perkins v. Perkins (Mo.App. 1955) 284 S.W.2d 603; and Havlik v. Bittner (1956) 272 Wis. 71 [74 N.W.2d 798],
The Contract Here Involved Clearly Expresses the Intent to Exclude Coverage for Injuries Suffered by the Insured.
Turning now to the proper interpretation of the insurance policy issued by Farmers in the instant case, I agree with the majority’s conclusion that the word “insured” as used in the policy is a word of art and one that has a definite contractual meaning. However, for this very reason I would give it the meaning expressly specified in the contract rather than another meaning not to be found therein. The policy explicitly states that the unqualified word “insured” may identify either the named insured, a permissive user or any person legally responsible for the use of the nonowned automobile by the named insured.
It should be noted that the language of the exclusionary provision here involved utilizes essentially the same terminology as is found in section 16454, i.e., “Any motor vehicle liability policy need not cover any liability for injury to the assured. ...” Secondly, it must be borne in mind, as previously discussed, that no exclusion under a liability policy is *794required to prevent a person from seeking to establish his own liability for his own injuries. Such an effort would constitute a contradiction in terms and would need no assistance from the policy to ensure its failure.
The majority opinion determines that the “insured” in this expression means “the driver” and that the exclusion is intended to guarantee that the carrier shall not be required to indemnify the driver for his own liability to himself arising from his own injuries. I fail to apprehend why such an utterly needless exclusion would be placed in the policy. To my mind it is clear that this exclusion was intended to utilize the limitation expressly authorized by section 16454 and to exclude from coverage any liability of the driver for injuries sustained by the named insured.
I can conceive of no instance in which such an exclusionary provision would be required to prevent an additional insured from seeking indemnity for his own liability for his own injuries. Neither can I imagine a situation in which an exclusion would be required to prevent a named insured from seeking indemnity for his own liability for injuries sustained while he personally was operating his automobile. It seems unquestionable to me that this exclusion is designed to cover the only situation in which it would be relevant, i.e., where the named insured is seeking to establish the liability of an additional insured for injuries sustained by the named insured by reason of the additional insured’s negligent operation of the vehicle.
The Factory Mutual Policy Does Not Extend Coverage to the Type oe Vehicle Here Involved.
I concur in the judgment in favor of Factory Mutual, not because there was substantial conflicting evidence on the question whether the pickup truck was or was not a commercial vehicle, but because the definitions contained in the policy in question clearly indicate that such a vehicle is not included within the policy’s definition of “private passenger vehicle” regardless of its use. Immediately following the provisions in the policy limiting the persons insured thereunder with respect to a nonowned automobile to “ (1) the named insured, (2) any relative, but only with respect to a private passenger automobile or trailer, ’ ’ these clear definitions are set forth:
“‘[Pjrivate passenger automobile’ means a four wheel private passenger, station wagon or jeep type automobile; . . . ‘utility automobile’ means an automobile other than a *795farm automobile, with a load capacity of fifteen hundred pounds or less of the pick-up body, sedan delivery or panel truck type not used for business or commercial purposes. ’ ’
Since the policy clearly placed the vehicle involved in the instant action in the separate classification of “utility vehicle” and since this class of vehicles was not included in the coverage extended to relatives of the named insured when using nonowned cars, I agree that such coverage may not be extended by any abstract judicial determination of what type vehicle might he included within the definition of “private passenger vehicle” when the policy itself does not speak definitively on the subject.
The petition of the plaintiff, cross-defendant and respondent for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied November 30, 1966.
‘ ‘ ‘Motor vehicle liability policy,’ as used in this act, shall be taken to mean a policy of liability insurance issued, by an insurance carrier authorized to transact business in this state, to the person therein named as insured, which policy shall designate, by explicit description or by appropriate reference, all motor vehicles with respect to which coverage is intended to be granted by said policy, and shall insure the insured named therein, and any other person using or responsible for the use of any such motor vehicle, with the consent, express or implied, of such insured, against loss from the liability imposed upon such insured by law or upon such other person for injury to, or death of, any person, other than such person or persons as may he covered, as respects such injury or death hy any workmen’s compensation law, or damage to property, except property of others in charge of the insured or the insured’s employees growing out of the maintenance, use or operation of any such motor vehicle in the United States of America; ...” (Italics added.)
Section 17150 provides: “Every owner of a motor veMele is liable and responsible for the death of or injury to person or property resulting from negligence in the operation of the motor vehicle, in the business of the owner or otherwise, by any person using or operating the same with the permission, express or implied, of the owner, and the negligence of such person shall be imputed to the owner for all purposes of civil damages. ’ ’
The quotation from the policy in the Armstrong ease contained in footnote 3 of the majority opinion does not appear in the Supreme Court’s decision. However, assuming that it is accurate and that the Supreme Court relied thereon, the exclusion there made was merely that the policy did not provide coverage for the liability of the renter or driver for injuries sustained by occupants. As indicated, as a general exclusion it was void and as to the renter himself no liability could attach against him for his own injuries.

=== CASE 2211775 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:11.63446+00 ===

244 Cal.App.2d 811 (1966)
LESTER M. LAING et al., Plaintiffs and Respondents,
v.
OCCIDENTAL LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY OF CALIFORNIA, Defendant and Appellant.
Civ. No. 28614.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Four.
Sept. 15, 1966.
Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher and John L. Endicott for Defendant and Appellant.
Dryden, Harrington, Horgan & Swartz and Vernon G. Foster for Plaintiffs and Respondents. *813
KINGSLEY, J.
This is an appeal by Occidental Life Insurance Company of California from a judgment on a group major medical expense insurance policy. Plaintiff Lester Laing sued for cash benefits under the policy as written and, alternatively, to reform the policy by deleting from it two exclusionary provisions which Occidental contended prevented recovery.  [fn. 1] The first cause of action--which was based on the policy as written--was tried by jury, and a finding was made for the plaintiff. A special interrogatory was submitted to the jury relating to the reformation count; the matter was tried by the trial judge who also entered judgment in favor of plaintiff on that issue.
Plaintiff Laing and Hank Thibodeau, originally as partners and later as a corporation (La Deau Manufacturing Company), engaged in the manufacture of continuous hinges, with Thibodeau primarily concerned with administration and sales, and with Laing concerned with managing the plant. Walter Norris, and later Ray Needham, employees of Quisenberry Insurance Agency, negotiated with the La Deau Manufacturing Company on group insurance; these negotiations resulted in La Deau obtaining from Cal-Western Insurance Co. a group policy. Thibodeau and Laing were later told by a Quisenberry representative that they had double coverage and could collect under one policy only. As a result, Thibodeau and Laing dropped coverage for themselves under the corporation's workmen's compensation policy. After dissatisfaction arose over the extent of financial protection on the Cal-Western policy, Needham arranged a conference in the La Deau office with a representative of Occidental Life Insurance Company of California to discuss substituting a new group policy. Needham, Laing, Thibodeau and the Occidental representative were present. Needham knew that the workmen's compensation policy did not cover Thibodeau and Laing and advised the Occidental representative of that fact. Needham testified:
"A. Well, I explained to him that there was no coverage *814 provided under the workman's compensation policy, and that we wanted to know whether or not Mr. Thibodeau and Mr. Laing, if they participated in this group policy, would be covered."
"Q. And what did he tell you in that respect?"
"A. To the best of my recollection, he said: 'If they don't collect under work--can't collect under workman's compensation or don't collect under workman's compensation, they will be covered by this policy.' * * *"
"A. ... 'If they can't collect any money under a workman's compensation policy, they will collect under this policy.' "
The application was signed and premiums were paid as required.
On the day of the accident, which was normally a working day for Laing, Laing planned to take the day off to attend a World Series game (for which tickets had already been obtained) with Thibodeau, and a Mr. Ainsworth, a social friend. Because of the convenient central location, the three men decided to meet at the plant, then go to lunch in the Chinese section of town, and proceed to the ball game. Laing arrived at the plant at 10 a.m., in sport clothes and without any plans to work; he wandered around the building and then the parking lot. During the preceding weeks Laing had engaged an independent contractor, Nicholas Electric Company, to install a new air-compressor unit. Maurice Dube, an employee of La Deau, was made available by La Deau to help Beck, an employee of Nicholas Electric. Shortly before the accident, Laing saw Dube working on the project, feeding wire into a conduit, and asked him how it was going; Dube replied "slow." Laing saw that Beck was having trouble and Laing asked him if he could use a hand. Beck accepted the offer and Laing climbed on the roof; as they began to pull on the wire, something gave way and both men fell to the ground. As a result, Laing was permanently paralyzed in the lower torso.
The policy had several exclusions, including the following: "... no Medical Expense Benefits shall be payable for or on account of: ... (4) Any bodily injury or sickness for which the person on whom claim is presented has or had a right to compensation under any workmen's compensation or occupational disease law, or (5) Any bodily injury or sickness which arises from or is sustained in the course of any occupation or employment for compensation, profit or gain, ..."
Defendant contends: (1) that the exclusions under (4) and *815 (5) of the policy apply to plaintiff Laing and that he is not entitled to benefits under the policy because he was acting in the scope of his employment; and (2) that plaintiff is not entitled to reformation because he is barred by the statute of limitations and by laches.
I
[1] Defendant's first argument (that is that the exclusionary provisions of the policy relating to injuries incurred in the scope of employment bar Laing from recovery) is well taken. Laing, in his capacity of plant manager, had charge over foremen in the plant, had the duty of overseeing and arranging for repairs and alterations of the equipment on the premises, and from time to time did repair work himself on the premises. Also, Laing had arranged with Nicholas Electric to do the repair work in question. Laing occasionally worked nights and Saturdays without overtime pay and without adjustments in his salary for the hours he worked. These facts clearly indicate that the injury arose out of and in the course of the employment of Laing such that the exclusionary items apply.  [fn. 2] It can be unequivocally stated that Laing's action, in helping the electrician make a repair, was in furtherance of La Deau's business and in furtherance of his own duties, in this situation where Laing generally supervised repairs and occasionally did repair work himself.
It has been held that where injury occurs outside of regular working hours, and where the employee is not manipulating the tools of his own calling when the injury occurred, and where the injured person is rendering reasonably needed assistance to a coworker at the time of the accident, the injured is entitled to recovery under the Workmen's Compensation Act, if at the time of the accident he is engaged in some activity or conduct reasonably attributable to the employment or properly incidental thereto. (Scott v. Pacific Coast Borax Co. (1956) 140 Cal.App.2d 173 [294 P.2d 1039].)
Plaintiff's attempts to distinguish the Scott case are futile. Plaintiff argues that, in the Scott case: "1. The service being performed was a simple one which he would reasonably have been expected to render a fellow employee as a regular incidence of his duties as a gasoline station attendant; 2. The service was performed at the request of the employee then in charge, and was calculated to advance the employer's interests; *816 3. The performance of the service would facilitate plaintiff's own employment on the following day since he would have to use the pump. (See: 140 Cal.App.2d 181-182.)"
These factors do not sufficiently distinguish the two cases. [2] In the instant case, as one in charge of repairs, Laing might reasonably be expected to render assistance occasionally in making those repairs; the repairs were calculated to advance the employer's interest, and the service done for Beck would certainly "facilitate plaintiff's own employment" where Laing himself was responsible for supervising the activities done. (That Nicholas was an independent contractor instead of a fellow employee is a "difference," but it is a difference without any significance in the case at bench.)
Other cases have held that acts in furtherance of the employer's business done outside regular working hours (Griffin v. Industrial Acc. Com. (1937) 19 Cal.App.2d 727 [66 P.2d 176]), and while combining those acts with purely personal acts that have nothing to do with the employment (Wiseman v. Industrial Acc. Com. (1956) 46 Cal.2d 570 [297 P.2d 649]), do not preclude an employee from recovery under workmen's compensation.
Further support for the conclusion that Laing was acting in the course of his employment, within the meaning of exclusion (5), may be found in J. J. Newberry Co. v. Continental Cas. Co. (1964) 229 Cal.App.2d 728 [40 Cal.Rptr. 509]. In that case, the manager of plaintiff's store, in violation of orders, returned to the store after it had closed for the day, in order to make a personal phone call over the employer's phone. He saw a light in a stockroom, investigated, and was attacked by burglars who then escaped with their loot. The store owner sued to recover under a policy against robbery, which policy applied only if a custodian in the store's employ was a victim. The court held that, in spite of the manager's violation of a specific order and the fact that he came to the premises for personal purposes only, his act of investigating the light was done in the scope of his employment and in a custodial capacity. Here Laing was not on the premises in violation of any company rule or policy and, as we have seen he, like the manager in Newberry, was at the particular place of the episode involved for a company and not a purely personal purpose. [3] The fact that he was on his way to a baseball game, and had not originally planned to conduct business, is immaterial; when he undertook to assist in pulling the wire, he was doing so in his capacity as an employee of the corporation and for its benefit. *817
Plaintiff correctly argues that all activities which occur on employer's premises do not "arise out of" the employment, but this generality does not aid plaintiff's case. In the Robbins v. Yellow Cab Co. case (1948) 85 Cal.App.2d 811 [193 P.2d 956], plaintiff was injured after working hours in a different department while obtaining her husband's pay check. However, the plaintiff in the Robbins case was doing nothing in behalf of her employer, while the plaintiff Laing in the instant case was helping make a repair. So too, in State Dept. of Institutions v. Industrial Acc. Com. (1941) 46 Cal.App.2d 439 [116 P.2d 79], (cited by plaintiff) the employee was not permitted to recover workmen's compensation benefits where she was injured while returning to the building of employment solely for the purpose of ascertaining the cause of her coemployee's delay in leaving the building. Here, again, the plaintiff was not aiding her employer and therefore that case is not comparable to the Laing situation.
In Williamson v. Industrial Acc. Com. (1918) 177 Cal. 715 [171 P. 797], a chambermaid voluntarily cleaned out a light well in the building, a job which was assigned to the male janitor. The court in the Williamson case emphasized that this was a hazardous act which no employer could reasonably expect a woman to do, and therefore it was out of the course of employment.  [fn. 3] In the case at bench we state again that Laing was in charge of the repairs, and therefore these two cases are not analogous. In San Francisco & Sacramento Ry. Co. v. Industrial Acc. Com. (1927) 201 Cal. 597 [258 P. 86], the injured employee actually was violating the employer's instructions, and in R. Sherer & Co. v. Industrial Acc. Com. (1917) 175 Cal. 615 [166 P. 318], a watchman left the piece of equipment of which he was in charge to perform services on another piece of equipment of which another watchman was in charge. The cases cited by plaintiff are, for the reasons detailed above, not analogous to the case at hand and do not aid the plaintiff's cause.
II
[4a] Plaintiff claims that the judgment supporting the reformation of the policy is supported by substantial evidence. *818
Defendant argues that Laing's failure to read his policy was inexcusable neglect and not mistake. It is true that some cases have held that the insured has a duty to read his life insurance policy. (Telford v. New York Life Ins. Co. (1937) 9 Cal.2d 103, 107 [69 P.2d 835]; Layton v. New York Life Ins. Co. (1921) 55 Cal.App. 202 [202 P. 958].) The case most closely supporting defendant's view in this matter is Taff v. Atlas Assur. Co. (1943) 58 Cal.App.2d 696, 700-702 [137 P.2d 483]. In that case, the plaintiff jeweler obtained a policy of insurance which contained an exclusion clause excluding loss from an unoccupied and unguarded motor vehicle. Plaintiff contended that the agent promised the policy would protect him under any and all circumstances. In sustaining a judgment against the insured, the court said (at page 700): "If he [the insured] had in mind a policy that would insure his jewelry under any conceivable situation, a business man of ordinary prudence surely would at some time within five years look to see whether he was secure in such coverage."
The court concluded its analysis of the problem with these rules (pp. 702- 703): "While the mere failure to read a policy does not in itself necessarily prohibit a revision of the contract, yet such failure on the part of the policyholder is a circumstance to be considered by the court on the question of his negligence. So, also, are the experience and intelligence of plaintiff factors to prove his neglect. Unless the policyholder making such excuse gives a satisfactory explanation of his failure to read it, the trial court may be justified in rejecting his excuse and in denying the reformation. The court is not bound to accept just any excuse offered by the holder of a policy seeking a reformation of its provisions for his failure to read it at the time he received it. [Citation.] A contract having been deliberately executed is presumed correctly to express the intention of the parties. [Citation.] The burden of overcoming such presumption rests upon him who seeks to avoid its plain terms by clear and convincing evidence. [Citation.] The reformation of a policy on the ground of mistake without the exercise of reasonable care on the part of the insured is not to be encouraged. [Citation.] In order to be relieved of the result of his failure to read his policy the insured must have exercised that degree of care ordinarily exercised by a reasonably prudent person under the same circumstances. Otherwise equity will not relieve against it. [Citation.] If the trial court should determine that the excuse offered by the insured is not a satisfactory explanation of his failure to read the policy, he is not relieved from the consequences *819 of his neglect of a legal duty within the meaning of section 1577 of the Civil Code."
However, the Taff case does not hold that the insured's failure to read his policy was, as a matter of law, a bar to reformation, but as the above quotation discloses, merely that such failure is "a circumstance to be considered" and that such a circumstance supports a finding that the insured did not make an excusable mistake. Nor, as defendant's brief concedes, does Taff hold that a failure to read is a fact to be considered by itself and without reference to the other circumstances of the particular case. In Taff, there was printed, on the first page in bold letters an admonition to read the policy and return it for correction, and the exclusion clause in the Taff case appeared on the first page of the policy in bold type. This made the insured's duty to read the policy a stronger duty than exists here, where the exclusion clause was in regular print not on the first page, and there was no equivalent warning to read the policy and return for corrections.
Furthermore, many cases have held that the presumption that persons are familiar with the terms of written contracts are not strictly applied to insurance contracts. (Raulet v. Northwestern Nat. Ins. Co. (1910) 157 Cal. 213 [107 P. 292]; Eagle Indem. Co. v. Industrial Acc. Com. (1949) 92 Cal.App.2d 222 [206 P.2d 877].) [5] An insured has the right to rely on the presumption that the policy he receives is in accordance with his application; and his failure to read it will not relieve the insurer or its agent from the duty of so writing it. (Mercer Casualty Co. v. Lewis (1940) 41 Cal.App.2d 918 [108 P.2d 65]; also Ames v. Employers Casualty Co. (1936) 16 Cal.App.2d 255 [60 P.2d 347].) Therefore, Laing's failure to read the policy is not such a neglect of duty as to create an absolute bar.
[4b] The record discloses two matters, each of which affords some reasonable excuse for the failure to read the policy and discover the lack of coverage.
First: The jury found, in answer to a special interrogatory, and the trial court's findings concurred, that a representative of defendant had represented that Laing would receive benefits under the policy herein involved unless he received benefits under workmen's compensation. Having applied for this policy, on that express representation, Laing was entitled, under the cases above cited, to rely on the company's duty to provide a policy as applied for. *820
Second: It is clear from an examination of the policy that, while the exclusion herein involved is, in fact, contained therein, it is not obvious nor patent. It is not without significance that, when defendant's witness Nickels, in charge of its group insurance office, was asked on the stand to point out the exclusionary language, he had difficulty in finding it and actually made two false starts on that endeavor. Two businessmen, admittedly without sophistication in matters of insurance, certainly were not required to be more alert nor better readers.
We cannot say that the trial court was without evidentiary support in finding that plaintiff Laing was entitled to rely on the company's representation that it had provided him with the coverage he had requested and for which he and his employer thought they were paying.
III
[6] Defendant claims that reformation is barred by sections 338 and 339 of the Code of Civil Procedure, which lay down a three-year statute of limitations in actions for reformation, since the action for reformation (introduced by the first amended complaint) was not instituted until November 21, 1961, over five years after the policy was issued and delivered.
The statute, however, does not begin to run until the mistake is discovered, or until the plaintiff, by reasonable diligence could and should have discovered it. (Bradbury v. Higginson (1914) 167 Cal. 553 [140 P. 254].) Admittedly, the mistake was not discovered until after the injury, when the company denied liability--a date well within the statutory period. The reasons above discussed are the answer to the contention that it should have been discovered at an earlier date.
IV
[7] Defendant argues also that plaintiff's action for reformation is barred by laches. The contention is that, pursuant to its established program of record keeping and destruction, it had destroyed certain records, including that portion of the file on the policy herein involved which would have shown which of its employees had participated in the sale of the policy and might, therefore, have been able to testify as to the truth or falsity of the claimed conversation between plaintiff, Needham and an Occidental agent on the matter of coverage. But, apart from the question (which we need not here *821 decide) of whether the company could rely on delay which, as above discussed, was due to its own fault, the claim lacks factual basis. [8] The party seeking to invoke the defense of laches must show not only delay but prejudice proximately caused by that delay. (Vesper v. Forest Lawn Cemetery Assn. (1937) 20 Cal.App.2d 157 [57 P.2d 368].) There is here no showing that the company's records still extant do not still show the names of its sales force on the date in question; simple inquiry among them should disclose the identity of the person who conferred with plaintiff and with Needham. [9] In any event, prejudice does not appear as a matter of law and the trial court's finding that none exists will not be disturbed on appeal. (McIntyre v. Doe & Roe (1954) 125 Cal.App.2d 285, 287 [270 P.2d 21].)
It is not contested that, if the judgment of reformation is proper, plaintiff is entitled to recover on the policy as reformed.
The judgment is affirmed.
Files, P. J., and Jefferson, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. The count for a money judgment was brought by plaintiff Laing alone; the count for reformation was brought in the names of both Laing and the corporation; the judgment for money runs in favor of Laing, that for reformation would inure to the benefit of both plaintiffs. It is conceded that no claim exists under the policy, either as written or as reformed, other than that of plaintiff Laing and that the corporate plaintiff seeks no relief other than that accruing to Laing. Under these circumstances, for convenience, we refer to plaintiff Laing as though he were the sole plaintiff and the sole successful party in the trial court.
[fn. 2]  2. Section 3600 of the Labor Code makes La Deau liable to Laing for the workmen's compensation provided by Division 4 where the injury arises out of the course of the employment.
[fn. 3]  3. Williamson is, in any event, of doubtful value to plaintiff; see Joshua Hendy Iron Works v. Industrial Acc. Com. (1946) 74 Cal.App.2d 191, 198 [168 P.2d 203], where the court said: "... the holding in the Williamson case should be limited to its precise facts, particularly in view of the earlier court's own language that the case was decided in 'the formative period of the law relating to industrial accident cases,' and 'must be decided upon its own peculiar state of facts.' "

=== CASE 9737718 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:33:01.940063+00 ===

N. PATRICK CROOKS, J.
¶1. The Petitioners in this case are various Wisconsin students, parents, teachers, school districts, school board members, citizens, and the president of the Wisconsin Education Association Council (WEAC).1 The Petitioners collec*599tively challenge the constitutionality of the state school finance system under Wis. Stat. ch. 121 and Wis. Stat. §§ 79.10 and 79.14. Two main issues are presented for our review: 1) whether the state school finance system is unconstitutional under Wis. Const, art. X, § 3 — the uniformity clause of the education article; and 2) whether the state school finance system is unconstitutional under Wis. Const, art. I, § 1 — the Equal Protection Clause. The Petitioners contend that the school finance system violates both art. X, § 3 and art. I, § 1 because it fails to equalize access to financial resources among school districts.
¶ 2. In an unpublished decision, the court of appeals upheld the constitutionality of the school finance system. Vincent v. Voight, No. 97-3174, unpublished slip op. (Ct. App. Dec. 23, 1998). The court determined that the current school finance system is not materially different from the system that this court upheld as constitutional in Kukor v. Grover, 148 Wis. 2d 469, 436 N.W.2d 568 (1989).2 Slip op. at 6. We agree *600that the Petitioners have not proved beyond a reasonable doubt that the current state school finance system violates either art. X, § 3 or art. I, § 1 of the Wisconsin Constitution. The present school finance system more effectively equalizes the tax base among districts than the system in place at the time Kukor was decided.
¶ 3. We further hold that Wisconsin students have a fundamental right to an equal opportunity for a *601sound basic education. An equal opportunity for a sound basic education is one that will equip students for their roles as citizens and enable them to succeed economically and personally. The legislature has articulated a standard for equal opportunity for a sound basic education in Wis. Stat. §§ 118.30(lg)(a) and 121.02(L) (1997-98) as the opportunity for students to be proficient in mathematics, science, reading and writing, geography, and history, and for them to receive instruction in the arts and music, vocational training, social sciences, health, physical education and foreign language, in accordance with their age and aptitude.3 An equal opportunity for a sound basic education acknowledges that students and districts are not fungible and takes into account districts with disproportionate numbers of disabled students, economically disadvantaged students, and students with limited English language skills. So long as the legislature is providing sufficient resources so that school districts offer students the equal opportunity for a sound basic education as required by the constitution, the state school finance system will pass constitutional muster.
I
A. The Wisconsin School Finance System
¶ 4. We begin by outlining the constitutional provisions applicable to school finance. Article X of the Wisconsin Constitution establishes the state public school system4 and provides that the school districts *602"shall be as nearly uniform as practicable. . . Wis. Const, art. X, § 3. The constitution also creates a school fund for the "support and maintenance" of schools and libraries. Wis. Const, art. X, § 2. Article X, § 4 allows for the imposition of a local tax on the school districts. It states that the sum to be raised locally must be "not less than one-half the amount received by such town or city respectively for school purposes from the income of the school fund." Wis. Const, art. X, § 4. Section 5 provides for the distribution of the income from the school fund "in some just proportion to the number of children and youth resident therein between the ages of four and twenty years." Wis. Const, art. X, § 5.
¶ 5. From these constitutional provisions, the legislature has developed an elaborate state school finance formula.5 One source of school funding is the property tax, which applies directly to each local district. The other significant source of funding is state aid.6 State aid includes equalization aid, categorical aid, and the school levy tax credit.7 We describe each type of aid in turn.
*603EQUALIZATION AID
¶ 6. According to the Legislative Fiscal Bureau, equalization aid "is intended to ensure that differences in tax rate primarily reflect differences in school district spending levels."8 Wisconsin Legislative Fiscal Bureau, Elementary and Secondary Sch. Aids at 10 (Jan. 1999). Equalization aid is distributed on the basis of a school district's relative fiscal capacity. Id. at 1. The majority of school funds are derived from property taxes. However, since the property tax base differs between districts, the state distributes equalization aid according to the formula set forth in Wis. Stat. § 121.07 (1997 — 98).9 Equalization aid provides each qualifying school district with a guaranteed tax base, thereby *604minimizing differences in the ability of school districts to raise revenue through property tax. Equalization aid compensates any deficiencies in a school district's tax base up to the guaranteed amount provided by the state. In other words, the equalization aid "make[s] up the difference between the district's actual tax base and the statefs] guaranteed tax base." Elementary and Secondary Sch. Aids at 7.
¶ 7. Computation of state equalization aid depends on five factors: a) membership, b) shared cost, c) equalized property valuation, d) guaranteed valuation, and e) the amount of available funding. Elementary and Secondary Sch. Aids at 7. The number of students enrolled in a district determines the district's membership. Wis. Stat. § 121.07(l)(a). Shared cost is the "sum of the net cost of the general fund and the net cost of the debt service fund." § 121.07(6)(a). Shared cost represents those school district expenditures for which the equalization formula provides aid. Elementary and Secondary Sch. Aids at 8. Equalized property valuation is "the full market value of taxable property in the school district as determined by the Department of Revenue (DOR). . .each year." Id. District equalized value (DEV) is the equalized valuation on a per pupil basis. See Elementary and Secondary Sch. Aids at 33. Guaranteed valuation represents a guaranteed tax base. Id. at 10. The state guaranteed valuation (SGV) is "the amount of property tax base support which the state guarantees behind each pupil." Id. at 8. See also § 121.07(7)-(8).
¶ 8. Equalization aid applies at three different district spending levels. District spending levels are defined in terms of shared cost. The first level consists of a primary guaranteed tax base of $2,000,000 per *605pupil for the first $1,000 of shared costs.10 Wis. Stat. § 121.07(6)(b), (c), and (7)(a). The $1,000 is also referred to as the primary cost ceiling. The Legislative Fiscal Bureau further explains:
The first level is for shared costs up to the "primary cost ceiling" of $1,000 per member. The state's sharing of costs at the primary cost ceiling, referred to as "primary shared costs," is calculated using a statutory guaranteed valuation of $2,000,000 per member. State aid at the primary level is based on a comparison between a school district's equalized valuation per member and the primary guaranteed valuation; state aid will equal the amount of costs that would be funded by the missing portion of the guaranteed tax base. Elementary and Secondary Sch. Aids at 8.
Currently, all school districts in the state receive some primary equalization aid. The primary guarantee is protected by a hold harmless provision, which means that negative aids cannot reduce any district's primary aid amount. See id.
¶ 9. The state gives secondary equalization aid to a school district when the district spends at a level between the primary shared cost ceiling and the secondary cost ceiling. Elementary and Secondary Sch. Aids at 8. See also Wis. Stat. § 121.07(6)(d)l-2 and (dg). The 1998-99 secondary cost ceiling was $6,285. Elementary and Secondary Sch. Aids at 8. The amount of aid is *606determined by the ratio of a district's actual per-pupil equalized valuation to the secondary guaranteed valuation. The secondary guaranteed valuation is a variable amount. Id. In 1998-99 it was $676,977. Id.
¶ 10. The third level, or "tertiary shared cost" level, "is that portion of a school district's shared cost which is greater than the secondary ceiling cost per member multiplied by its membership." Wis. Stat. § 121.07(6)(dr). Before the legislature acted in 1995, the state employed a two-tiered system, which was replaced by the current three-tiered system under 1995 Wis. Act. 27. The amount of tertiary aid is deducted from the secondary aid amount if the amount of tertiary aid is a negative number. Elementary and Secondary Sch. Aids at 9. This is referred to as "negative aid." However, when the secondary and tertiary aid equal a negative number, the resulting amount is not deducted from the primary aid. Id. The tertiary guarantee is designed to discourage districts from spending at a level above the ceiling, and to narrow per pupil spending disparities. Id.
¶ 11. Applying these concepts, the amount of aid a district receives at any level may be determined by the following formula:
State aid = 1-DEV/SGV x shared cost11
The general equalization formula to determine the amount of aid a school district receives is:
*607Equalization aid = (1-(DEV¡primary SGV) x primary shared cost) +
(1-(DEVIsecondary SGV) x secondary shared cost) +
(1-(DEV¡tertiary SGV) x tertiary shared cost)
CATEGORICAL AID
¶ 12. There are approximately 25 categorical aid programs.12 The programs are either formula-driven, or they are grant programs. Formula-driven programs give funds to school districts on the basis of the number of students who meet the criteria for the program. Elementary and Secondary Sch. Aids at 14. Grant programs require districts to submit a proposal to receive funds. Id. Categorical aids differ from equalization aid in that they do not depend on the relative *608wealth of a school district. Id. Categorical aids are not calculated into statutory revenue limits.
THE SCHOOL LEVY TAX CREDIT
¶ 13. The school levy tax credit is paid to municipalities, in contrast to equalization aid and categorical aid, which are paid to school districts. Elementary and Secondary Sch. Aids at 1. See also Wis. Stat. §§ 20.835(3)(b), 79.10, 79.14. The tax credit is designed to reduce property taxes. Id. In 1998-99, on a statewide level, the school levy credit reduced the school portion of tax bills by 16.8% on average. Elementary and Secondary Sch. Aids at 29.
¶ 14. In addition to the school levy tax credit, district increases funded by local taxes are limited by a fixed amount, termed a "revenue limit." Wis. Stat. § 121.91. Revenue limits may only be exceeded if residents in a district pass a voter referendum. § 121.91(3). A school district may be penalized if the school district exceeds the maximum allowed revenue under § 121.91. § 121.92.
B. Procedural History
¶ 15. We now turn to an examination of the procedural history of this case. The Plaintiffs initiated this action in October 1995. Thereafter, the president of the Wisconsin Education Association Council (WEAC) and other teachers ("the Intervening Plaintiffs") intervened. The Plaintiffs, Intervening Plaintiffs, and Defendants filed cross-motions for summary judgment on February 24,1997.
*609¶ 16. The Petitioners13 contend that the needs of Wisconsin students are changing and that the school finance system has not kept up with those needs. They contend that the perceived inequities in the system violate the uniformity clause and the Equal Protection Clause, contrary to the Wisconsin Constitution. The inequality stems from a failure "to adequately adjust for the disparity in tax base." (Pl.-Pet'r's Br. at 4.) As a result, property wealth dictates educational opportunity in this state, the Petitioners argue.
¶ 17. According to the Petitioners, categorical aids have been reduced, which "effectively restricts district spending by preventing the school board from compensating for the reduced state aid with additional property tax revenue." (Intervening Pl.-Pet'r's Br. at 12.) This results in school districts shifting funds away from regular programs and into categorical programs. As a result, some districts are unable to retain teaching positions or maintain school facilities. Other districts have cut their offerings in advanced placement or multiple foreign languages. .
¶ 18. The Petitioners further contend that revenue limits prevent school districts from raising necessary funding. For instance, revenue limits prohibit school districts from purchasing and implementing new technology.
¶ 19. Moreover, the Petitioners argue that there has been a significant increase in "high need" students in Wisconsin. High need students include impover*610ished children, disabled children, and children with limited English skills. Additional programs have been mandated by either the state or the federal government for these high need students, but without necessarily increasing funding for the programs.
¶ 20. Finally, the Intervening Plaintiffs-Petitioners contend that charter schools and the Milwaukee Parental School Choice Program pull students out of the public schools. This in turn decreases the number of pupils, or members, in a school district, reducing the amount of funding the district receives.
¶ 21. The circuit court, the Honorable Richard J. Callaway presiding, found that under Kukor, 148 Wis. 2d 469, the school finance system is constitutional and granted the defendants' motion for summary judgment. The court first noted that all children in this state have an equal right to education. However, the Plaintiffs "mistakenly framed the issue as whether the State distributes its school money in a manner which equalizes local budgets rather than whether the children of Wisconsin. . .are receiving the education to which they are entitled." The court then concluded that the Plaintiffs and Intervening Plaintiffs had not overcome the strong presumption of constitutionality that statutes enjoy. See, e.g., United States v. National Dairy Prod. Corp., 372 U.S. 29, 32 (1963).
¶ 22. The school finance system does not violate the uniformity clause of the constitution, the circuit court found, because according to this court's interpretation of the uniformity clause in Kukor, 148 Wis. 2d at 492 (Ceci, J. plurality); 148 Wis. 2d at 514 (Steinmetz, J., concurring), the constitution does not require that the educational opportunities provided by school districts be absolutely equal.
*611¶ 23. The circuit court also determined that the school finance system does not violate equal protection. The court repeatedly noted that the Plaintiffs and Intervening Plaintiffs failed to give virtually any evidence relating to the quality of education students receive in Wisconsin, and therefore, the court could not ascertain whether students are being deprived of their right to an education. The state has significantly increased its total state aid to the public schools, and the increase in state aid outweighs any disproportionate distribution of tax credit to wealthy property owners. The court further recognized that the current system provides schools across the board with more state aid than the system at issue in Kukor. The schools face the same problems that they did when the Kukor court reviewed the system, and the Kukor court was unpersuaded by those facts.
¶ 24. In sum, the circuit court concluded that the Plaintiffs and Intervening Plaintiffs did not demonstrate the school finance system's negative impact on education. Without such evidence, the court had no way to ascertain "the magnitude of any deficiencies in the State's effort to fulfill its duty to provide students with a basic education."
¶ 25. The court of appeals agreed that the plaintiffs did not demonstrate any material difference between the current system and the system at issue in Kukor. Vincent, slip op. at 6. In other words, no significant disparities exist between the aid given under either system. Slip op. at 28-29. Moreover, the court found no evidence of children who do not receive at least a basic education. Slip op. at 32-33. In fact, the court concluded, "the evidence suggests that the state is providing greater aid to school districts than it did at the time Kukor was decided." Slip op. at 33.
*612¶ 26. Judge Dykman concurred in the court of appeals' decision, but noted the record demonstrated "that lower spending school districts are laboring under very difficult conditions." Vincent, slip op. at 35 (Dykman, J., concurring). The concurrence also lamented that Kukor contained no test for the court of appeals to use in assessing the current finance system and that "substantially improved programs are needed in our less affluent school districts." Slip op. at 36.
¶ 27. In part II of this opinion we analyze art. X, § 3 in light of its constitutional history and this court's past precedent. We affirm Kukor, but explain further the Kukor definition of equal opportunity for an education. In parts III and IV we address whether the current school finance system violates art. X, § 3 and art. I, § 1 of the Wisconsin Constitution.
HH HH
¶ 28. We begin by interpreting the uniformity clause in art. X, § 3 of the Wisconsin Constitution, which states that the district schools "shall be as nearly uniform as practicable."14 We interpret constitutional provisions de novo. Thompson v. Craney, 199 Wis. 2d 674, 680, 546 N.W.2d 123 (1996). We benefit, however, *613from the analyses of the circuit court and the court of appeals.
¶ 29. We recognize that "the clear purpose of art. X, § 3, was to compel the exercise of the power to the extent designated." Zweifel v. Joint Dist. No. 1, Belleville, 76 Wis. 2d 648, 658, 251 N.W.2d 822 (1977). It is a "fundamental principle" that the Wisconsin Constitution limits legislative power. Manitowoc v. Manitowoc Rapids, 231 Wis. 94, 97, 285 N.W. 403 (1939). See also State ex rel. Dudgeon v. Levitan, 181 Wis. 326, 339, 193 N.W. 499 (1923); Pauly v. Keebler, 175 Wis. 428, 439, 185 N.W. 554 (1921); Outagamie County v. Zuehlke, 165 Wis. 32, 35, 161 N.W. 6 (1917). In Busé v. Smith, 74 Wis. 2d 550, 564, 247 N.W.2d 141 (1976), we specifically stated that "the search is not for a grant of power to the legislature but for a restriction thereon." Moreover, it is "a limitation upon the broad power of the state to educate its citizens through the establishment and operation of schools. The limitations are precisely stated: District schools, uniformity, and free tuition for certain ages." Zweifel, 76 Wis. 2d at 658. See also Manitowoc, 231 Wis. at 97-98; Zuehlke, 165 Wis. at 35.
¶ 30. Three sources guide our interpretation of a constitutional provision: "the plain meaning of the words in the context used; the constitutional debates and the practices in existence at the time of the writing of the constitution; and the earliest interpretation of the provision by the legislature as manifested in the first law passed following adoption." Id.
¶ 31. The word "uniform" in the context of art. X, § 3 plainly refers to the "character of instruction" provided in the public schools. In T.B. Scott Lumber Co. v. Oneida County and another, 72 Wis. 158, 161, 39 N.W. 343 (1888), this court found that the organization of a *614township school system15 did not violate the uniformity clause under art. X, § 3. By finding the township school system "uniform," this court implied that it did not equate equal acreage with "uniformity." Suzanne M. Steinke, The Exception to the Rule: Wisconsin's Fundamental Right to Education and Public School Financing, 1995 Wis. L. Rev. 1387, 1399 [hereinafter, The Exception to the Rule]. Later, in State ex rel. Zilisch v. Auer, 197 Wis. 284, 290, 221 N.W. 860 (1928), we determined that the uniformity clause in art. X, § 3 related to the "character of instruction" at the public schools after they were established, not the "method of forming school districts," or fixing district boundaries. "Character of instruction" was described as "the training that these schools should give to the future citizens of Wisconsin." Id. These representative cases demonstrate that from our earliest jurisprudence on, we have construed the uniformity clause to relate to the "character of instruction" offered in the public schools, and not the size, boundaries, or composition of the school districts. See also The Exception to the Rule, 1995 Wis. L. Rev. at 1400.
¶ 32. The practices in existence around the time of the constitutional conventions further guide our interpretation of Wis. Const, art. X, § 3. Before the mid — 1800's, elementary and secondary schools were generally privately funded. Erik LeRoy, The Egalitarian Roots of the Education Article of the Wisconsin Constitution: Old History, New Interpretation, Busé v. Smith Criticized, 1981 Wis. L. Rev. 1325, 1344 [hereinafter, Egalitarian Roots]. See also The Exception to the *615Rule, 1995 Wis. L. Rev. at 1391. The territorial government in 1836 created a "district school" system that was financed partially by taxes, but still in large part by private subscription. Egalitarian Roots, 1981 Wis. L. Rev. at 1344-45.
¶ 33. Several factors produced an "impetus" for free public school education in Wisconsin. Egalitarian Roots, 1981 Wis. L. Rev. at 1347. First, some viewed public schools as an opportunity to eliminate distinctions between the wealthy and the poor.16 Id. at 1346. Others viewed public schools as a way to integrate the swell of new immigrants with East Coast "transplants." Id. at 1347. Finally, others simply wanted to use state funds to "to pay for education." Id. at 1348.
¶ 34. It appears that by the time of the 1846 constitutional convention, there was general support for a constitutional provision on education. Egalitarian Roots, 1981 Wis. L. Rev. at 1348 and n.101. The 1846 constitutional convention manifested its support for education by devoting 500,000 acres of land, which the federal government was to give to Wisconsin upon attaining statehood. Id. at 1349. Unfortunately, however, no debates ensued relating to the draft of art. X, § 3 at either the 1846 or 1848 constitutional conventions because the provision was wholly uncontroversial. Id. at 1350.
¶ 35. Finally, we examine the early state statutes on school finance. The state laws of 1848 contained a number of statutory provisions relating to the public schools. The most comprehensive statute on public schools included a detailed section on local *616taxes17 and a section on the distribution of income of *617the school fund. "An Act in Relation to Public Schools," Laws of 1848, p. 240-41, 243. Significantly, Section 91 of the statute required each town receiving state funds to match at least half of the amount donated by the state. Section 92 set the property tax at "two and a half mills on each dollar." Section 93 provided for an additional tax that could be raised after a vote was taken to fund teachers' wages and expenses. The school fund provision stated that towns would receive interest from the school fund "in proportion to the number of children in such town-" Section 104, Distribution of Income of the School Fund, Laws of 1848, p. 243.
¶ 36. The plain meaning, the practices around the time of the constitutional convention, and the early statutes all indicate that art. X, § 3 was intended to refer to the character of the instruction given at the public schools.
¶ 37. We now turn to this court's more recent precedent regarding school finance. This court has directly examined the constitutionality of the state school finance system twice in the last 25 years. At issue in Busé, 74 Wis. 2d at 556, were two statutes that created negative aid for certain school districts, or reduced the positive aid those districts could have received. The plaintiffs, the negative aid school districts and property taxpayers residing in the negative aid school districts, argued that the negative aid statutes were unconstitutional. Their main argument was *618that the statutory negative aid provisions violated the rule of uniform taxation, articulated in art. VIII, § 1 of the Wisconsin Constitution. Busé, 74 Wis. 2d at 554. Additionally, the court addressed whether negative aid was unconstitutional under art. X, §§ 3 and 4 and art. I, § 1 of the Wisconsin Constitution. Id. at 562.
¶ 38. The court first examined whether the statutes violated the uniformity clause of Wis. Const, art. X, § 3. The court specifically considered whether art. X, § 3 requires the legislature "to provide an equal opportunity for education for all school children in the state." Busé, 74 Wis. 2d at 562. The court recognized that while the United States Constitution does not require the establishment of schools, San Antonio Indep. Sch. Dist. v. Rodriguez, 411 U.S. 1 (1973), the Wisconsin Constitution does contain that requirement. Busé, 74 Wis. 2d at 564 (quoting Wis. Const, art. X, § 3). Besides establishing the public schools, art. X, § 3 also states that the public schools must be "as nearly uniform as practicable" and that children in the state may attend the public schools without charge. Id. at 565.
¶ 39. Having set forth the pertinent constitutional provisions, the court held the framers of the constitution intended the phrase "as nearly uniform as practicable" to refer to the "character of instruction" at the district schools. Id. at 566 (quoting State ex rel. Zilisch v. Auer, 197 Wis. 284, 289-90, 221 N.W. 860, 223 N.W. 123 (1928)). The court further stated that "[e]quality of opportunity for education is equated with the right of all school children to attend a public school free of charge...," id. at 565, and equal opportunity for education is a fundamental right. Id. at 567. However, the court concluded that according to the plain meaning of art. X, § 3 and constitutional history, art. X, § 3 *619does not require educational opportunity to be absolutely uniform. Id. at 568.
¶ 40. With regard to art. X, § 4 of the Wisconsin Constitution, the court examined whether local district control of funding was, in some measure, required by the constitution. Busé, 74 Wis. 2d at 570. The court again carefully examined the language of the constitution, the constitutional debates, and the early legislative enactments to determine that "[l]ocal districts retain the control to provide educational opportunities over and above those required by the state and they retain the power to raise and spend revenue '. . .for the support of common schools therein.Id. at 570-72.
¶ 41. The court then found the negative aid provisions unconstitutional in light of the uniform tax rule in art. VIII, § 1 of the Wisconsin Constitution. The court set forth the limitations on the power to tax, noting that "the purpose of [a] tax must be one which pertains to the public purpose of the district within which the tax is to be levied and raised." Id. at 577. The state does not have the power to tax a local entity " 'for a purely local purpose.'" Id. at 576 (quoting Thomas M. Cooley, Law of Taxation, § 86, pp. 211, 212 (1924)). As such, the court concluded, "the state cannot compel one school district to levy and collect a tax for the direct benefit of other school districts, or for the sole benefit of the state." Id. at 579.
¶ 42. Finally, the court examined whether the negative aid provisions violated equal protection and due process. Because the court held that equal educational opportunity is a fundamental right, the court applied the strict scrutiny test to its equal protection analysis. Id. at 580. The court then concluded that the negative aid provisions survived strict scrutiny. Id.
*620¶ 43. The concurrence viewed negative aid as a state tax. Busé, 74 Wis. 2d at 581 (Robert W. Hansen, J., concurring). However, the concurrence agreed with the majority that a municipality cannot be forced to assume obligations that it does not ordinarily have. Id. (quoting Lund v. Chippewa County, 93 Wis. 640, 648-49, 67 N.W. 927 (1896)).
¶ 44. The dissent disagreed that negative aid violated the uniform taxation rule. Busé, 74 Wis. 2d at 583 (Abrahamson, J., dissenting). The dissent first noted that it felt the majority had not "accorded this statute the proper presumption of constitutionality." Id. at 584. Moreover, the dissent argued it was "not clear beyond reasonable question that the statute conflicts with the constitution," and when in doubt, a court must " 'favor. . .the validity of the act.'" Id. (quoting State ex rel. New Richmond v. Davidson, 114 Wis. 563, 579-80, 88 N.W. 596, 90 N.W. 1067 (1902)).
¶ 45. The dissent articulated the issue before the court as "whether the 'negative aid' statute violates the public purpose doctrine. . . ." Busé, 74 Wis. 2d at 589. The dissent found that negative aid "applies across the state to all school districts," and "[n]o one school district is singled out to support another school district or state education." Id. at 594. Moreover, the dissent felt that negative aid should not be invalidated just because some, but not all, districts have to pay it. Id. The dissent concluded that the negative aid provisions were consistent with precedent. Id. at 594-95.
¶ 46. More recently, in Kukor v. Grover, the plurality and concurrence agreed that under art. X, § 3 of the Wisconsin Constitution each student is guaranteed a basic education.18 148 Wis. 2d at 503 (Ceci, J., plural*621ity); id. at 514 (Steinmetz, J., concurring). The plurality and concurrence further agreed that education does not have to be absolutely uniform to satisfy art. X, § 3.19 Id. at 487 (Ceci, J., plurality); id. at 514 (Steinmetz, J., concurring). Second, the plurality and concurrence held that the legislature's fiscal decisions regarding education are entitled to great deference. Id. at 502-03 (Ceci, J., plurality); id. at 512 (Steinmetz, J., concurring). Third, the plurality and concurrence held that it is not necessary to analyze the school funding system under strict scrutiny, because equal allocation of state resources is not a fundamental right.20 Id. at 498 (Ceci, J., plurality); id. at 5.13 (Steinmetz, J., concurring).
¶ 47. The dissent characterized the state school finance system as "fundamentally flawed" because the state, according to the dissent, did not take educational need into account when distributing funds. Kukor, 148 Wis. 2d at 516 (Bablitch, J., dissenting). The dissent *622noted that "character of instruction" had been defined by this court as " 'services, procedures, opportunities or rules' provided in district schools." Id. at 520 (quoting Zweifel v. Joint Dist. No. 1, Belleville, 76 Wis. 2d 648, 653, 251 N.W.2d 822 (1977)). The dissent then pointed to the circuit court's findings, which indicated the failure of the school finance system. Id. at 522-24. In particular, the dissent criticized the finance system's method of funding "special needs" programs, leaving school districts with little choice but to draw funds from "regular" programs to be used for "special needs." Id. at 525. The dissent felt that the evidence demonstrated the finance system's failure to provide children with "a uniform opportunity to become an educated person." Id. at 526.
¶ 48. Our decision in Kukor laid the foundation for the right that we explain today. Recently, a number of states considering the constitutionality of school finance systems have turned toward the notion of educational adequacy as a better approach than previous educational equality analyses. See, e.g., McDuffy v. Secretary of the Executive Office of Educ. and others, 615 N.E.2d 516, 554 (Mass. 1993) (quoting Rose v. Council for Better Educ., Inc., 790 S.W.2d 186, 212 (Ky. 1989)); Pauley v. Kelly, 255 S.E.2d 859, 877 (W. Va. 1979). The adequacy approach to school finance refers to an examination of "the quality of the educational services delivered to children in disadvantaged dis-tricts_" Peter Enrich, Leaving Equality Behind: New Directions in School Finance Reform, 48 Vand. L. Rev. 101, 109 (1995) [hereinafter, Leaving Equality Behind].
¶ 49. Courts have turned toward adequacy as an alternative way to analyze school finance systems because previous decisions centered on equality have *623not lessened the disparity between school districts. Leaving Equality Behind, 48 Vand. L. Rev. at 102-03. Focusing on adequacy, it is claimed, has a number of benefits. Among other benefits, the adequacy approach is "grounded in broadly shared societal values concerning the importance of education and the obligation to provide for the basic needs of society's least advantaged." Id. at 170. The adequacy approach also may be appealing because it does not threaten to lower the level of achievement in some districts in an effort to create equality. Id.
¶ 50. Under the adequacy approach, a state generally lists the types of knowledge that a child should possess to guide a legislature in fulfilling its constitutional obligations. For example, Massachusetts articulated the following guidelines:
An educated child must possess "at least the seven following capabilities: (i) sufficient oral and written communication skills to enable students to function in a complex and rapidly changing civilization; (ii) sufficient knowledge of economic, social, and political systems to enable students to make informed choices; (iii) sufficient understanding of governmental processes to enable the student to understand the issues that affect his or her community, state, and nation; (iv) sufficient self-knowledge and knowledge of his or her mental and physical wellness; (v) sufficient grounding in the arts to enable each student to appreciate his or her cultural and historical heritage; (vi) sufficient training or preparation for advanced training in either academic or vocational fields so as to enable each child to choose and pursue life work intelligently; and (vii) sufficient level of academic or vocational skills to enable public school students to compete favorably with *624their counterparts in surrounding states, in academics or in the job market."
McDuffy, 615 N.E.2d at 554 (quoting Rose, 790 S.W.2d at 212). This type of standard articulates the content of an adequate education. Leaving Equality Behind, 48 Vand. L. Rev. at 176. Courts that have used this approach do not attempt to "displace the legislative function of identifying realistic parameters for the state's ambitions, but rather [attempt] to serve as a goad or as a backstop to the legislature's accomplishment of that task." Id. In Massachusetts, it was expected that limited judicial intervention would likely be "quite productive." Id.
¶ 51. An equal opportunity for a sound basic education is one that will equip students for their roles as citizens and enable them to succeed economically and personally. The legislature has articulated a standard for equal opportunity for a sound basic education in Wis. Stat. §§ 118.30(lg)(a) and 121.02(L). Section 118.30(lg)(a) states that "each school board shall adopt pupil academic standards in mathematics, science, reading and writing, geography and history." Section 121.02(L) requires that "each school board shall.. .provide instruction" in several subjects, according to school grades.
¶ 52. By grounding the standard in statutes, we reiterate our position in Kukor, 148 Wis. 2d at 503, 505 n.14, wherein we stated that we defer to the legislature because it "is uniquely equipped to evaluate and respond to such questions of public policy...." As such, we defer here to the legislature's wisdom in choosing *625which core subjects21 should be involved in providing an equal opportunity for a sound basic education.22
¶ 53. Further, we note that the reason for articulating the standard in terms of equality and adequacy is to guarantee "that each district can provide its students with an acceptable basic level of educational servicesLeaving Equality Behind, 48 Vand. L. Rev. at 112. The objective is to adopt a standard that will "equaliz[e] outcomes, not merely inputs." Id. at 151.
I — I I — I I — I
¶ 54. We now consider the Petitioners' argument that the statutory school finance system set forth in Wis. Stat. ch. 121, and Wis. Stat. §§ 79.10 and 79.14, lacks uniformity under art. X, § 3 of the Wisconsin Constitution. A party challenging a statute must prove that the statute is unconstitutional beyond a reasonable doubt. Norquist v. Zeuske, 211 Wis. 2d 241, 250, 564 *626N.W.2d 748 (1997). "Constitutional challenges to a statute must overcome a strong presumption of constitutionality," and the presumption of constitutionality is greatest for tax statutes. Id. We make every effort to construe a statute consistent with the constitution. Id. We conclude the Petitioners have not proved beyond a reasonable doubt that the statutory school finance system violates art. X, § 3. The state adequately funds each school district to provide for a basic education, and any disparity between districts is a result of district revenue-raising capacity above the state's guaranteed tax base. The right to an equal opportunity for a sound basic education has not been shown to be violated by the present school finance system.
¶ 55. We begin by briefly summarizing the Petitioners' arguments relating to their challenge under art. X, § 3 of the Wisconsin Constitution. Both the Plaintiffs-Petitioners and the Intervening Plaintiffs-Petitioners argue that the school finance system fails because, they contend, the state does not equalize financial resources between school districts. (Pl.-Pet'r's Br. at 41; Intervening Pl.-Pet'r's Br. at 33.) The Plaintiffs-Petitioners specifically argue that the Legislature should "eliminate the tax base disparities from the system so districts that tax the same (at whatever level they choose), spend the same." (Pl.-Pet'r's Br. at 71.)
¶ 56. The Intervening Plaintiffs-Petitioners argue that the state should create a school finance system that "recognizes, rather than ignores, differing needs of both property-poor districts and high needs students." (Intervening Pl.-Pet'r's Br. at 34.) Essentially, the Intervening Plaintiffs-Petitioners would like the state school financing system to adjust the financial resources distributed to school districts to take into account the cost of educating high need students. *627(Intervening Pl.-Pet'r's Br. at 35.) The Intervening Plaintiffs-Petitioners also would like the state to formulate objective standards to measure whether students are receiving at least a basic education. (Intervening Pl.-Pet'r's Br. at 34.)
¶ 57. Historically, this court has held that disparity in the revenue-raising capacity of a school district does not constitute a violation of the uniformity clause. As we stated earlier, in Zilisch, 197 Wis. at 289, we considered whether the phrase, "as nearly uniform as practicable," referred to the method of establishing school districts, or to maintaining schools after the districts were established. The court looked to the language of art. X, § 3, which refers to "the establishment of district schools," for guidance. Id. This language revealed that the framers applied the uniformity clause to the schools themselves, not to the creation of the school districts. Id. at 290. The court explained that the provision spoke to "the character of instruction that should be given in those schools after the districts were formed, — with the training that these schools should give to the future citizens of Wisconsin." Id.
¶ 58. Similarly, in Larson v. State Appeal Bd., 56 Wis. 2d 823, 827-28, 202 N.W.2d 920 (1973), this court again held that art. X, § 3 of the Wisconsin Constitution applies to the "character of instruction" in schools, not the nature of the boundaries between school districts. The appellant in Larson set forth evidence relating to the equalized valuations, the number of students, and the size of the Watertown and Johnson Creek school districts. Id. at 826-27. The court refused to apply an analysis under Wis. Const, art. X, § 3 because the court found that those facts did not pertain to the character of instruction in the districts. Id. at *628828. Larson reaffirmed that this court does not review the composition of school districts under the guise of an art. X, § 3 analysis.
¶ 59. We find this conclusion to be very significant. The Petitioners argue that some school districts have low property values and therefore cannot raise as much local revenue as other districts. However, according to a careful reading of Zilisch, the constitution does not require districts to have uniform revenue-raising capacity. The Zilisch court stated that districts are not required to have uniform boundaries, or to be established in a uniform manner. Zilisch, 197 Wis. at 290. See also Joint Sch. Dist. v. Sosalla, 3 Wis. 2d 410, 420, 88 N.W.2d 357 (1958). If the framers of the state constitution did not intend the districts' boundaries or method of establishment to be uniform, then surely the framers could not have envisioned the districts' taxing capacity to be uniform, since taxing ability and boundaries are interrelated.
¶ 60. Moreover, the constitution only requires that each child receive an equal opportunity for a sound basic education. Busé recognized that children have a fundamental right to an "equal opportunity for education." See Busé, 74 Wis. 2d at 567. We have repeatedly stated this proposition, both before and after our pronouncement in Busé.
¶ 61. First, in State ex rel. Comstock v. Joint Sch. Dist., 65 Wis. 631, 636-37, 27 N.W. 829 (1886), we stated that "when the legislature has provided for each such child the privileges of a district school, which he or she may freely enjoy, the constitutional requirement in that behalf is complied with." Later, in Davis v. Grover, 166 Wis. 2d 501, 539, 480 N.W.2d 460 (1992), we held:
*629"[t]he uniformity clause clearly was intended to assure certain minimal educational opportunities for the children of Wisconsin.... [T]he uniformity clause requires the legislature to provide the opportunity for all children in Wisconsin to receive a free uniform basic education." In Jackson v. Benson, 218 Wis. 2d 835, 894-95, 578 N.W.2d 602 (1998), this court most recently recognized that "art. X, § 3 provides not a ceiling but a floor upon which the legislature can build additional opportunities...."
¶ 62. A review of other provisions in art. X of the Wisconsin Constitution is further helpful in ascertaining the framers' intent in drafting art. X, § 3. Article X, § 5 is the one constitutional provision that allocates state funds for the public school districts. It states that income from the school fund is to be distributed "in some just proportion to the number of children and youth resident therein between the ages of four and twenty years...." This provision articulates the extent of the state's funding obligation to the school districts: to provide funding on a per-pupil basis. The plain meaning of the provision supports this view — the framers phrased their directions in purely mathematical terms such as "proportion" and "number." The provision does not include language from which we could infer that certain children were to be allocated more funding than others based on subjective need alone.
¶ 63. An analysis of Wis. Const, art. X, § 4 further supports our conclusion. Article X, § 4 requires towns and cities to raise a tax to support the schools located within that area. Wis. Const, art. X, § 4. In Busé, 74 Wis. 2d at 571, we recognized the importance of local control under art. X, § 4. We quoted Experience Estabrook, the Chairman of the Constitutional Committee on Education and School Funds during the *630second Wisconsin Constitutional Convention, who argued that local funds should support local schools so that all citizens, wealthy or poor, would have an "adequate interest" in their public schools. We find his language worth repeating:
If a sufficient sum was not contributed by the school fund, the towns should have power to raise more. This provision was directly for the advantage of the poor.... [A] poor man with a family of children, and no fancy lots to dispose of, could understand the advantage. Experience had shown that if nothing was contributed by the town, the common schools languished, and select schools rose on their ruins. The school fund of Connecticut was so large as to be sufficient to defray the expenses of the education of every child within the limits of the state. Yet there, until a year or two, the district school-system had declined. No adequate interest was felt by the people, in common schools, unless they contributed to their support. To obviate this danger, the committee had inserted the section.
Busé, 74 Wis. 2d at 570-71 (quoting Experience Estabrook, Journal and Debates Constitutional Convention 1847-48, p. 335). Estabrook's comments on art. X, § 4 demonstrate that above the constitutionally mandated state per-pupil expenditures, the framers intended local government to contribute a significant amount to school districts. More importantly, Estabrook's comments suggest that local school districts may vary in the amount they tax and spend on their districts.
¶ 64. Other jurisdictions have also upheld their school finance systems on the basis that the state provided for a basic level of education. The Minnesota Supreme Court recently interpreted the phrase, "general and uniform system of public schools," contained *631in the education clause of the Minnesota Constitution, and found that it did not mean" 'identical'" or" 'nearly identical.'" Skeen v. State, 505 N.W.2d 299, 302, 311 (Minn. 1993). The Minnesota school finance system was constitutional, the court determined, because the evidence did not establish "that the basic system is inadequate or that the 'general and uniform' requirement somehow implies full equalization of local referendum levies." Id. at 312. The court further stated that the inequities in the system did not "rise to the level of a constitutional violation." Id. Most significantly, the court recognized that the system was constitutional because it continued to "meet the basic educational needs of all districts." Id.
¶ 65. The Virginia Supreme Court, in examining the education article of the Virginia Constitution, held that it does not require " 'substantial equality' in spending or programs among or within the school divisions in the Commonwealth." Scott v. Commonwealth, 443 S.E.2d 138, 142 (Va. 1994).
¶ 66. Other courts have examined whether the state funds each district enough to fulfill state minimum requirements. The Oregon Supreme Court found compliance under the language of the Oregon Constitution "if the state requires and provides for a minimum of educational opportunities in the district and permits the districts to exercise local control over what they desire, and can furnish, over the minimum." Olsen v. State, 554 P.2d 139, 148 (Or. 1976). Noting that it did not necessarily find the school finance system "desirable," the court nevertheless held that the system was constitutional.
¶ 67. Further, the Colorado Supreme Court cautioned that the uniformity provision in the Education Clause of the Colorado Constitution did "not prevent a *632local school district from providing additional educational opportunities beyond" the constitutional standard. Lujan v. Colorado State Bd. of Educ., 649 P.2d 1005, 1025 (Colo. 1982). Moreover, the court held that the uniformity provision did not require identical per-pupil expenditures among school districts. Id.
¶ 68. The cases from other jurisdictions support our conclusion that the uniformity clause under Wis. Const, art. X, § 3 does not require absolute uniformity in either educational offerings or per-pupil expenditures among school districts. The cases cited above also demonstrate that a school finance system that uniformly funds school districts to provide a basic level of education is constitutional.
¶ 69. We now turn to the evidence presented in this case. The legislature is entitled to deference in its "legislative policy involving fiscal-educational decisions." Kukor, 148 Wis. 2d at 503 (quoting Busé, 74 Wis. 2d at 566). In Busé, 74 Wis. 2d at 566, we explained that the legislature "determined what uniformity [is] 'practicable.'" We uphold a circuit court's findings of evidentiary or historical fact unless they are clearly erroneous. Treiber v. Knoll, 135 Wis. 2d 58, 64, 398 N.W.2d 756 (1987). The Petitioners made a voluminous record, submitting numerous affidavits, depositions, and other materials. We have carefully perused the record made by the Petitioners, and yet we cannot conclude that they have proved the school finance system is unconstitutional beyond a reasonable doubt.
¶ 70. The Plaintiffs-Petitioners attempt to demonstrate that some districts "are able to provide more opportunities" in their course offerings and technology than other districts. (Pl.-Pet'r's Br. at 50, *633quoting Deputy State Superintendent Steven Dold's deposition). They also attempt to demonstrate that some districts maintain better facilities, textbooks, and a larger teaching staff. Finally, they attempt to provide statistical and financial evidence showing differences in equalized valuations between districts. They then cite to case law from Arizona, Ohio, and Vermont, invalidating school finance systems based on financial differences among the school districts in those states. Roosevelt Elementary Sch. Dist. Number 66 v. Bishop, 877 P.2d 806 (Ariz. 1994); DeRolph v. State of Ohio, 677 N.E.2d 733 (Ohio 1997) (plurality opinion); Brigham v. State of Vermont, 692 A.2d 384 (Vt. 1997).
¶ 71. The Petitioners' evidence, however meticulously gathered, fails to demonstrate that any children lack a basic education in any school district. Merely showing disparity of the financial resources among school districts is not enough in this state to prove a lack of equal opportunity for a sound basic education. As we have discussed above, Wisconsin requires districts to fulfil a constitutional minimum educational offering, not a maximum.
¶ 72. While we recognize that the Petitioners have gathered qualitative evidence pertaining to the deteriorating school facilities, limited curricula, and lack of computer technology of some "property poor" school districts, we agree with the Respondents that evidence of the elimination or reduction of certain advanced or elective courses from some districts does not mean that those school districts fail to offer a basic education. (Resp't's Br. at 71-72.) We also strongly agree with the circuit court that the evidence fails to show that the actual basic education being received by the students attending these school districts is inferior to that of the students in the "property rich" school *634districts. There is no evidence, as the circuit court noted, of poor standardized test scores, college entrance rates, or the like. As we have stated, what is required is an equal opportunity for a sound basic education.
¶ 73. Moreover, the present school finance system more effectively equalizes the tax base among districts than the system did at the time Kukor was decided. At the time of the Kukor decision, the system had only two levels of shared cost. Kukor, 148 Wis. 2d at 476-77. The present system now includes a tertiary level of shared cost. The effect of the tertiary level of shared cost has been to redistribute funds to districts spending less, which are those with lower property values. As such, the present system does more to equalize values between districts than the system found constitutional in Kukor did.
¶ 74. State funding has also significantly increased.23 Kukor was based on figures compiled for the 1985-86 school year. Kukor, 148 Wis. 2d at 475 nn.1-2. In 1985-86, the state distributed approximately $1.142 billion in state aid. Kukor, 148 Wis. 2d at n.2 (citing Basic Facts (1986-87), Wisconsin Depart*635ment of Public Instruction at A-6, A-7). By 1997-98, in comparison, the state appropriated approximately $3,804 billion. Elementary and Secondary Sch. Aids at 4, Table 3. Between 1987 and 1998, state aid increased by at least 4.9% every fiscal year, and often much more. Id. For instance, from the 1995-96 fiscal year to the 1996-97 fiscal year, state aid increased by 31.8%.24 Id. In contrast, the Consumer Price Index only reflected increases between 2.3% and 5.4% per year. Id.
¶ 75. The Petitioners also contend that the statutory revenue limits are unconstitutional under art. X, § 3. In particular, the Intervening Plaintiffs-Petitioners argue that revenue limits most severely affect school districts with decreasing student populations, or those with many high needs students. (Intervening Pl.Pet'r's Br. at 47.)
¶ 76. We do not agree that revenue limits adversely affect the constitutionality of the school finance system. Revenue limits were included in the 1848 statutes, as we noted earlier. Revenue limits do not absolutely bar school districts from increased spending — they merely require a voter referendum to do so. Moreover, Wis. Stat. § 121.91(4)(f) and (6), as created by 1997 Wis. Act 27, §§ 2902v and 2903g, minimize the impact of revenue limits on school districts with declining enrollments by adjusting the method for counting pupils. Finally, revenue limits were intended to provide property tax relief, and actually have an equalizing effect, because districts that spend less can increase their spending by a greater percentage without first seeking a referendum.
¶ 77. Finally, we note that the cases cited by the Plaintiffs-Petitioners are distinguishable on the facts. *636Brigham is distinguishable because the Vermont Constitution does not contain a provision requiring local funding of school districts. Brigham, 692 A.2d at 392. In DeRolph, 677 N.E.2d at 742-745, the Ohio Supreme Court concluded that many districts in the Ohio public school system were wholly unable to provide the basic resources necessary to educate the students, and therefore, the finance system was in violation of the Ohio Constitution. This is not the case in Wisconsin where the basic resources are being provided. The school finance system at issue in Roosevelt relied heavily on local property taxation and "only partial attempts at equalization." Roosevelt, 877 P.2d at 815. Again, the state funds two-thirds of the school districts' expenditures in Wisconsin and employs three levels of equalization aid. Certainly, this is not heavy reliance on local property taxation or a half-hearted attempt at equalization.
¶ 78. In sum, we conclude the Petitioners have not proved beyond a reasonable doubt that the statutory school finance system violates art. X, § 3. The state adequately funds each school district to provide for a basic education, and any disparity between districts is a result of district revenue-raising capacity above the state's guaranteed tax base. The right to an equal opportunity for a sound basic education has not been shown to be violated by the current school finance system.
IV
¶ 79. We now address whether the current school finance system violates equal protection under art. I, *637§ 1 of the Wisconsin Constitution.25 First, we must determine whether to apply a strict scrutiny review or a rational basis review. The Petitioners urge us to apply a strict scrutiny standard of review.
¶ 80. Equal protection guarantees the "right to be free from invidious discrimination in statutory classifications and other governmental activity."26 Jackson, 218 Wis. 2d at 901 (quoting Harris v. McRae, 448 U.S. 297, 322 (1980)). We apply a strict scrutiny review of a statute when the legislative classification interferes with a fundamental right or is created on the basis of a suspect criterion. State v. Annala, 168 Wis. 2d 453, 468, 484 N.W.2d 138 (1992). If a fundamental right or a suspect class is not involved, then a court reviews whether the statute's classification "rationally furthers a purpose identified by the legislature." Id. Fundamental rights are based on the Constitution either explicitly or implicitly. State v. Martin, 191 Wis. 2d 646, 652, 530 N.W.2d 420 (Ct. App. 1995) (citing San Antonio Indep. Sch. Dist. v. Rodriguez, 411 U.S. 1, 33 (1973)).
*638¶ 81. We acknowledge that Wisconsin children have a fundamental right to an equal opportunity for a sound basic education, and that right is based on art. X, § 3 of the Wisconsin Constitution.27 Kukor, 148 Wis. 2d at 496 (quoting Busé, 74 Wis. 2d at 567). However, in San Antonio Independent School District v. Rodriguez, 411 U.S. 1, 24 (1973), reh'g denied, 411 U.S. 959 (1973), the United States Supreme Court held that the Equal Protection Clause does not require "absolute equality or precisely equal advantages" on the basis of wealth. We also have stated that while the right to an equal opportunity for education is fundamental in Wisconsin, absolute equality in per-pupil expenditures is not mandated. Kukor, 148 Wis. 2d at 496.
¶ 82. The Petitioners argue that we should review their equal protection claim relating to financial disparities between districts under strict scrutiny. They argue that since this court has recognized the equal opportunity for education as a fundamental right, strict scrutiny applies.
¶ 83. We carefully distinguish between the fundamental right to an equal opportunity for a sound basic education under art. X, § 3 and the wealth-based arguments the Petitioners make. In other words, the fundamental right to an equal opportunity for a sound basic education does not rest on any classification based on wealth. In Kukor we addressed a similar argument. Citing Rodriguez, we concluded that a rational basis standard should be applied "because the rights at issue in the case before the court are premised *639upon spending disparities and not upon a complete denial of educational opportunity within the scope of art. X."28 Kukor, 148 Wis. 2d at 498. See also Skeen, 505 N.W.2d at 316-17 (citing our approach in Kukor with approval). Since the Petitioners' argument rests on wealth-based classifications and not classifications based on art. X, § 3, we apply the rational basis test.
¶ 84. Under the rational basis test, we give great deference to legislative classifications. Tomczak v. Bailey, 218 Wis. 2d 245, 264, 578 N.W.2d 166 (1998). We must " 'locate or. . .construct, if possible, a rationale that might have influenced the legislature and that reasonably upholds the legislative determination.'" Id. (quoting Sambs v. City of Brookfield, 97 Wis. 2d 356, 371, 293 N.W.2d 504 (1980)).
¶ 85. The legislative classifications set forth in Wis. Stat. ch. 121 are rationally related to the purpose of educating Wisconsin's children. The school financing system provides all school districts with a guaranteed tax base. Moreover, the three-tiered shared cost system, which was implemented after Kukor was decided, *640is specifically designed to narrow per pupil spending disparities between districts. The school financing system seeks to equalize the tax base, not rate, of the school districts. Elementary and Secondary Sch. Aids at 10. Arguably, the system of taxation may actually penalize wealthier school districts because it is designed to tax districts that spend at a higher level. See id. (stating that "[a] school district that spends at a higher per pupil level than another will continue to face a higher tax rate unless the district is not subject to the formula because its local tax base exceeds the state's guaranteed tax base.") As such, the three-tiered classification system is rationally related to the legitimate governmental end of providing an equal opportunity for a sound basic education.
¶ 86. Finally, the legislative classifications set forth in Wis. Stat. §§ 121.91 and 121.92 relating to revenue limitations pass the rational basis test. We agree with the Respondents that revenue limitations "serve the legitimate state purpose of reducing the risk that local school boards would use the additional state aid to increase local spending by keeping tax rates as high as they had been before the infusion of additional state aid," instead of replacing local property taxes. (Resp't's Br. at 85.)
V
¶ 87. A majority of this court holds that Wisconsin students have a fundamental right to an equal opportunity for a sound basic education. An equal opportunity for a sound basic education is one that will equip students for their roles as citizens and enable them to succeed economically and personally. The legislature has articulated a standard for equal *641opportunity for a sound basic education in Wis. Stat. §§ 118.30(lg)(a) and 121.02(L) as the opportunity for students to be proficient in mathematics, science, reading and writing, geography, and history, and to receive instruction in the arts and music, vocational training, social sciences, health, physical education and foreign language, in accordance with their age and aptitude. An equal opportunity for a sound basic education acknowledges that students and districts are not fungible and takes into account districts with disproportionate numbers of disabled students, economically disadvantaged students, and students with limited English language skills. So long as the legislature is providing sufficient resources so that school districts offer students the equal opportunity for a sound basic education as required by the constitution, the state school finance system will pass constitutional muster.
¶ 88. We conclude that the school finance system articulated in Wis. Stat. ch. 121 is constitutional under both art. X, § 3 and art. I, § 1 of the Wisconsin Constitution. The Petitioners have not shown beyond a reasonable doubt that the current school financing system violates either art. X, § 3, or art. I, § 1, and therefore, they have not made out a prima facie case in support of their motion for summary judgment.
¶ 89. I am authorized to state that Chief Justice SHIRLEY S. ABRAHAMSON, Justice WILLIAM A. BABLITCH, and Justice ANN WALSH BRADLEY join in the standard we have set forth in ¶ 3, ¶ 51, and ¶ 87. I am further authorized to state that Justice JON P. WILCOX, Justice DAVID T. PROSSER, and Justice DIANE S. SYKES join in our decision as to the constitutionality of the present school finance system.
*642By the Court. — The decision of the court of appeals is affirmed.
We remember Ralph Waldo Emerson's words to the Harvard graduating class of 1837:
[T]here is a portion of reading quite indispensible to a wise man [or woman]. History and exact science he [or she] must learn by laborious reading. Colleges [and public schools], in like manner, have their indispensable office — to teach elements. But they can only highly serve us when they aim not to drill, but to create; when they gather from far every ray of various genius to their hospitable halls, and by the concentrated fires, set the hearts of their youth on flame. Thought and knowledge are natures in which apparatus and *599pretension avail nothing. Gowns and pecuniary foundations, though of towns of gold, can never countervail the least sentence or syllable of wit. Forget this, and our American colleges [and public schools] will recede in their public importance, whilst they grow richer every year.
Ralph Waldo Emerson, "The American Scholar" in Ralph Waldo Emerson: Essays and Journals, 1837, at 37 (Lewis Mumford ed., 1968) (words added in brackets).
We hold that this case presents a justiciable issue. In Baker v. Carr, 369 U.S. 186, 211 (1962), the United States Supreme Court stated that a court must decide on a case-by-case inquiry whether a so-called political issue is justiciable, and "[djeciding whether a matter has in any measure been committed by the Constitution to another branch of government, or whether the action of that branch exceeds whatever authority has been committed, is itself a delicate exercise in *600constitutional interpretation...." This court on numerous occasions has interpreted the state constitution to find that assessing the constitutionality of the state school finance system is within its province. See, e.g., Kukor v. Grover, 148 Wis. 2d 469, 436 N.W.2d 568 (1989); Busé v. Smith, 74 Wis. 2d 550, 247 N.W.2d 141 (1976); State ex rel. Zilisch v. Auer, 197 Wis. 284, 221 N.W. 860 (1928).
In Kukor the court of appeals specifically certified the issue of whether the judiciary has the power to declare the system of financing unconstitutional, after the circuit court found that " '[w]hether a higher degree of uniformity is now 'practicable' is for the Legislature to decide. . . . The battle over scarce tax dollars for education is a political one. . . . The Legislature is where the framers of the constitution intended these decisions to be made.'" Kukor, 148 Wis. 2d at 483 n.8. This court clearly concluded that it does have that power by proceeding to examine the constitutionality of the school finance system. Moreover, in Busé, 74 Wis. 2d at 581, we held a portion of the school finance system unconstitutional. There we specifically stated, "to hold that the legislature is constitutionally mandated to provide an equal opportunity for education. . .is not necessarily to validate as constitutional any means chosen by the legislature to achieve that end." Id. at 567. We are satisfied that the issues presented to us in this case are appropriate for decision by this court in the exercise of our constitutional role. This is an area where all three of the co-equal branches of state government share power and authority consistent with the Wisconsin Constitution. It is indeed "a delicate exercise in constitutional interpretation."
See Wis. Stat. §§ 118.30(lg)(a) and 121.02(L) (1997-98).
The constitution refers to "common schools," "normal schools," and "district schools," instead of "public schools," which is the general terminology used today. Wis. Const, art. X, §§ 2(1), 2(2), and 3. Common schools, district schools, and nor*602mal schools were all forms of publicly funded schools. See generally, Conrad E. Patzer, Public Education in Wisconsin (1924).
The state appropriated approximately $7.72 billion in school aid for 1997-99 biennium budget. Wisconsin Legislative Fiscal Bureau, Elementary and Secondary Sch. Aids 1 (Jan. 1999).
The federal government also contributes a limited amount of aid to school districts, which is generally used for special education and remedial education. Elementary and Secondary Sch. Aids at 3. The amount of this aid is not significant for the purposes of this case, so we do not address it further in this opinion.
The legislature, as part of Wis. Stat. ch. 121 — the chapter on school finance — further includes a provision on school dis*603trict standards, which directs school boards to maintain certain licensure requirements, facility and curriculum standards, and standardized testing procedures. Wis. Stat. § 121.02 (1997-98). This statute is incorporated into the subchapter on general aid. Section 121.02(L) directs local school boards to provide regular instruction in particular courses in the elementary grades, grades 5-8, and grades 9-12.
We note that equalization aid is a component of general school aids. Elementary and Secondary Sch. Aids at 1. Other general school aids include integration aid and special adjustment aid. Id. at 11. We only discuss equalization aid in detail because many school districts do not receive either integration aid or special adjustment aid. Id. at 12. A school district receives integration aid when it transfers students to change the racial balance of the district. Id. Special adjustment aid is given to a district that is experiencing a reduction in general school aid, or when a school district is consolidating. Id. at 13. We also note that a portion of the School District of Milwaukee's equalization aid goes toward paying for the Milwaukee Parental Choice Program and charter schools. Id. at 13-14.
All subsequent references to the Wisconsin Statutes are to the 1997-98 text unless otherwise noted.
A different primary guarantee applies to various types of school districts. The primary guarantee for a K-12 school district is $2,000,000. A union high school's primary guarantee is $6,000,000, and the primary guarantee for a K-8 school is $3,000,000. This opinion focuses on the primary guarantee for K-12 school districts because most districts are in that category. Elementary and Secondary Sch. Aids at 9.
As defined in ¶ 7, "DEV" represents the district equalized value figure, and "SGV" represents the state guaranteed valuation figure.
The following is a list of the state categorical aid programs: 1) handicapped education, 2) county children with disabilities education boards (CCDEBs), 3) pupil transportation, 4) school library, 5) TEACH technology block grants, 6) TEACH training and technical assistance grants, 7) telecommunications access program, 8) technology infrastructure loans, 9) pioneering partners grants, 10) bilingual-bicultural education, 11) aid to Milwaukee Public Schools (desegregation settlement aid), 12) preschool to grade 5 grants, 13) state tuition payments; open enrollment transfer payments, 14) full-time open enrollment aid for transportation, 15) alcohol and other drug abuse (AODA) grants, 16) head start supplement, 17) nutritional programs, 18) student achievement guarantee in education (SAGE), 19) driver education, 20) children-at-risk programs, 21) peer review and mentoring, 22) CESA administration, 23) environmental education, 24) alternative schools for American Indians, 25) youth options and open enrollment transportation. Elementary and Secondary Sch. Aids at 14-25.
We refer to the Plaintiffs and Intervening Plaintiffs collectively as "Petitioners," except when referring to the procedural history of this case. Throughout this opinion, we also identify specific arguments made by either the Plaintiffs or the Intervening Plaintiffs in their briefs as "Plaintiffs-Petitioners," or "Intervening Plaintiffs-Petitioners."
Wisconsin Const, art. X, § 3 — District schools; tuition; sectarian instruction; released time — states:
The legislature shall provide by law for the establishment of district schools, which shall be as nearly uniform as practicable; and such schools shall he free and without charge for tuition to all children between the ages of 4 and 20 years; and no sectarian instruction shall be allowed therein; but the legislature by law may, for the purpose of religious instruction outside the district schools, authorize the release of students during regular school hours.
A township school system was organized and taxed through a town. Patzer, Public Education in Wisconsin at 63. Under this system, independent school districts became sub-districts of the greater township school unit. Id.
The suffrage movement has also been credited with promoting public education. Egalitarian Roots, 1981 Wis. L. Rev. at 1346 n.93.
Laws of 1848 — Of Taxes for School Purposes:
Sec. 90. It shall be the duty of the supervisors of the towns in this state to assess the taxes voted by every school district in their town, and also all other taxes provided in this chapter chargeable against such district or town upon the taxable property of the district or town respectively, and to place the same on the town assessment roll, in the column of school taxes and the same shall be collected and returned by the town treasurer in the same manner and for the same compensation as town taxes.
Sec. 91. The supervisors of each town shall assess upon the taxable property of said town a sum not less than one half of the amount received by said town from the school fund of this state, and the same shall be collected and returned in the same manner as is provided in the preceding section and shall be apportioned to the several school districts in the town in proportion to the number of children in each district between the ages of four and twenty years for the support of schools therein.
Sec. 92. The supervisors shall also assess upon the taxable property of their township two and a half mills on each dollar of the valuation thereof in each year which shall be apportioned to the several school districts in the townships for the support of schools therein, and the same shall be levied, eallected [sic] and returned in the same manner as is provided in the preceding section.
Sec. 93. Each school district at any regularly called meeting of the legal voters of said district may raise an additional tax to defray the expenses of teachers wages and contingent expenses: and said tax shall be levied collected and returned as the town taxes provided for in this act: Provided, that when a tax shall be voted in any school district meeting, the notice for such meeting shall specify the object of raising such tax.
Sec. 94. The supervisors on delivery of the warrant for the collection of taxes to the town treasurer, shall also deliver to said treasurer a written statement of the amount of school taxes, the amount raised for district purposes on taxable property of each district in the town, the amount belonging to any new district on the division of the former district and the names of all persons having judgments assessed under the provisions of this chapter, upon the taxable property of any district with the amount payable to such person on account thereof.
Sec. 95. The town treasurer of each town shall retain in his hands out of the moneys collected by him the full amount of the *617school tax collected on the assessment roll, and hold the same subject to the order of the district treasurer.
Sec. 96. Said treasurer shall from time to time apply to the county treasurer for all school moneys belonging to his town or the districts thereof, and on the receipt of the moneys to be apportioned to the districts, he shall notify the town clerk of the amount to be apportioned.
We have adopted the United States Supreme Court's treatment of plurality opinions in applying the holdings of that *621Court. Lounge Management v. Town of Trenton, 219 Wis. 2d 13, 21-22, 580 N.W.2d 156 (1998); Tomczak v. Bailey, 218 Wis. 2d 245, 284, 578 N.W.2d 166 (1998) (Crooks, J., concurring). In a plurality " 'the holding of the Court may be viewed as that position taken by those Members who concurred in the judgments on the narrowest grounds.'" Id. (quoting Gregg v. Georgia, 428 U.S. 153, 169 n.15 [] (1976) (opinion of Stewart, Powell, and Stevens, JJ.)). See also Marks v. United States, 430 U.S. 188, 193 (1977).
We also note that the plurality viewed the "character of instruction" that must be uniform as the standards set forth in Wis. Stat. § 121.02, such as "minimum standards for teacher certification, minimal number of school days, and standard school curriculum." Kukor v. Grover, 148 Wis. 2d 469, 492-93, 436 N.W.2d 568 (1989).
However, the court recognized that equal access to education is a fundamental right. Kukor, 148 Wis. 2d at 496.
The opportunity to be proficient in these core subjects must be as equal as practicable; the performance on proficiency tests is not expected to be equal. This means that poor student performance on proficiency tests in school districts is not, without much more, an indicia of the unconstitutionality of the state school finance system.
Wisconsin Stat. § 118.30 (1997-98) was the result of a coordinated effort on the part of both the executive and legislative branches of Wisconsin state government. For instance, the state superintendent is responsible for general pupil assessments given in the 4th, 8th, and 10th grade, § 118.30(l)(a), and the department must develop a high school graduation examination based on pupil academic standards if academic standards are issued by the governor. § 118.30(l)(b). In accepting and applying the standard set forth today, this court is cognizant of its role, and the respective roles of the other coequal branches of government in Wisconsin.
We also note that the state appears to fund "poor" school districts much more than it funds "wealthy" districts. The circuit court cited some excellent comparisons of the amount of state aid per pupil given to "wealthy" and "poor" school districts. For instance, according to the equalization aid estimate for 1996-97, Mequon-Thiensville (a "wealthy" district) received $724.61 in equalization aid, which was 10.6% of its $6,840.53 costs per pupil. In comparison, Antigo (a "poor" district) received $4,642.05 in equalization aid, which was 77.2% of its $6,014.20 costs per pupil. This is but one example of the more substantial state aid given to "poor" districts than to "wealthy" districts.
The state is now committed to funding two-thirds of the school districts' cost of education. 1997 Wis. Act 27.
Article I, § 1 of the Wisconsin Constitution states:
All people are bom equally free and independent, and have certain inherent rights; among these are life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness; to secure these rights, governments are instituted, deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed.
We treat the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution and the Wisconsin Constitution as equivalent. Jackson v. Benson, 218 Wis. 2d 835, 900-01 n.28, 578 N.W.2d 602 (1998). As such, we refer to cases analyzing either the Fourteenth Amendment or art. I, § 1 of the Wisconsin Constitution.
We note that children do not have a fundamental right to an education under the United States Constitution. San Antonio Indep. Sch. Dist. v. Rodriguez, 411 U.S. 1, 35 (1973).
In Papasan v. Allain, 478 U.S. 265, 286 (1986), the United States Supreme Court again analyzed whether a school funding scheme violated equal protection. The Court differentiated allegations that "petitioners have been denied a minimally adequate education," and the allegations of disparity in distributing funds. Id. The court found that the petitioners had not alleged the denial of a minimally adequate education because "they [did] not allege that they receive[d] no instruction on even the educational basics." Id. Similarly in this case, the Petitioners have not alleged a violation of equal protection under art. I, § 1, since they do not allege that students lack even a basic education. Their arguments, while couched in terms of adequacy, actually allege financial disparities.

=== CASE 9737719 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:33:01.949253+00 ===

JON P. WILCOX, J.
¶ 90. (concurring). I agree that the Petitioners' constitutional challenge presents a justiciable issue for this court. I also agree that the current system of school financing is constitutional and that there is no reason to remand the case for further proceedings.
¶ 91. However, I do not agree with the test that the majority opinion sets forth for examining whether the state school financing system violates art. X, § 3 of the Wisconsin Constitution. Therefore, I do not join ¶¶ 3, 48-53, or 87 of the majority opinion.
¶ 92. Article X, § 3 does not mandate absolute uniformity of equal opportunity for education in all school districts in this state. Majority op. at ¶ 46 (citing Kukor v. Grover, 148 Wis. 2d 469, 487, 436 N.W.2d 568 (1989)(Ceci, J., plurality) and id. at 514 (Steinmetz, J., concurring)). Legislative determinations in the area of school finance schemes are entitled to great deference by this court. Majority op. at ¶ 46 (citing Kukor, 148 Wis. 2d at 502-03 (Ceci, J., plurality) and id. at 512 (Steinmetz, J., concurring)).
¶ 93. Like the majority of this court, I conclude that the Petitioners have not demonstrated beyond a reasonable doubt that the present system of school financing is not "as nearly uniform as practicable" as guaranteed by art. X, § 3 of the Wisconsin Constitution. I respectfully concur.

=== CASE 9737720 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:33:01.958121+00 ===

SHIRLEY S. ABRAHAMSON, CHIEF JUSTICE
¶ 94. (concurring in part and dissenting in part). The majority opinion written by Justice Crooks estab*643lishes in paragraphs 3, 51 and 87. a standard for interpreting the uniformity provision of article X, § 3 of the Wisconsin Constitution. I join only paragraphs 3, 51, 87 and footnote 2 of Justice Crooks' opinion.1 In *644contrast to the majority, however, I would remand the cause to the circuit court.
¶ 95. Neither the parties nor the courts have had the opportunity to consider the state school finance system under the constitutional standard set forth in the majority opinion. Both the circuit court and court of appeals suggested other evidence that might be presented in this case. The majority opinion also points to evidence that is lacking in the record. See majority op. at ¶¶ 71, 72. After establishing a standard of constitutional interpretation the court should afford the parties an opportunity to develop additional facts, if needed, in the circuit court. Accordingly, I would remand the cause to the circuit court for further proceedings.
¶ 96. In remanding, however, I note my concerns and those of the circuit court, that the state school finance system is failing in certain respects. The state school finance system may be failing to provide each of the property-poor districts with the necessary resources to provide all students with the opportunity for a sound basic education. The state school finance system may be providing inadequate resources to those *645districts with disproportionately large numbers of high needs students. The parties should have a chance to present evidence and argument relating to the standard set forth today.
I — I
¶ 97. The framers of the Wisconsin Constitution recognized the importance of education when they created article X governing the establishment and funding of public schools. Creating a system of free and uniform public schools was considered to be among the most essential of the framers' tasks.2 Throughout the 1846 and 1848 conventions, the framers expressed the desire that all of Wisconsin's students, rich and poor, would be educated together in the public schools.3 For example, the requirement in article X, § 4 that localities contribute to school funding was included "directly for the advantage of the poor," because it increased the commitment to local schools. Without local support "the common schools languished, and select schools rose on their ruins."4
¶ 98. The sweeping and revolutionary goals of article X were explained by Eleazor Root, the state's first superintendent of public instruction and a member of the education committee at the second constitutional convention. Root explained that the purpose of article X was to secure permanently to all the benefits of a free and comprehensive public school sys*646tem. "None are excluded, — none are condemned by the accidents of birth or fortune to grow up in ignorance. The state acts the part of a wise and affectionate parent, and dispenses its bounty with an impartial hand to all its children. . .[and] seeks to train them up so as to render them useful and honorable citizens."5 In State ex rel. Zilisch v. Auer, 197 Wis. 284, 289-290, 221 N.W. 860 (1928), the court summarized the intent of the framers as follows:
It is significant that [article X, § 3] applies to the "establishment of district schools," — not to the establishment of school districts. . . . An examination of the debates in the conventions that framed our present constitution and the constitution of 1846 (which contained a similar provision) discloses that the members of those conventions, when they were framing the article relating to schools, were concerned, not with the method of forming school districts, but with the character of instruction that should be given in those schools after the districts were formed, — with the training that these schools should give to the future citizens of Wisconsin.
¶ 99. Article X read as a whole demonstrates that the framers intended to require the legislature to create and finance a school system that is equitable and uniform in character throughout the state and that provides equal educational opportunity for all students.
¶ 100. The constitution "virtually declares that public education is a state power and function, based upon the well-established principle that the whole state is interested in the education of the children of *647the state and that this function must be exercised by the people as a whole. . . ."6 The framers believed that the creation of free and uniform public schools was "the only system on which we could depend for the preservation of our liberties."7 The legislature has recognized that "education is a state function" and that "the state must guarantee that a basic educational opportunity be available to each pupil."8
I — I HH
¶ 101. The plaintiffs focus their claim on the inequities in the per capita student funds caused by the failure to provide sufficient equalization aid.9 The plaintiffs focus on the "equity approach": they seek to eliminate the disparity among school districts by equalizing available resources, while recognizing that individual school districts should be able to spend more for their children's education. They argue that inequalities in the system stem from a failure to adjust adequately for the disparity in the property tax base.
¶ 102. The framers of the Wisconsin Constitution did not intend the school districts' boundaries to be *648uniform and therefore could not have envisioned the school districts' taxing and spending capacity to be uniform, since taxing and spending ability and school district boundaries are related.10 But the state school finance system must provide districts and schools with the funding needed to meet the constitutional. mandate. The record, which is undisputed, shows that school districts vary widely in the amount spent per student (ranging from $13,534 to $5,301), in the ability to raise dollars for every mill levied, and in the actual levy rates.
¶ 103. The plaintiff-intervenors, the Wisconsin Education Association Council and a number of teachers and school administrators from school districts across the state, assert that the state school finance system is unconstitutional because it does not allow districts with significant numbers of high needs students to offer these students an adequate educational opportunity. High needs students include disabled children, economically disadvantaged children and children with limited skills in the English language. The State's brief concedes, as it must, that it probably costs more per child to educate high needs students.
¶ 104. A non-uniform education can result from treating similarly situated students and school districts differently, but it can also result from treating differently situated students and school districts in the *649same way.11 Consequently, to ensure that all students have an opportunity for a sound basic education, school districts with a disproportionate number of high needs students must be provided with extra financial resources to meet the standard that is constitutionally required.
¶ 105. The plaintiff-intervenors argue that the current state school finance system fails to account for the distinct needs of school districts that have a disproportionate number of high needs students, so that these school districts are unable to provide educational opportunities that are sufficiently uniform or basic.12 For example, the plaintiff-intervenors emphasize, and the State admits, that the State reimburses districts *650for only approximately 39% of the cost of educating disabled students and 25% of the cost of educating limited English-speaking (LES) students. With regard to economically disadvantaged students, the state school finance system has provided no extra resources on a statewide basis.13
¶ 106. Because the state school finance system fails to address the costs of educating high needs students, the plaintiff-intervenors argue that schools or school districts with a disproportionate number of such students are not able to provide anywhere near the educational opportunities of other schools or school districts.14 While the state school finance system *651especially fails property-poor school districts with disproportionate numbers of high needs students, the plaintiff-intervenors assert that even property-rich school districts that have disproportionate numbers of high needs students, such as Madison, are unable to offer educational opportunities that are uniform with the rest of the state.15 School districts with large numbers of high needs students may have to divert funds to pay for the higher costs associated with the high needs students, leaving the other students at a disadvantage.16
¶ 107. Wausau, for example, as a result of Hmong resettlement, has a kindergarten enrollment of 34% LES students. Because of the high costs associated with educating such students, only a small portion of which is reimbursed by the state, the Wausau education community faces severe funding shortages. Wausau has been forced to cut staffing and is unable to implement certain state-mandated programs.17
¶ 108. In Milwaukee the school district suffers the combined effects of being a relatively property-poor *652district along with having a disproportionate number of high needs students. According to the briefs, which are not disputed, approximately 70% of Milwaukee's students are economically disadvantaged to the extent that they qualify for a free or reduced-cost lunch. Over 12,000 of Milwaukee's students are reported as homeless, constituting more than 10% of the student population.18 Milwaukee educates more than 25% of the state's LES students and more than 36% of the state's students living in poverty. In addition, Milwaukee asserts that it has the comparative disadvantage of being surrounded by a number of the state's richest school districts. Twelve of the thirty-four school districts that the State concedes are "unequalized," in that they have a disproportionately large amount of resources with which to fund their schools, are within commuting distance of Milwaukee. A non-party brief filed by Milwaukee Mayor John Norquist asserts that these "unequalized" rich school districts drain students, teachers, and resources from the comparatively underfunded Milwaukee schools.19
¶ 109. The evidence submitted shows that some Milwaukee school facilities are old and decrepit, that staffing shortages exist, and that vocational education and other programs have been reduced significantly because of financial limitations. Milwaukee students scored dramatically below the state averages in the 1997-98 Wisconsin Student Assessment System test administered by the Department of Public Instruction. For example, only 26% of Milwaukee tenth-graders achieved a proficient or advanced score on the reading *653examination, compared with the statewide average of 63%.20
¶ 110. The plaintiff-intervenors argue that the statewide tests offered by the Department of Public Instruction in the fourth, eighth and tenth grades show that LES students, economically disadvantaged students and disabled students have drastically lower rates of achieving a level of "proficiency or above."21
¶ 111. Although the defendants' brief de-empha-sizes the differences in educational opportunities offered to students around the state and characterizes the plaintiffs' evidence as anecdotal, the defendants were not able to confirm or dispute school district-specific allegations concerning course offerings, physical plants, staffing and other items. The circuit court suggests that at least some property-poor districts are having difficulty with providing adequate educational opportunities to their students.
¶ 112. The evidence, according to the circuit court, suggests that the school districts' inability to raise funds has resulted in increased class size with classes sometimes taught in partially condemned buildings, basements, storage rooms, hallways, auditorium stages, unused shower facilities, elevator shafts and janitorial closets. The circuit court found that maintenance of facilities is often delayed, resulting in leaking roofs, antiquated heating and cooling systems, inadequate lighting and water running through the walls. Furthermore, the circuit court found that in some districts textbooks are outdated and a lack of options in advanced math, science, electives, computer technology and extracurricular activities exists.
*654¶ 113. The circuit court also found that school districts that spend more per student are able to provide their students with more opportunities in a variety of areas while students in property-poor school districts do not have equal educational opportunities.
¶ 114. Judge Charles P. Dykman, in his concurrence in the Court of Appeals, concluded from the record that "lower spending school districts are laboring under very difficult conditions."
¶ 115. I recognize that the State provides funds to educate limited-English speaking students and disabled students in the form of categorical aids. Although this aid reimburses the school districts for only a portion of the cost of educating these high needs students, the circuit court on remand would determine whether this additional aid is sufficient to enable all school districts with the resources to provide students with an equal opportunity for a sound basic education.
¶ 116. Although I realize that equal dollars do not necessarily translate to equal educational opportunity, it is clear that substantial funding differences may significantly affect students' opportunities to learn. Money is not the only variable affecting educational opportunity, but it is one that the legislature can equalize.
¶ 117. Both the circuit court and court of appeals acknowledged that they were unable to adequately adjudicate this case because of the lack of a developed standard from this court regarding the requirements of article X, § 3. I would remand the cause to the circuit court for further proceedings in light of the standard the majority opinion sets forth in the present case to determine whether the defendants have met their constitutional obligation.
*655¶ 118. The circuit court would determine whether the disparities in funding among school districts result in an unacceptable level of inequality in educational opportunity. The circuit court would also decide whether those students in property-poor districts or in school districts with disproportionate numbers of high needs students are offered unacceptably diminished educational opportunities.
¶ 119. If the plaintiffs' and plaintiff-intervenors' proof is sufficient, the circuit court would not be limited to choosing between declaring the entire state school finance system constitutional or unconstitutional. It may be that the state school finance system is constitutionally acceptable for some school districts, but not for others.
¶ 120. If the circuit court were to declare all or part of the present state school finance system unconstitutional, it would not be up to the circuit court to adopt a state school finance system that the circuit court considers to be constitutional. Courts interpret the constitutional mandate. As the representatives of the people, the legislature should craft the state school finance system. There are doubtless numerous ways a legislature might design a constitutionally acceptable state school finance system.
¶ 121. Any declaration of unconstitutionality would cast no aspersion on the legislative or executive branches of government, which assuredly have worked very hard to craft our current educational system. The legislature has appropriated vast sums of money for education in this state. The executive branch has worked diligently to improve the students' proficiency.
¶ 122. The legislative and executive branches and the citizens of the state recognize the high cost of further improving the educational system, but they *656also realize that the cost of not improving the educational system to meet the constitutional mandate will be much higher. As Derek Bok, former president of Harvard University, wisely stated, "If you think education is expensive, try ignorance."
¶ 123. I would remand the cause to the circuit court for further proceedings. For the reasons set forth, I write separately.
¶ 124. I am authorized to state that Justices WILLIAM A. BABLITCH and ANN WALSH BRADLEY join this opinion.
The defendants at oral argument, unlike the plaintiffs, the plaintiff-intervenors, the circuit court and the court of appeals, did not request the court to set a standard. The defendants^ position at oral argument, like that of the concurring justices, Justices David T. Prosser and Diane S. Sykes, was that the courts have no role in interpreting article X, § 3 of the Wisconsin Constitution; article X, § 3 speaks only to the legislature.
The suggestion that the court should not interpret the uniformity provision of article X, § 3 is contrary to the language of the constitution and this court's long-standing precedent. "The specific constitutional guarantee of education flows from the provision that the legislature provide for the establishment of district schools. Since the [legislature's] power to establish schools existed without a specific grant as an inherent function of state government.. .the clear purpose of article X, § 3, was to compel the exercise of the power to the extent designated." Zweifel v. Joint Dist. No. 1, 76 Wis. 2d 648, 658, 251 N.W.2d 822 (1977).
A "fundamental principle" of state constitutional law is that the Wisconsin Constitution, in contrast with the U.S. Constitution, is not a grant of, but a limitation upon, legislative power. "The purpose [of article X, § 3] was not to grant a power to the legislature to establish schools, for this power would exist without grant, but to compel the exercise of the power to the extent designated." Manitowoc v. Manitowoc Rapids, 231 Wis. 94, 97-98, 285 N.W. 403 (1939). See also Busé v. Smith, 74 Wis. 2d 550, 564, 247 N.W.2d 141 (1976) ("the search is not for a grant of power to the legislature, but for a restriction thereon"); State ex rel. Dudgeon v. Levitan, 181 Wis. 326, 339, 193 N.W. 499 (1923); Pauly v. Keebler, 175 Wis. 428, 439, 185 N.W. 554 (1921); Outagamie County v. Zuehlke, 165 Wis. 32, 36, 161 N.W. 6 (1917).
*644Article X, § 3 is "a limitation upon the broad power of the state to educate its citizens through the establishment and operation of schools. The limitations are precisely stated: District schools, uniformity, and free tuition for certain ages." Zweifel, 76 Wis. 2d at 658.
I agree with the majority opinion that the task of interpreting the uniformity provision of article X, § 3, falls on the courts. If the function of interpreting the Wisconsin Constitution were left to the legislature, there would not only be a violation of the separation of powers doctrine, but also the legislature would be empowered to amend the constitution without abiding by the constitutional requirements for amendments.
Conrad E. -Patzer, Public Education in Wisconsin at 18 (.1924).
See The Convention of1846 at 574-75 (Milo M. Quaife, ed., 1919).
Kukor v. Grover, 148 Wis. 2d 469, 489, 436 N.W.2d 568 (1989) (quoting Journal and Debates, Constitutional Convention at 335 (1847-48)).
Report of the State Superintendent at 13 (Dec. 31,1849) in Plaintiff-Intervenors Appendix at 321.
Conrad E. Patzer, Public Education in Wisconsin at 37 (1924).
Kukor, 148 Wis. 2d at 488 (quoting Journal and Debates, Constitutional Convention at 238 (1847-48)).
Wis. Stat. § 121.01 (1997-98).
The 181 plaintiffs in this case include school districts, parents, students and taxpayers. The following non-parties have filed briefs in this case: A coalition of state representatives and senators, the Mayor of Milwaukee, the ACLU of Wisconsin, the Council of Great City Schools, the Institute for Wisconsin's Future together with the Wisconsin Coalition for Advocacy, the Wisconsin Parent Teachers Association, Governor Tommy Thompson, and the Fair Air Coalition.
The requirement of uniformity applies to the districts after they are formed, to the character of the instruction given, rather than to the means by which the districts are established and their boundaries are fixed. See Larson v. State Appeal Bd., 56 Wis. 2d 823, 827, 202 N.W.2d 920 (1973); Joint Sch. Dist. v. Sosalla, 3 Wis. 2d 410, 420, 88 N.W.2d 357 (1958); State ex rel. Zilisch v. Auer, 197 Wis. 284, 289-90, 221 N.W. 860 (1928).
In his dissent in Kukor, 148 Wis. 2d at 516-17, 525, which I joined, Justice William A. Bablitch wrote:
The fundamental flaw of the state formula is that it distributes dollars without regard to educational needs. It assumes that every child in this state begins his or her educational journey from the same starting point. If all children began that journey from the same starting point, then the formula would provide no constitutional objection: every child would start with the same opportunity. That may well have been the reality, with few exceptions, in 1848. It is not even close to reality today. The result is that a significant number of school children in this state are denied an equal opportunity to become educated people.
However, a close inspection of the record reveals that while some special needs of "exceptional" students are being met in overburdened school districts, such special needs programs are draining resources and staff from regular programs of instruction.
The plaintiff-intervenors state the issue in the Reply Brief at 16 as follows:
[Wjhether the combination of revenue limits and declining categorical aids have prevented some of Wisconsin's children from receiving the basic education and equal educational opportunity to which they are constitutionally entitled.
The plaintiff-intervenors note that the State has implicitly accepted that these children require more resources by recently instituting the "SAGE" program (Student Achievement Guarantee in Education) on a pilot basis, which is aimed at reducing class size in high-poverty schools. Plaintiff-interven-ors Brief at 14.
One of the biggest problems with the current state school finance system, according to the plaintiff-intervenors, is the recently adopted revenue limits. Revenue caps or limits restrict the amount of revenue a district can raise from state aid and local property taxes. See Wis. Stat. § 121.90 et seq. The base spending limit is calculated from a school district's spending in the 1992-93 school year, and a statutorily defined flat rate spending increase is allowed each year. The spending increase was $206 per student in 1996-97. A local school district may exceed these revenue limits only by a voter referendum. Plaintiff-intervenors Brief at 10-11.
The plaintiff-intervenors argue that these revenue limits contribute heavily to a state school finance system that is arbitrary and refuses to take into account high needs students. These limits are based, according to the plaintiff-intervenors, on the misguided assumptions that all students cost the same to educate and that educational needs do not change over time.
For a discussion of the impact of high needs students on Madison's school district, see Gia Weier, Heading Toward A Crisis?, The Isthmus, May 19, 2000, at 5 (discussing Madison's growing problem in providing adequately for its disabled students while maintaining a strong curriculum for other students).
For challenges to state school finance systems based on educational equality and educational adequacy, see, e.g., Rose v. Council for Better Education, 790 S.W.2d 186 (Ky. 1989); McDuffy v. Secretary of the Executive Office of Education, 615 N.E. 2d 516 (Mass. 1993); Pauley v. Kelly, 255 S.E.2d 859 (W. Va. 1979); Peter Enrich, Leaving Equality Behind: New Directions in School Finance Reform, 48 Vand. L. Rev. 101 (1995).
See Plaintiff-intervenors Brief at 38-40 and Appendix at 271-78.
See American Civil Liberties Union Brief at 9-10; Plaintiff-Intervenors Appendix at 282-85.
See Mayor Norqnist Brief at 6-8.
See American Civil Liberties Union Brief at 10.
See Plaintiff-intervenors Appendix at 324-325.

=== CASE 9737721 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:33:01.96696+00 ===

WILLIAM A. BABLITCH, J.
¶ 125. (concurring in part, dissenting in part). This is a landmark case in the history of education for the state of Wisconsin. For the first time, this court has articulated the standard behind the constitutional guarantee to our children of an equal opportunity for education. With three justices, including this writer, joining that part of the majority opinion of Justice Crooks that articulates a constitutional standard for education, the guarantee of an equal opportunity for education finally has teeth.
¶ 126. Unfortunately, a different majority concludes that the present system meets constitutional muster. I disagree. I agree with the concurrence/dissent of Chief Justice Abrahamson that this case should be remanded for further proceedings, in light of the standard we set in the majority opinion, to determine whether the defendants have met their constitutional obligation. This record raises serious and troubling questions about our system of education that should be examined more thoroughly below.
¶ 127. Accordingly, I join paragraphs 3, 87, footnote 2, and Section II of the majority opinion, and join *657the concurrence/dissent of the Chief Justice.1 I write to more fully document the condition of education in this state as shown in the circuit court. This evidence is not in dispute.
¶ 128. This record demonstrates that various school districts suffer from woeful conditions: inadequate course offerings, an inability to raise further funds for ever-increasing educational demands from the state and federal government, and special needs that are either going unmet or are being met at the expense of regular education programs. This record further shows great financial disparities among school districts. As a result of all of this, it cannot come as a surprise that tens of thousands of children across the state fail to meet even basic competency in reading, writing, mathematics, language, science, social studies *658and the arts. These children have major gaps in knowledge and skills basic to progress. For these children, the constitutional guarantee of an education is an empty promise.
¶ 129. Despite the historic and commendable efforts by the Governor and the legislature to support public education, after reading this record one is left with the overwhelming realization that, for too many of our children, those efforts have not satisfied even a minimal constitutional guarantee of an equal opportunity for an adequate education.
¶ 130. This record should leave every citizen greatly concerned at the lack of fairness and opportunity for tens of thousands of children in our schools. For a state founded by immigrants and built with a common commitment to education for all, rich and poor alike, regardless of the accident of place of birth, this record shows that we have drifted far from the dreams of our ancestors.
¶ 131. Several distinct categories illustrate the systemic problems in education.
¶ 132. Plants and equipment. Undisputed affidavits in the record illustrate that conditions in many districts across the state are hardly conducive to education. Maintenance is deferred, if done at all. Leaks, cracks, obsolete lockers go unrepaired. Libraries are inadequately stocked. Computers, where they exist, are largely out of date. School buses are run-down and accordingly more expensive to fix. As buses dwindle, transportation of students takes more time: One district has children traveling 90 minutes, leaving home at 6:50 a.m. and arriving to school at 8:20 a.m.
¶ 133. House trailers, storage rooms, hallways, elevator shafts, and the like are used for classrooms. In one school science class is held in a trailer, but has no *659science equipment. Social studies is being taught off a cart, room to room. Special education therapy space is provided in a janitor's area; and in one school it is held in a storage room closet off the stage. Another school has school suspension served in a janitor's closet.
¶ 134. Many schools are unable to provide facilities that are accessible to people with disabilities. Playgrounds are unsafe, uninsured, and unequipped.
¶ 135. Course offerings. In many schools, course offerings are being curtailed due to needs in other educational areas. Textbooks are seriously outdated. Languages have been cutback or completely eliminated. Advanced courses in subjects such as science, math, and technology are taught on an alternate year schedule. Electives, such as family and consumer economics classes and technical education classes, have been eliminated. Career counseling in many schools is severely limited or nonexistent. Funds for training staff in computer technology are unavailable, which together with inadequate equipment make it impossible to teach basic computer skills.
¶ 136. Children with special needs. It is undisputed in the record that public schools are facing a significant increase in the number of special needs students. These students generally fall into three, sometimes overlapping, categories: Limited English Speaking (LES) students, children living in poverty, and children with disabilities. The children come to school lacking the language, social, and cultural tools many of us take for granted. These children must be taught how to learn before they can begin to learn.
¶ 137. A commonly voiced concern by numerous districts in the state is that special education programs established to meet these needs are eating up the dollars from other already limited education programs. *660The communities of Wausau and Milwaukee are striking examples of this problem.
¶ 138. Wausau has experienced a significant increase in the number of Hmong students, approximately 22 percent in the last ten years, and increasing steadily. The kindergarten enrollment is 34 percent LES students. The language problems are significant. Communications between teacher and student, and between teacher and parent, are severely limited. Accordingly, LES costs, including indirect costs, are high; but unfortunately, state reimbursement has been decreasing. Currently, the state reimburses for 25 percent of the direct LES costs, none for the indirect costs. Direct costs associated with these needs exceed $2.5 million. Indirect costs exceed $1 million. As a result, Wausau School District has had to curtail programs and staffing. It is grossly understaffed in its health services program, despite the increasing number of high needs students who have greater health requirements. Wausau has been unable to implement the state-mandated middle school foreign language program. It has been forced to make cuts with respect to staff development and teacher mentor programs. It has been unable to implement its five-year technology plan, estimating the district is spending approximately three times less on its technology budget compared with adequate technology programs in other districts.
¶ 139. Wausau is trapped in a vicious cycle. As it reduces its general program quality to make up for mandated special needs, students without special needs leave for private schools to seek the quality that public schools no longer provide. With the resulting drop in enrollment, state dollars decrease and the schools must further reduce program quality.
*661¶ 140. Milwaukee must address perhaps an even larger struggle. It is faced with a large number of high needs students. Approximately 80 percent of its students qualify for free or reduced lunch. Over 12,000 of their students are reported as homeless. Poverty undisputedly leads to distinct learning problems. As with Wausau, the needs of these students inevitably impact on regular educational programs.
¶ 141. Financial disparities. The record, which is undisputed, shows inter alia the following financial disparities:
1. School districts vary widely in the amount spent per pupil, ranging from $13,534 to $5301.
2. The levy rates vary widely, ranging from $4.71 to $20.63 per thousand.
3. The ability to raise dollars for every mill levied varies widely. For example, in 1996-67 Gibraltar was able to raise $1,270,000 for every mill levied; Bowler was able to raise $55,000 for every mill levied.
¶ 142. The effects of these disparities are many. To name but two:
.1. Property poor districts that tax at the same rate as property rich districts have significantly fewer dollars to spend on education. For example, the two like-size districts of Neenah and Elmbrook tax at approximately the same rate of $11.55 per thousand. However, due to the disparity of tax base, Elmbrook is able to spend $1400 more per pupil than Neenah, which amounts to over $9,000,000 more available to Elmbrook than to Neenah for educational needs.
2. In some like-size districts, which spend the same, the tax burden on the taxpayer is significantly disparate. For example, Beloit and Wauwatosa spend approximately $8500 per pupil. Yet Beloit must tax *662their taxpayers $2.17 per thousand more than Wauwa-tosa to raise the same amount of dollars.
¶ 143. The circuit court found that this evidence was undisputed. Plaintiffs assert that the system's disparities deny students in property-poor districts equal educational opportunities. Based on this record it is hard to disagree. But without a standard, the circuit court was powerless.
¶ 144. Statewide testing.
One measure of student achievement is the Wisconsin Student Assessment System (WSAS) Knowledge and Concepts Examinations at grades four, eight, and ten. Student scores were reported in four general proficiency categories: advanced, proficient, basic, and minimal performance.
¶ 145. "Advanced" means achievement beyond mastery, in depth understanding.
¶ 146. "Proficient" means competent, including mastery of the important knowledge and skills.
¶ 147. "Basic" means somewhat competent, mastery of most of the important knowledge and skill, but evidence of at least one major flaw in understanding.
¶ 148. "Minimal Performance" means limited in content, evidence of major misconceptions or gaps in knowledge and skill basic to progress.
¶ 149. The scores achieved leave serious questions as to the adequacy of education achieved by tens of thousands of children across the state.
¶ 150. Based upon this testing, in the fall of 1996 the Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction estimated2 that in reading, 8 percent of the fourth graders, 15 percent of the eighth graders, and 14 percent of the tenth graders were in the "Minimal Performance Cate*663gory." Assuming approximately 60,000 students in each grade tested, 4800 fourth graders, 9000 eighth graders, and 8400 tenth graders had an education achievement that was limited in content, with major misconceptions or gaps in knowledge and skills basic to progress.
¶ 151. With respect to language and writing skills, 10 percent (that is, 6000 children) of the fourth graders, 19 percent (11,400 children) of the eighth graders, and 14 percent (8400 children) of the tenth graders had an education achievement that was limited in content, with major misconceptions or gaps in knowledge and skills basic to progress.
¶ 152. The figures are even worse in mathematics and science. For example, in mathematics 33 percent of the tenth graders (20,000 children) had an education achievement that was limited in content, with major misconceptions or gaps in knowledge and skills basic to progress.
¶ 153. This lack of educational achievement is particularly evident in the scores of children with special needs, of which there are tens of thousands of the over 800,000 students in K-12. In reading, although 74 percent of the English proficient students in fourth grade were either at the "Proficient" or "Advanced" levels, only 28 percent of the Limited English Proficient students were at those levels. Seventy-nine percent of the students without disabilities were at those levels, while only 31 percent of the disabled students were at those levels.
¶ 154. These wide disparities continue through the grades tested, and cut across mathematics, language, arts, science, and social studies.
¶ 155. It is shaming to this great state.
*664¶ 156. By a slim majority, this court today decides that the present system is constitutionally acceptable. However, if the conditions outlined above remain unattended, the system will inevitably get worse. If the legislature does nothing, the children will be back demanding their constitutional guarantee.
¶ 157. Unquestionably, the cost to fix the system is high. The cost of not fixing it will be much higher: Uneducated citizens will extract extremely high social costs in the future. As the mechanic on television says, "You can pay me now or pay me later."
The standard we adopt today recalls the standard which I urged in my dissent 11 years ago in Kukor v. Grover, 148 Wis. 2d 469, 520-21, 436 N.W.2d 568 (1989), joined in by then-Justice Shirley S. Abrahamson and Chief Justice Nathan S. Heffernan:
[The constitutional requirement] has generally been defined as embracing broad educational opportunities needed to equip children for their roles as citizens, participants in the political system, and competitors in both the labor market and the market-place of ideas, [citations omitted].
I conclude that the mandate given by the uniformity clause in art. X, sec. S of the Wisconsin Constitution is that the state provide a character of instruction in the state schools such that all children are provided with a uniform opportunity to become equipped for their future roles as citizens, participants in the political system, and competitors both economically and intellectually. In short, the state must provide a character of instruction that allows each child an opportunity to become an educated person.
It was a standard based not on financial disparities but on the adequacy of the education provided. I read adequacy of education as the focal point of our newly adopted standard.
These statewide estimates are based on samples developed by CTB/McGraw Hill under contract with DPI.

=== CASE 9737722 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:33:01.974271+00 ===

DAVID T. PROSSER, J.
¶ 158. (concurring in part; dissenting in part). The principal issue in this case is stated by the petitioners: "Does the Wisconsin school finance system violate the Uniformity Provision of the Education Article, article X, § 3 of the Wisconsin Constitution?" A majority of the court holds that it does not. Three justices, however, would rule otherwise. Moreover, these three justices and Justice Crooks interpret art. X, § 3 in a manner that encourages future litigation and will plunge the judiciary into the legislature's domain.
¶ 159. I join the concurring opinion of Justice Sykes not because I am unwilling to apply standards embedded in the text of the constitution or in statutory law-whatever the field, regardless of the consequences-but because I am unwilling to impose legal standards that did not exist before this decision.
I
¶ 160. A majority of the court embraces the proposition that art. X, § 3 of the Wisconsin Constitution gives Wisconsin students "a fundamental right to an *665equal opportunity for a sound, basic education. An equal opportunity for a sound basic education is one that will equip students for their roles as citizens and enable them to succeed economically and personally." Majority op. at ¶¶ 3, 51, 87. Chief Justice Abraham-son's concurrence/dissent at ¶ 94.
¶ 161. Constitutional principles must be rooted in constitutional text. Four members of the court maintain that the standard they embrace is rooted in art. X, § 3. They are mistaken. Article X, § 3 was part of the original constitution. The relevant text now reads:
The legislature shall provide by law for the establishment of district schools, which shall be as nearly uniform as practicable; and such schools shall be free and without charge for tuition to all children between the ages of 4 and 20 years; and no sectarian instruction shall be allowed therein; but the legislature by law may, for the purpose of religious instruction outside the district schools, authorize the release of students during regular school hours.
Our analysis must begin with the language of the constitution. Two phrases in art. X § 3 stand out: "district . schools" and "as nearly uniform as practicable."
¶ 162. First, the text emphasizes the term "district schools" not "school districts." There is danger in assuming that these terms are synonymous. They are not. A 1972 amendment to art. X, § 3 authorizing the release of students for religious instruction repeated the term "district schools." The 1972 amendment altered the text of the original section, substituting "4" for "four" and "20" for "twenty," but it did not change the term "district schools."
¶ 163. Section 3 uses the term "district schools" followed by the phrase "such schools" and the clause *666"no sectarian instruction shall be allowed therein," although religious instruction "outside the district schools" is permitted (emphasis added).
¶ 164. By contrast, art. X, §§ 2 and 5 both employ the term "school district." These sections also were part of the original constitution. Article X, § 2 refers to "support and maintenance of common schools, in each school district." Article X, § 5 provides that no appropriation shall be made from the school fund to "any school district for the year in which a school shall not be maintained at least three months." The constitution is precise in avoiding state payments from the school fund to individual schools.
¶ 165. A fair reading of these sections suggests that "school districts" are political entities, whereas "district schools" are literally schools. The legislature distributes state aid to the political entities — to the school districts. Consequently, it is troublesome to base a cause of action that school districts must be made uniform on a section of the constitution, art. X, § 3, that does not apply to them.
¶ 166. It is even more unsettling to give Wisconsin students "a fundamental right to an equal opportunity for a sound basic education" and to ground that right in a section that makes no reference to individual rights, only to "district schools." The responsibility of this court in constitutional interpretation is to state the law, not make the law.
¶ 167. Second, art. X, § 3 contains the phrase "as nearly uniform as practicable." The uniformity in the text is indisputably diluted by the adjacent phrases "as nearly" and "as practicable." "As nearly uniform as practicable" does not mean "equal." "As nearly uniform as practicable" is not as strong or uncompromising as the storied phrase "equal protection of the law." The *667words in the text suggest a goal; they do not impose a rule.
¶ 168. Article X, § 3 may be compared to art. IV, § 23 of the Wisconsin Constitution, which addresses town government and provides in part: "The legislature shall establish but one system of town government, which shall be as nearly uniform as practicable" (emphasis added). Because this section closely parallels art. X, § 3, this court should look to the experience with town government for guidance in interpretation.1 This court has declared that the "uniformity requirement [in art. IV, § 23] has been consistently interpreted not to require absolute uniformity in the system of government, but only practical uniformity. . . .[T]he framers of the constitution recognized that some latitude had to be provided to enable the legislature to authorize departures from absolute uniformity." State ex rel. Wolf v. Town of Lisbon, 75 Wis. 2d 152, 162, 248 N.W.2d 450 (1977).
*668I — I I — I
¶ 169. Over the years, both the legislature and Wisconsin courts have interpreted the Education Article, including art. X, § 3. They have not required uniformity among school districts. The legislature has never required that school districts be equal or uniform in terms of population or enrollment or geographic area. School districts have been created in different ways, T.B. Scott Lumber Co. v. Oneida County, 72 Wis. 158, 161 (1888); Maxcy v. Oshkosh, 144 Wis. 238, 260, 128 N.W. 899 (1910), and they have not been uniform in their organization or reorganization. Joint Sch. Dist. v. State Appeal Board, 56 Wis. 2d 790, 794, 203 N.W.2d 1 (1973). The state authorizes common school districts, union high school districts, and unified school districts. Wis. Stat. §§ 120.001-120.44. These districts may serve different grades. Not all school districts have kindergarten for four-year-olds. Zweifel v. Joint Dist. No. 1., Belleville, 76 Wis. 2d 648, 251 N.W.2d 822 (1977). Compensation among the school districts is not uniform, and employee benefits are not uniform. In Busé v. Smith, 74 Wis. 2d 550, 568, 570, 247 N.W.2d 141 (1976), this court recognized the obvious fact that not all school districts have equal revenue raising power and held that art. X, § 3 did not require equalization of revenue raising power.
¶ 170. Given the text of art. X, § 3, the immense diversity of school districts and district schools and the precedent of prior decisions about what art. X, § 3 does not mean, the court should have dismissed claims that the legislature has a constitutional obligation to equal*669ize educational opportunity among school districts in terms of dollars.2
¶ 171. What the court has done instead is to embrace two conflicting theories of what the section requires: Equality of resources for school districts and special attention to special needs, beyond equality. In short, EQUALITY PLUS. This may be desirable social and educational policy but it does not arise from the text of our constitution. It is distinctly legislative in character.
¶ 172. Until today, this court has had difficulty imposing uniformity on much of anything based upon the language of art. X, § 3. The court attempted to explain this section in State ex rel. Zilisch v. Auer, 197 Wis. 284, 289-90, 221 N.W. 860, (1928). In response to arguments about detachment from a school district, the court said:
An examination of the debates in the conventions that framed our present constitution and the constitution of 1846 (which contained a similar provision) discloses that the members of those conventions, *670when they were framing the article relating to schools, were concerned, not with the method of forming school districts, but with the character of instruction that should be given in those schools after the districts were formed, — with the training that these schools should give to the future citizens of Wisconsin.
Viewing the terms of this constitutional provision in the light of its express terms as well as of the purpose which actuated those who drafted it, we conclude that the requirement as to uniformity applies to the districts after they are formed, — to the character of the instruction given, — rather than to the means by which they are established and their boundaries fixed.3
¶ 173. The court cited no authority for these passages. In fact, the language was inspired by the brief of respondent (Zilisch) who did not point to constitutional debates. Rather, counsel relied on a Wisconsin case, State ex rel. Dick v. Kalaher, 145 Wis. 243, 129 N.W. 1060 (1911), which defines a school: "School is a generic term, and denotes an institution for instruction or education" (citing American Asylum v. Phoenix Bank, 4 Conn. 172 (1822); 7 Words & Phrases, 6343). Then counsel argued:
It is this institution and not the district to which the constitutional provision applies. This is shown by the plain wording of the constitution which limits the requirement of uniformity to "schools" and merely prefixes the word "district" to denote the type of schools.
*671This plain and natural construction has been followed by the courts, under similar constitutional provisions. The decisions hold that such uniformity relates only to the character of the institution, called the school.
Respondent's Brief at 64. Today, a new constitutional right is founded on the argument of counsel in a school detachment case almost three-quarters of a century ago.
I — I H — I hH
¶ 174. In the early years of statehood, the hiring and licensing of teachers was entirely a local matter. Wisconsin Blue Book, p. 432 (1999-2000). For a number of years, state support of public education consisted of money derived principally from the sale of public lands that the federal government had granted to the state. Id. In Chapter 287, Laws of 1885, the legislature levied a one-mill state property tax to be collected by the state and distributed to counties for school support. Id. The state's first attempt to equalize tax support for schools in property-poor districts was the Wisconsin Elementary Equalization Law of 1927 (Chapter 536).4 Id.
¶ 175. In 1995, the legislature appropriated more than $4 billion to provide 66.7 percent of the revenue for public K-12 schools in Wisconsin beginning in the 1996-97 school year. The money included general aid, delivered through a three-tier formula, *672categorical aid, and school levy credits. The increase over the 1995-96 school year was more than $950,000,000. School funding was increased 5.9 percent for the 1997-98 school year and 5 percent for the 1998-99 school year. Legislative Fiscal Bureau, 1997-98 Wisconsin State Budget, Comparative Summary of Budget Provisions, Public Instruction, at 862-63. These are the school finance plans under challenge.5
¶ 176. This court on many occasions has observed that all legislative acts are presumptively constitutional. If doubts exist about a statute's constitutionality, we must resolve them in favor of the constitutionality of a statute. "Our task is not to judge the merits of the statute or the wisdom of the legislature. Our task is to determine whether the statute clearly contravenes some constitutional provision." Busé, 74 Wis. 2d at 583 (Abrahamson, J., Day, J., and Heffernan, J. dissenting).
¶ 177. We do not hide from the deficiencies that exist in this state's system of public education. We are not insensitive to the fact that fiscal resources are not equal. We might even have salutary proposals for improvements. But it is not the role of the supreme court to shape education policy or provide revenues. *673This vital responsibility is reserved to the executive and the legislative branches. The judiciary's task is to determine whether the acts or omissions of other branches clearly contravene some constitutional provision. In my view, they do not.
¶ 178. I join the majority opinion in affirming the court of appeals and in holding the present school finance system constitutional. In other respects, I dissent.
¶ Í79. I am authorized to state that Justice DIANE S. SYKES joins this concurring/dissenting opinion.
Jack Stark summarizes the litigation under this section in his book, The Wisconsin State Constitution, A Reference Guide at 100 (1997):
According to this section "the principal organizational features of town government must be the same," but, as the section specifies, only "practical" uniformity is required, so general enactments that make reasonable distinctions among towns are constitutional [State ex rel. Wolf v. Town of Lisbon, 75 Wis. 2d 152, 161-62, 248 N.W.2d 450 (1977)]. As to reasonable distinctions, this section "provides for the exercise of different powers by the boards of different towns, when there is anything in a town which calls for the exercise of such different or additional powers" [Land, Log & Lumber Co. and others v. Brown and others, 73 Wis. 294, 40 N.W. 482 (1889)]. That is, a law that applies throughout the state and makes reasonable distinctions based on differences among towns does not violate this section [Thompson v. Kenosha County, 64 Wis. 2d 673, 221 N.W. 845 (1974)].
In his brief, Governor Thompson argues that the equalized share of state support for public education has increased from 72.3 percent of state aid in 1986-87 to 77.6 percent in 1998-99. Non-Party Brief by Governor Tommy G. Thompson at 4. The first tier of the three-part general school aid formula is for costs shared between the state and school district up to a primary cost ceiling of $1,000 per student. The state's share at this level is calculated using a guaranteed property valuation of $2 million per student. 1997-98 Wisconsin Blue Book, p. 291. Plaintiffs argue that the first tier creates disequalizing spending disparities by its hold harmless feature. The Governor responds that this disequalization has fallen from 0.7 percent of total equalization payments in 1996-97 to 0.52 percent in 1999-2000. Id. at 5.
In reaching this conclusion, the court overruled State ex rel. Brown v. Haney, 190 Wis. 285, 209 N.W. 591 (1926).
According to the 1999-2000 Wisconsin Blue Book, Chapter 536, Laws of 1927, was promoted by State Superintendent of Public Instruction John Callahan, who urged a 40 percent level of state support for local school costs. This figure was not reached until after 1970. There was no state support for high schools until 1875.1999-2000 Wisconsin Blue Book, p. 432.
The court obtained printouts of school referenda in the 1990s from the Department of Public Instruction. According to our calculations, there were 166 successful referenda to exceed revenue caps in the four years 1996-1999. These referenda totaled approximately $85,000,000. There also were approximately 335 successful referenda on long term debt during these same four years. The value of these referenda exceeded $2.5 billion. Local school referenda are part of the state school finance system. A number of the school district plaintiffs in this case participated in successful referenda.

=== CASE 9737723 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:33:01.981578+00 ===

DIANE S. SYKES, J.
¶ 180 (concurring in part; dissenting in part). I agree with the majority's conclusion that the state school finance system is not unconstitutional under Wis. Const, art. X, § 3, the uniformity clause of the education article, or Wis. Const, art. I, § 1, the Equal Protection Clause. Therefore, I join sections I and III of the opinion, as well as the decision to affirm. However, I cannot agree with sections II and V of the majority opinion, which announce an expansive new state constitutional right under art. X, § 3 to "an equal opportunity for a sound basic education," defined as an education "that will equip students for their roles as citizens and enable them to succeed economically and personally." Majority op. at ¶¶ 3, 51, 52, 87.
¶ 181. The petitioners allege that the current school finance formula violates the uniformity clause of the education article as well as the Equal Protection Clause of the Wisconsin Constitution by creating or failing to redress alleged educational disparities in so-called "property-poor" districts, districts with many *674high-needs children, and districts where charter schools and the school choice program decrease the enrollment in the public schools. Four members of this court are convinced that in order to decide the uniformity clause challenge, the court is required to articulate a constitutional standard or test for the right to education under art. X, § 3. And they have done so, by reference to an elaborate definition of "educational adequacy" that has no support in the text of the constitution itself nor in any of our prior art. X, § 3 cases.
¶ 182. Any definition of education or standard for educational adequacy is inherently a political and policy question, not a justiciable one. The people of this state — through their elected representatives in the legislature, the governor's office and local school boards — decide what their schools will teach and how much education is adequate or desirable for their children. What constitutes an "adequate" or "sound" or even "basic" education is most emphatically not a question of constitutional law for this or any other court.
¶ 183. As the majority opinion discusses at length, our cases pertaining to the education article have held that the framers of the Wisconsin Constitution were concerned with the nature, character and purposes of education — not the technicalities of school district size, boundaries or composition — and viewed education as necessary to the preservation of liberty and the perpetuation of a productive, honorable citizenry. Majority op. at ¶¶ 31-47; Kukor v. Grover, 148 Wis. 2d 469, 485-90, 436 N.W.2d 568 (1989); Busé v. Smith, 74 Wis. 2d 550, 564-66, 247 N.W.2d 822 (1977); State ex rel. Zilisch v. Auer, 197 Wis. 284, 289-90, 221 N.W. 860 (1928).
*675¶ 184. But I do not read these cases to mean that art. X, § 3 commits to the judiciary, in the exercise of its obligation of constitutional interpretation, questions of educational adequacy, content or scope. There is certainly nothing in the text of art. X, § 3 to support such a conclusion. Wisconsin Const, art. X, § 3 provides:
The legislature shall provide by law for the establishment of district schools, which shall be as nearly uniform as practicable; and such schools shall be free and without charge for tuition to all children between the ages of 4 and 20 years. . ..
¶ 185. The other sections of the education article pertain to the election of the state superintendent of public instruction (art. X, § 1), the school fund (art. X, §§ 2, 5), local school taxes (art. X, § 4), the state university system (art. X, § 6) and the sale of school and university lands (art. X, §§ 7,8). There is nothing in the education article that specifically or even generally addresses the content, character or scope of the education the legislature must provide in the state's district schools.1
¶ 186. As the majority opinion notes, the power to establish schools is inherent in state government, and so the education article of the Wisconsin Constitution has always been interpreted as a directive compelling the legislature to exercise its power for the establishment of a public school system rather than as an organic grant of legislative authority over education. Majority op. at ¶ 29. Zweifel v. Joint Dist. No. 1, 76 Wis. 2d 648, 658, 251 N.W.2d 822 (1977); Busé v. Smith, 74 Wis. 2d at 564; Manitowoc v. Manitowoc Rapids, 231 Wis. 94, 97, 285 N.W. 403 (1939).
*676The specific constitutional guarantee of education flows from the provision that the legislature provide for the establishment of district schools. Since the power to establish schools existed without a specific grant as an inherent function of state government, the clear purpose of art. X, sec. 3, was to compel the exercise of the power to the extent designated. Art. X, sec. 3, must then be viewed as a limitation upon the broad power of the state to educate its citizens through the establishment and operation of schools. The limitations are precisely stated: District schools, uniformity, and free tuition for certain ages.
Zweifel, 76 Wis. 2d at 658 (citation omitted). See also Manitowoc, 231 Wis. at 98 ("the purpose [of art. X, § 3] was not to grant a power to the legislature to establish schools, for this power would exist without grant, but to compel the exercise of the power to the extent designated"); Outagamie County v. Zuehlke, 165 Wis. 32, 35-36, 161 N.W. 6 (1917)("It is established by the decisions of this court that our state constitution is not so much a grant as a limitation of power, therefore the state legislature has authority to exercise any and all legislative powers not delegated to the federal government nor expressly or by necessary implication prohibited by the national or state constitution.").
¶ 187. However, art. X, § 3 says only that the legislature must establish uniform public schools, free and open to all. It does nothing to either prescribe or limit instructional character or content, leaving it exclusively to the legislature, which had inherent authority over it to begin with.
¶ 188. The lower courts, some members of the legislature and some amici complained about the lack of a constitutional definition or standard for the right *677to education under art. X, § 3.2 The court has responded to these complaints by adopting a broad new definition of the right to education that is as breathtaking in scope as it is disconnected to anything in the text of the constitution.
¶ 189. The court's new definition of the right to education is grounded in ideas about constitutional educational adequacy found in the law reviews and the decisions of other state supreme courts, measured by reference to the sufficiency of instruction and the equal opportunity to become proficient in specific curricular subjects. Majority op. at ¶¶ 48-52. The new approach emphasizes the objective of equalizing student outcomes, although the majority opinion notes that unequal student scores on proficiency tests would not be enough alone to make out a constitutional violation. Majority op. at ¶¶ 51-53, n.21. The court's new standard is linked in part to statutes prescribing curricular requirements for the public schools. Majority op. at ¶ 51.
¶ 190. The newly-minted constitutional right is as follows: "Wisconsin students have a fundamental right to an equal opportunity for a sound basic education. An equal opportunity for a sound basic education is one that will equip students for their roles as citizens and enable them to succeed economically and personally." Majority op. at ¶ 3. The new right to education includes "the opportunity for students to be proficient in mathematics, science, reading and writing, geography, and history, and for them to receive instruction in *678the arts and music, vocational training, social sciences, health, physical education and foreign language, in accordance with their age and aptitude." Id. There is more: "An equal opportunity for a sound basic education acknowledges that students and districts are not fungible and takes into account districts with disproportionate numbers of disabled students, economically disadvantaged students, and students with limited English language skills." Id. And the legislature must henceforward provide "sufficient resources" to meet the new standard; otherwise, it will be in violation of art. X, § 3. Id.
¶ 191. The problem with all of this is that there is no support for it anywhere in the text of the Wisconsin Constitution. It is entirely the product of judicial invention, despite efforts to tie some parts of the standard to particular statutory enactments. This may be fine education policy, and as a parent and a citizen I certainly support the educational aspirations and goals expressed by the new standard, as well as the requirement that schools include instruction in the specified curricular subject areas. But as a judge, I am compelled to say as forcefully as I can that the court's exercise in education clause standard-writing has nothing whatsoever to do with constitutional law.
¶ 192. In my judgment, any attempt by this court to create a constitutional standard or definition of the right to education based upon ideas about educational adequacy, outcomes and curricular offerings is seriously misguided. It encroaches upon the prerogatives of the legislative branch of government, implicating separation of powers principles and bringing into play the political question doctrine of Baker v. Carr, 369 U.S. 186 (1962). The judiciary should not be drawn into deciding issues that are essentially political in nature, *679exclusively committed by the constitution to another branch of government and not susceptible to judicial management or resolution. This is clearly such an issue.
¶ 193. In Baker the United States Supreme Court established the basic framework for analyzing the justiciability of political questions:
The nonjusticiability of a political question is primarily a function of the separation of powers. Much confusion results from the capacity of the 'political question' label to obscure the need for case-by-case inquiry. Deciding whether a matter has in any measure been committed by the Constitution to another branch of government, or whether the action of that branch exceeds whatever authority has been committed, is itself a delicate exercise in constitutional interpretation, and is a responsibility of this Court as ultimate interpreter of the Constitution.
Prominent on the surface of any case held to involve a political question is found a textually demonstrable constitutional commitment of the issue to a coordinate political department; or a lack of judicially discoverable and manageable standards for resolving it; or the impossibility of deciding without an initial policy determination of a kind clearly for nonjudicial discretion; or the impossibility of a court's undertaking independent resolution without expressing lack of the respect due coordinate branches of government; or an unusual need for unquestioning adherence to a political decision already made; or the potentiality of embarrassment from multifarious pronouncements by various departments on one question.
*680Id. at 210-11, 217. See also Nixon v. United States, 506 U.S. 224, 228-29 (1993); Powell v. McCormack, 395 U.S. 486, 518-19 (1969). The Court ixiBaker ultimately found the reapportionment issue before it to be justicia-ble, a conclusion followed by this court in State ex rel. Reynolds v. Zimmerman, 22 Wis. 2d 544, 561-64, 126 N.W.2d 551 (1964), overruling State ex rel. Broughton v. Zimmerman, 261 Wis. 398, 52 N.W.2d 903 (1952), and State ex rel. Martin v. Zimmerman, 249 Wis. 101, 23 N.W.2d 610 (1946).
¶ 194. It is, of course, the duty and particular province of the judiciary to interpret the constitution and say what the law is. Marbury v. Madison, 5 U.S. (1 Cranch) 137 (1803); State ex rel. Wisconsin Senate v. Thompson, 144 Wis. 2d 429, 436, 424 N.W.2d 385 (1988).3 I am fully aware that the doctrine of political question nonjusticiability is rarely invoked and in fact has not been directly applied by this court on a question of state constitutional law since Baker.
¶ 195. I am convinced, however, of the doctrine's applicability to art. X, § 3, at least to the extent that this court has now ventured into creating a constitutional standard or test for "educational adequacy." My conclusion is based upon the text of art. X, § 3, the obvious lack of judicially discoverable or manageable standards for educational adequacy, and the impossibility of deciding the issue without undertaking an initial, clearly nonjudicial policy determination.
*681¶ 196. Under the Baker analysis, "the concept of a textual commitment to a coordinate political department is not completely separate from the concept of a lack of judicially discoverable and manageable standards for resolving it; the lack of judicially manageable standards may strengthen the conclusion that there is a textually demonstrable commitment to a coordinate branch." Nixon, 506 U.S. at 228-29. As I have already noted, while it is clear that art. X, § 3 is not a grant of legislative power but a direction that legislative power be exercised in a particular way, the text of the education article nonetheless supports the conclusion that this is an area that is committed entirely to the legislative branch. Authority over public education is inherent in the legislature; art. X, § 3 does nothing more than command its exercise for the creation and support of a system of generally uniform, tuition-free, district schools.4 The constitution is silent on the issue of the scope, content or character of the education provided by the public schools.
¶ 197. In addition, the task of filling in the constitutional gaps is clearly a judicially unmanageable one, as the profound breadth and soaring rhetoric of the court's new standard demonstrate. More fundamentally, just how much education is adequate to the requirements and expectations of students, parents and society at any given point in time manifestly involves policy determinations of a nonjudicial type.
¶ 198. Finally, there is uncertainty and risk H inherent in multiple and conflicting pronouncements about education policy emanating from different *682branches of government. By constitutionalizing the notion of "educational adequacy" (however we would choose to define it), we create the potential for never-ending school finance litigation.
¶ 199. The majority opinion refers to the necessity of adopting an adequacy-based constitutional standard for education "as a goad or as a backstop to the legislature...." Majority op. at ¶ 50. But no legislature can ever satisfy everyone, particularly in a policy area so fraught with nuances and competing interests as this one. The constitutional right to education announced by the court today guarantees not better schools but bi-annual school finance litigation, as dissatisfied combatants in the battle for state education budget dollars go to court with claims of educational "inadequacy."
¶ 200. The majority dismisses the justiciability issue by reference to the unremarkable fact that this court has entertained art. X, § 3 challenges before, in Kukor, Busé and Zilisch. Majority op. at ¶ 2, n.2. In other words: "We've gone a little way down this road before, why not continue further?" This is poor constitutional justification for the exploration in educational policymaking the court engages in today. The difference, of course, between this case and the earlier ones is that this court has never before arrogated to itself, under the guise of constitutional interpretation, the power to dictate educational content, character or scope.5 Not until today.
*683¶ 201. I recognize that courts in other states have attempted to define the parameters of their state constitution education clauses by reference to variations on the "educational adequacy" theme. Majority op. at ¶¶ 48-50. However, I am persuaded by the reasoning of the Illinois Supreme Court, which invoked the political question nonjusticiability doctrine in declining to follow the trend:
What constitutes a "high quality" education, and how it may best be provided, cannot be ascertained by any judicially discoverable or manageable standards. The constitution provides no principled basis for a judicial definition of high quality. It would be a transparent conceit to suggest that whatever standards of quality courts might develop would actually be derived from the constitution in any meaningful sense. Nor is education a subject within the judiciary's field of expertise, such that a judicial role in giving content to the education guarantee might be warranted. Rather, the question of educa*684tional quality is inherently one of policy involving philosophical and practical considerations that call for the exercise of legislative and administrative discretion.
To hold that the question of educational quality is subject to judicial determination would largely deprive the members of the general public of a voice in a matter which is close to the hearts of all individuals in Illinois. Judicial determination of the type of education children should receive and how it can best be provided would depend on the opinions of whatever expert witnesses the litigants might call to testify and whatever other evidence they might choose to present. Members of the general public, however, would be obliged to listen in respectful silence. We certainly do not mean to trivialize the views of educators, school administrators and others who have studied the problems which public schools confront. But nonexperts — students, parents, employers, and others — also have important views and experiences to contribute which are not easily reckoned through formal judicial factfinding. In contrast, an open and robust public debate is the lifeblood of the political process in our system of representative democracy. Solutions to problems of educational quality should emerge from a spirited dialogue between the people of the State and their elected representatives.
Committee for Educ. Rights v. Edgar, 672 N.E.2d 1178, 1191 (Ill. 1996). See also Coalition for Adequacy and Fairness in Sch. Funding, Inc. v. Chiles, 680 So. 2d 400, 408 (Fla. 1996)(challengers of school finance system failed to present "an appropriate standard for determining [educational] 'adequacy' that would not present a substantial risk of judicial intrusion into the powers and responsibilities assigned to the legislature").
*685¶ 202. So it is here. The expansive constitutional right to education announced and explicated by the court today is not derived from the constitution in any meaningful sense, and it is entirely inappropriate in our representative system to resolve disputes over educational content, adequacy or finance through art. X, § 3 litigation. To invoke the political question doctrine of nonjusticiability here is not to abdicate the responsibility of judicial review but to vindicate the democratic process by which these sorts of issues are best resolved. This does not leave the legislature to exercise its authority over education issues unchecked. The checks and balances of the ballot box are oftentimes far more effective than those of a coordinate branch of government.
¶ 203. Accordingly, I cannot subscribe to parts II and V, or paragraph 3 of the majority opinion, in which the court articulates a new constitutional "right to education" under art. X, § 3. Therefore, I respectfully concur in parts I and III of the majority opinion, but in other respects, I dissent.
¶ 204. I am authorized to state that Justice DAVID T. PROSSER, joins this opinion.
See Justice Prosser's concurrence in part, dissent in part, which I join.
The Wisconsin Constitution nowhere mentions the "right to education." It is not contained in the Declaration of Rights, art. I, nor anywhere in the education article. It is a judicial extrapolation from the uniformity clause of art. X, § 3. Busé v. Smith, 74 Wis. 2d 550, 567, 247 N.W.2d 141 (1976).
See also The Federalist, No. 78 (Alexander Hamilton) ("The interpretation of the laws is the proper and peculiar province of the courts. A constitution is, in fact, and must be regarded by the judges, as a fundamental law. It therefore belongs to them to ascertain its meaning, as well as the meaning of any particular act proceeding from the legislative body").
Of course, if the legislature suddenly started charging tuition or turning students away there would be a justiciable claim for violation of art. X, § 3. The text is explicit as to these matters, which are clearly capable of judicial resolution and remedy.
There is unfortunate dicta in Busé v. Smith, 74 Wis. 2d 550, 247 N.W.2d 141 (1976), which suggests that this court has the authority to dictate the subjects to be taught in the public schools. Referring to the distinction drawn in State ex rel. Zilisch v. Auer, 197 Wis. 284, 221 N.W. 860 (1928), between the "character of instruction" and the mechanics of school district *683creation, the court in Busé stated: "If 'character of instruction' was all that was required to be 'as nearly uniform as practicable' under the mandate of the constitution, then it was left up to this court to ultimately determine what subjects were to be included in 'character of instruction' and to the legislature to determine what uniformity was 'practicable.'" Busé, 74 Wis. 2d at 566. This statement was completely unnecessary to the holding in Busé, which concerned the very technical issue of the constitutionality of the negative aids formula. Zilisch itself was a challenge to school district boundaries. Despite their expansive language, neither Busé nor Zilisch concerned the issue of whether art. X, § 3 mandates a certain content or character of education. I would withdraw the foregoing language from Busé. There is nothing in the text of art. X, § 3, nor in Zilisch or any of our cases, to support the proposition that this or any other court has a role in curriculum decisions.

=== CASE 9737724 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:33:02.859135+00 ===

Mr. JUSTICE GREEN delivered the opinion of the court: The principal question in this case is whether a real estate broker representing sellers is liable to buyers under the Consumer Fraud and Deceptive Business Practices Act (Consumer Fraud Act) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1979, ch. 121?2, par. 261 et seq.) for an innocent misrepresentation, relied upon by the buyers, as to the interest rate in a mortgage which encumbered the premises sold and was assumed by the buyers. Although the wording of the act creates some confusion, we hold that such a broker is liable. On March 28, 1979, plaintiffs, Ronald Beard and Nellie Beard, filed suit in the circuit court of Vermilion County against defendants, F. Dale Gress, Dorothy Gress, and their real estate broker, Ray Madsen, d/b/a Ray Madsen & Associates, seeking monetary damages from a transaction whereby plaintiffs purchased real estate from defendants Gress. Pursuant to the motion of defendant Madsen asserting that counts IV and VI, directed solely against him, did not state a cause of action, the circuit court dismissed those counts. Plaintiffs have appealed. We have jurisdiction because of the court’s findings pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 304(a). 73 Ill. 2d R. 304(a). Counts IV and VI alleged defendant Madsen to be a real estate broker for defendants Gress and to have negligently made misstatements concerning (1) the rate of interest on the mortgage encumbering the premises, which was assumed by plaintiffs, and (2) the length of time during which the property had been listed for sale. Plaintiffs claimed to have relied to their detriment upon these statements and sought monetary damages. Count IV merely sought relief at common law for inaccurate statements negligently made by a real estate broken Count VI incorporated by reference all of the allegations of count IV but also alleged certain statutory violations which we later describe in detail.  There is little dispute that count IV was properly dismissed. At common law, a real estate broker is presumably liable for his material misstatements as to matters concerning a sale of realty only if he knows or should have known of the inaccuracy. (Lyons v. Christ Episcopal Church (1979), 71 Ill. App. 3d 257, 389 N.E.2d 623.) Although count IV states that Madsen negligently made the statements in issue, it does not state that he knew or should have known of their falsity. Count VI referred to both the Consumer Fraud Act and the Uniform Deceptive Trade Practices Act, hereinafter called the Uniform Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1979, ch. 121½, par. 311 et seq.). The two acts are related in that section 2 of the Consumer Fraud Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1979, ch. 121½, par. 262) states in part that “the use or employment of any practice described in Section 2 of the [Uniform Act] in the conduct of any trade or commerce are hereby declared unlawful.” The allegations of count VI referring to either of the two acts are contained in the following paragraphs of that count: “14. Defendant Ray Madsen committed a deceptive trade practice as defined by Chapter 121½ §312 Ill. Rev. Stats., in that he did publish and with intent to sell as heretofore alleged, make a public statement that the mortgage assumable under defendant F. Dale Gress and Dorothy Gress name was at the rate of interest of 7½%, and that said statement constitutes an unfair and deceptive practice in that it was a misrepresentation of a material fact made with the intent that potential buyers would rely on s'aid statement as defined by Chapter 121½ §262. 15. Defendant Ray Madsen represented or caused to be represented a material fact to-wit: that the residence of defendants Gress was listed for sale on or about January, 1979, with intent that others rely on said misrepresentations of such material fact, and that said representation constitutes an unfair and deceptive trade practice in violation of Chapter 121½ §312, and §262, Ill. Rev. Stats, in that said statement tends to cause confusion among buyers.”  We dispose of paragraph 15 of count VI summarily. The relief sought by the count is mgney damages. Regardless of whether a misrepresentation as to the length of time property has been listed for sale might give rise to a ground for rescission of a contract for sale or a sale, we do not see how such a misrepresentation can give rise to a claim for money damages. No allegations of the count answer the question. The count does not allege that because of the misrepresentation, the buyers were deceived into believing they would obtain any greater value than they received. We conclude that this paragraph does not of itself set forth a cause of action nor give aid to any other paragraphs of the count in doing so. On the other hand, if purchasers are misled into believing that the interest rate upon a mortgage they are to assume is lower than it turns out to be, they are clearly damaged thereby. This is the theory of paragraph 14. Accordingly, we must determine whether it in combination with the rest of the count does set forth a statutory violation creating a cause of action for money damages. Only injunctive relief is available under the Uniform Act itself. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1979, ch. 121½, par. 313.) Furthermore, the act, itself, has been held to be applicable only to transactions involving goods and services. (Steinberg v. Chicago Medical School (1977), 69 Ill. 2d 320, 371 N.E.2d 634.) The transaction here involved a sale of real estate rather than goods, and Madsen furnished no services for plaintiffs. Thus, the reference in paragraph 14 to section 2 of that act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1979, ch. 121½, par. 312) is significant only if that paragraph alleges “use of employment” by defendant Madsen of a “practice described in section 2” of that act “in the conduct of any trade or commerce.” If so, a cause of action would thus be stated under section 2 of the Consumer Fraud Act. Section 10a(a) of that act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1979, ch. 12½, par. 270(a)) permits the trial court, in its discretion, to award monetary damages for a violation thereof. Section 1(f) of that act states: “(f) The terms ‘trade’ and ‘commerce’ mean the advertising, offering for sale, sale, or distribution of any services and any property, tangible or intangible, real, personal or mixed, and any other article, commodity, or thing of value wherever situated, and shall include any trade or commerce directly or indirectly affecting the people of this State.” (Emphasis added.) Ill. Rev. Stat. 1979, ch. 12½, par. 261(f). Section 2 of the Uniform Act (the act which itself is only applicable to transactions involving goods and services) contains 12 subsections setting forth acts constituting prohibited trade practices. The first 10 subsections refer to a manner of furnishing goods or services. Subsection 11 concerns the making of “false or misleading statements of fact concerning the reasons for, existence of or amounts of price reductions” and thus has no relevance to any conduct alleged here. Subsection 12 states that a person commits a deceptive practice when he “engages in any other conduct which similarly creates a likelihood of confusion or of misunderstanding.” The misstatement of the interest rate attributed to Madsen would be “conduct” which creates “a likelihood * * * of misunderstanding.” Thus, the question arises as to whether such conduct prohibited under the Uniform Act when done in a transaction involving goods or services becomes a violation under the Consumer Fraud Act when done in regard to a real estate transaction because of the provision of section 2 of the Consumer Fraud Act which makes practices described in the Uniform Act violations of the Consumer Fraud Act when committed “in any trade or commerce” which includes the sale of real estate.  We need not answer that question because, disregarding the reference in paragraph 14 to the Uniform Act, we consider the paragraph barely sufficient to allege a direct violation of section 2 of the Consumer Fraud Act without reference to the Uniform Act. That section states in pertinent detail: “§2. Unfair methods of competition and unfair or deceptive acts or practices, including but not limited to the use or employment of any deception, fraud, false pretense, false promise, misrepresentation or the concealment, suppression or omission of any material fact, * * * or the use or employment of any practice described in Section 2 of the ‘Uniform Deceptive Trade Practices Act’, approved August 5, 1965, in the conduct of any trade or commerce are hereby declared unlawful whether any person has in fact been misled, deceived or damaged thereby. In construing this section consideration shall be given to the interpretations of the Federal Trade Commission and the federal courts relating to Section 5(a) of the Federal Trade Commission Act.” (Emphasis added.) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1979, ch. 121½, par. 262.) By the express terms of the section a misrepresentation made by a broker for a party as to a material fact in a real estate sale constitutes an actionable violation of the Consumer Fraud Act. Question could be raised as to whether even the Consumer Fraud Act applies to sales of real estate. The act is designated as follows: “An Act to protect consumers and borrowers and businessmen against fraud, unfair methods of competition and unfair or deceptive acts or practices in the conduct of any trade or commerce * * *." (Emphasis added.) In Steinberg v. Chicago Medical School (1977), 69 Ill. 2d 320, 371 N.E.2d 634, the court held that an applicant to a private medical school, not being a consumer, borrower, or businessman had no standing to sue under the act for a breach by the school of its stated policy for granting admission. Section 1(e) of the act states: “The term ‘consumer’ means any person who purchases or contracts for the purchase of merchandise not for resale in the ordinary course of his trade or business but for his use or that of a member of his household.” (Emphasis added.) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1979, ch. 121½, par. 261(e).) Section 1(b) of the act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1979, ch. 121½, par. 261(b)), in turn, defines “merchandise” as “any objects, wares, goods, commodities, intangibles, real estate situated outside the State of Illinois, or services.” (Emphasis added.) The argument could be raised that a purchaser of domestic realty who was not a businessman or borrower would have no standing to sue. The foregoing argument is refuted by the history of the Consumer Fraud Act, however. Prior to October 1, 1973, section 2 of the act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1971, ch. 121½, par. 262) expressly limited the application of its prohibitions to sales and advertisements of merchandise and made no reference to the broader category of “any trade or commerce” as now stated in that section. Prior to October 1,1973, there was no subsection (f) to section 1 of the act defining the words “trade” and “commerce” as now provided. In fact, prior to October 1,1973, neither the word “trade” nor the word “commerce” was used anywhere in the act. By the same amendment, the stated purpose of the act was broadened to include “businessmen” as an additional group to be protected by the act. While making the foregoing changes, the General Assembly made no change in section 1(e) of the act, which limits the term “consumer” to one who purchases or contracts for the purchase of “merchandise,” nor did it change section 1(b), which does not include domestic real estate within the definition of “merchandise.”  In People ex rel. Scott v. Cardet International, Inc. (1974), 24 Ill. App. 3d 740, 321 N.E.2d 386, the appellate court held that under the act prior to October 1, 1973, where protection of businessmen was not a stated purpose of the act, it gave no coverage to the sale of a franchise. In describing the effect of the amendment, it stated that its apparent purpose was to extend protection to businessmen and to extend its scope to beyond matters connected with the sale or advertisement of merchandise to the conduct of any trade or commerce. We agree, and conclude that the broadened scope of section 2 now covers real estate transactions and permits purchasers of real estate to sue for violations of that section even though they still do not come within the definition of “consumers” set forth in the act. Any other interpretation would give the obviously unintended result of protecting businessmen who purchase real estate but giving no such protection to other citizens who do so. Our holding that section 2 of the Consumer Fraud Act is applicable to sales of real estate is consistent with our holding in Grimes v. Adlesperger (1978), 67 Ill. App. 3d 582, 384 N.E.2d 537, where we relied partly on section 2 of the act in affirming a decree rescinding a contract for the sale of real estate and the restaurant business conducted thereon. The basis of the rescission was grossly inaccurate information concerning previous gross sales of the business given to the purchaser in a booklet put out by a multiple listing service. We also held neither the mental state of the person making a misrepresentation nor the diligence of the party injured to check as to the accuracy of the misrepresentation to be material to the existence of a cause of action for that misrepresentation under section 2. We follow that precedent here.  Count VI is not a model of clarity. However, because the main reason for its dismissal was that the court believed the legislation upon which it was based to be inapplicable, we do not affirm upon the basis of a lack of clarity that could be cured by amendment. The count alleged that defendant Madsen had been negligent in his misrepresentations and also that they were violative of the statutes. Although we have determined that his mental state was immaterial as to a violation of the Consumer Fraud Act, we do not consider the count to sound in negligence. It claimed statutory violations, and the negligence allegation was surplusage. Although two misrepresentations were alleged, they both arose out of the same transaction and did not make the count duplicitous. Winn v. Underwood (1945), 325 Ill. App. 297, 60 N.E.2d 116. For the reasons stated we affirm the dismissal of count IV and reverse the dismissal of count VI. The case is remanded to the circuit court of Vermilion County for further proceedings. Affirmed in part, reversed in part, and remanded. MILLS, P. J., concurs,

=== CASE 9737725 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:33:02.864584+00 ===

Mr. JUSTICE TRAPP, concurring in part and dissenting in part: The majority opinion agrees that the pleadings limit this action to an “innocent misrepresentation” in the context of a careless statement made without knowledge. I cannot agree that either the Consumer Fraud and Deceptive Business Practices Act (Consumer Fraud) or the Uniform Deceptive Trade Practices Act (Deceptive Practices) is properly applicable to such a transaction. In plain language, a single “innocent misrepresentation” is not a “practice” in the sense of a “repeated or customary action” or “the usual way of doing something.” Webster’s Seventh New Collegiate Dictionary. Section 2 of the Consumer Fraud Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1979, ch. 121*2, par. 262) is stated as: “[U]nfair or deceptive acts or practices, including but not limited to the use or employment of any deception, fraud, false pretense, false promise, misrepresentation or the concealment, suppression or omission of any material fact, with intent that others rely upon the concealment, suppression or omission of such material fact, or the use or employment of any practice described in Section 2 of the ‘Uniform Deceptive Trade Practices Act’, * * *." Upon the face of the expressions employed, i.e., deception, fraud, false pretense and concealment, the language of the statute expressly contemplates a mental state. This court has stated as much in Scott v. Association for Childbirth at Home, International (1980), 85 Ill. App. 3d 311, 318,407 N.E.2d 71, 76. Reviewing the words employed in this act, the court stated: “It is noteworthy that conduct characterized by the latter words usually involves a mens re upon the part of the actor, while no wrongful intent or knowledge by the actor is necessary for conduct to produce a result which can be deemed to be ‘unfair.’ In Colautti, the court ruled legislation subjecting physicians to criminal liability for performing abortions upon viable fetuses under certain circumstances to be void for vagueness. The court noted that the lack of a definite mens re requirement in a prohibitory statute compounds its problems of clarity.” 85 Ill. App. 3d 311, 318. The conduct alleged in this complaint obviously does not come within the conduct specifically described in the Consumer Fraud Act, sections 262A through 262N. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1979, ch. 121½, pars. 262A through 262N.) Section 2 of the Consumer Fraud Act undertakes to incorporate the use or employment of any practice described in the Deceptive Practices Act. It is fairly to be said that the complaint does not allege any “practice” on the part of the defendant. By its language, section 2 of the Uniform Deceptive Trade Practices Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1979, ch. 121M, par. 312) in subparagraphs 1 through 11 are directed to supplying goods and services and there is no contention that they are applicable here. At least two of the subparagraphs specifically call for an “intent” to achieve a stated purpose. Without separate analyses of the language of the several subparagraphs, it is fair to say that at least the several subparagraphs call for a mental state of knowledge. To charge the conduct pleaded here with liability, the majority opinion undertakes to employ the language found in subparagraph 12 of section 2 of the Uniform Deceptive Trade Practices Act: “[A]ny other conduct which similarly creates a likelihood of confusion or of misunderstanding.” (Emphasis added.) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1979, ch. 121½, par. 312.) By the rule of statutory construction described as ejusdem generis, the word “similarly” limits the “other conduct” of subparagraph 12 to that of like kind or quality as that stated in the several subparagraphs of that act. In Farley v. Marion Power Shovel Co. (1975), 60 Ill. 2d 432, 328 N.E.2d 318, the supreme court was asked to employ its liberal construction of the words “or other structure” so as to bring a mammoth movable shovel within the Structural Work Act. The court, however, applied the rule of construction, saying: ‘The doctrine of ejusdem generis is that where a statute or document specifically enumerates several classes of persons or things and immediately following, and classed with such enumeration, the clause embraces “other” persons or things, the word “other” will generally be read as “other such like,” so that the persons or things therein comprised may be read as ejusdem generis “with,” and not of a quality superior to or different from, those specifically enumerated.’ ” 60 Ill. 2d 432, 436, 328 N.E.2d 318, 320. The pleaded conduct, upon its face, is not conduct of the kind or quality which appears in either section 2 of the Consumer Fraud Act, or section 2 of the Uniform Deceptive Trade Practices Act. One finds statements in a number of opinions to the effect that subparagraph 12 of section 2 of the Uniform Deceptive Trade Practices Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1979, ch. 121½, par; 312) is to be given, a broad application and that the good or bad faith of the seller is “not important.” Upon examination, such statements prove to be essentially dicta for the reason that upon review the pleading alleged, or the evidence demonstrated, conduct specifically described in either or both of the respective acts. In Fitzgerald v. Chicago Title & Trust Co. (1978), 72 Ill. 2d 179, 380 N.E.2d 790, the opinion reports that the complaint alleged intentional, deliberate and deceptive concealment of the fact of a practice. In Perrin v. Pioneer National Title Insurance Co. (1980), 83 Ill. App. 3d 664, 404 N.E.2d 508, the complaint alleged intentional concealment and misrepresentation. A division of this court referred to such language in Grimes v. Adlesperger (1978), 67 Ill. App. 3d 582, 384 N.E.2d 537. In that case, however, the trial court found that the plaintiff had engaged in a misrepresentation which he undertook to explain, but failed to explain plausibly. In Williams v. Bruno Appliance & Furniture Mart, Inc. (1978), 62 Ill. App. 3d 219, 379 N.E.2d 52, the complaint alleged fraud, as well as an advertisement with intent not to sell as advertised. In Edgewater Beach Apartments Corp. v. Edgewater Beach Management Co. (1973), 12 Ill. App. 3d 526, 299 N.E.2d 548, the trial court found that the defendant acted with full knowledge. One finds that the theme of broad interpretation and the use of the “other conduct” language of subparagraph 12 of the Uniform Deceptive Trade Practices Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1979, ch. 121½, par. 312(12)) is most extensively discussed in American Buyers Club of Mt. Vernon, Illinois, Inc. v. Honecker (1977), 46 Ill. App. 3d 252, 361 N.E.2d 1370. There, however, the defendant pleaded fraúd in the inducement to entering the contract, and the trial court found that misrepresentations had been made. A substantial search of the decisions of our courts has failed to discover an instance where an action under the respective acts has been founded upon allegations of the nature here pleaded. I would conclude that the duty of this defendant is correctly stated in Lyons v. Christ Episcopal Church (1979), 71 Ill. App. 3d 257, 389 N.E.2d 623. I concur in the majority opinion in its affirmance of the dismissal of paragraph 15 of count VI. I dissent from the conclusion reached and the reversal of the trial court’s dismissal of paragraph 14 of count VI, and I would affirm the trial court.

=== CASE 9737726 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:33:10.025943+00 ===

HUNTER, Justice.
This case is before this Court upon the petition to transfer of plaintiffs-appellees B. & S. Sandock, Inc., et al. The trial court awarded the plaintiffs compensatory and punitive damages arising out of a breach of contract by the defendant-appellant F. D. Borkholder Company, Inc. The Court of Appeals, Third District, affirmed the award of compensatory damages but reversed the punitive damages award in an opinion authored by Judge Staton. Sandock v. F. D. Borkholder Co., (1979) Ind.App., 396 N.E.2d 955. Judge Garrard dissented from the majority’s treatment of the punitive damages issue.
Transfer is now granted, and the decision and opinion of the Court of Appeals are hereby vacated. The relevant facts were summarized by Judge Staton as follows:
“B. & S. Sandock, Inc. (Sandock) and F. D. Borkholder Company, Inc. (Borkholder), entered into a contract for the construction by Borkholder of a concrete block addition to Sandock’s pre-existing structure. The addition was to be used as a retail showroom and warehouse in furtherance of San-dock’s furniture and carpet business. San-dock was unable to use the addition for its intended use, however, because of a recurring moisture problem on the inside of one of the walls. Sandock filed suit seeking both compensatory and punitive damages. After trial by the court, Sandock was awarded compensatory damages in the amount of $8,711.69 and punitive damages in the amount of $6,500.00.”
On appeal, Borkholder contended that:
1. The judgment was not supported by sufficient evidence;
2. The trial court erred in not granting Borkholder’s motion for an involuntary dismissal; and
3. The trial court erred in awarding punitive damages.
We adopt the opinion of the Court of Appeals which affirms the trial court on the first two issues, as follows:
*569“I.
“Sufficiency of the Evidence
“Borkholder’s argument with respect to the sufficiency of the evidence is twofold. First, Borkholder argues that because Sandock has been able to use certain areas of the addition for storage, Sandock was not damaged at all. This argument is without merit. Because of the unsightliness of one of the walls, Sandock was not able to use the addition as a showroom. Because of the dampness, Sandock was only able to use part of the addition for storage. Additionally, the useful life of the addition was less than it would have been had the construction proceeded pursuant to the plans and specifications embodied in the contract. Sandock proved that it had been damaged.
“Borkholder’s second attack on the sufficiency of the evidence concerns testimonial conflicts as to the cause of the moisture problem. Several witnesses testified that the moisture problem was not attributable to Borkholder’s work, while others testified that it was. Borkholder maintains that because of that conflict, the judgment was not supported by sufficient evidence. In propounding this argument, Borkholder has misconstrued the trial court’s function as the finder of facts and our function as a court of appellate review. The case was heard below without the intervention of a jury. Accordingly, it was the function of the trial court to weigh the evidence and assess credibility in an effort to resolve the factual disputes. When, as here, the sufficiency of the evidence is raised as an issue on appeal, our function is to determine if there is substantial evidence of probative value to support the judgment based on an examination of the evidence most favorable to the party that prevailed below together with the reasonable inferences that can be drawn therefrom. Peters v. Davidson, Inc., (1977), Ind.App., 359 N.E.2d 556. Such an examination in the instant case discloses that the judgment is supported by sufficient evidence.
“II.
“Involuntary Dismissal
“At the close of Sandock’s case-in-chief, Borkholder moved for an involuntary dismissal. Involuntary dismissals are provided for in TR. 41(B), which reads in pertinent part as follows:
“ ‘After the plaintiff or party with the burden of proof upon an issue, in an action tried by the court without a jury, has completed the presentation of his evidence thereon, the opposing party, without waiving his right to offer evidence in the event the motion is not granted, may move for a dismissal on the ground that considering all the evidence and reasonable inferences therefrom in favor of the party to whom the motion is directed, to be true, there is no substantial evidence of probative value to sustain the material allegations of the party against whom the motion is directed. The court as trier of the facts may then determine them and render judgment against the plaintiff or may decline to render any judgment until the close of all the evidence . . . . ’
“Borkholder contends that there was no substantial evidence of probative value concerning the amount of the damages that were incurred by Sandock and that the trial court therefore erred in not granting the motion.2 [Footnote 1 is omitted.]
*570“Sandock offered testimony from which the trial court could reasonably have concluded that the addition was not suitable for the purposes contemplated by the contract. Sandock offered further testimony that the amount required to remedy the defects would be slightly in excess of $17,-000. There was, therefore, sufficient evidence to overcome Borkholder’s motion for an involuntary dismissal.”
The Court of Appeals also determined that Borkholder’s contention that the judgment was contrary to law was waived for failing to comply with Ind.R.Ap.P. 8.3(A)(7) and denied Sandock’s request for an assessment of damages against Bork-holder pursuant to Ind.R.Ap.P. 15(G) for bringing a frivolous appeal. We concur in those dispositions.
III.
Punitive Damages
The Court of Appeals cited our decision in Hibschman Pontiac, Inc. v. Batchelor, (1977) 266 Ind. 310, 362 N.E.2d 845, for the proposition that punitive damages are recoverable in breach of contract actions only when a separate tort accompanies the breach or tort-like conduct mingles in the breach. Here, prior to the execution of the contract, Sandock representatives expressed their concern about moisture on the walls. Under the terms of the contract, they were to pay $200 for plans to be drawn up by Bork-holder’s architect. The contract provided that all labor and material would be furnished in accordance with specifications. Sandock was given a copy of the plans. However, contrary to these plans, the top and bottom courses of block forming the one wall were not filled with concrete, thus constituting latent variances. Furthermore, the roofline was shortened which represented an additional deviation from the plans.
There was testimony that the cut-off roofline enabled water to leak down into the top of the block wall. Other evidence indicated that the wetness problem resulted from this water percolating down through the inside of the wall, collecting at the bottom, and then rising again by capillary action. Sandock made numerous complaints but was constantly reassured by several Borkholder representatives that the problem was caused by simple condensation, a theory ultimately disproved by an on-site test conducted by the Borkholder firm. Sam Sandock testified that Freeman Bork-holder, president of the company, promised that the situation would be remedied whereupon Sandock tendered all but $1,000 of the contract price. The problem was never corrected. The Borkholder people knew, of course, that the blocks in the wall were not filled with concrete. Also, Bork-holder himself conceded that the roofline adjustment increased the likelihood of water running down into the core of the wall.
We believe that there is cogent and convincing proof that the Borkholder firm engaged in intentional wrongful acts constituting fraud, misrepresentation, deceit, and gross negligence in its dealings with San-dock. Hibschman Pontiac, Inc., supra. Ac*571cordingly, we agree with the Court of Appeals that the trial court could have concluded that separate torts accompanied the breach. Next, relying on Hibschman, the Court of Appeals attempted to identify the public interest to be served by imposing punitive damages. However, the majority could not perceive any such interest and refused to let the award stand. We disagree. As Judge Garrard stated in his dissent:
“I have no problem identifying the public interest to be served in requiring that the builders of public buildings be deterred from fraudulently disregarding building code requirements or those contained in the plans and specifications they have agreed to comply with.” Sandock v. Borkholder, supra, at 959.
The purpose of punitive damages generally is to punish the wrongdoer and to deter him and others from engaging in similar conduct in the future. Indiana & Michigan Electric Co. v. Stevenson, (1977) Ind.App., 363 N.E.2d 1254; Jos. Schutz Brewing Co. v. Central Beverage Co., (1977) Ind.App., 359 N.E.2d 566. An award of such damages is particularly appropriate in proper cases involving consumer fraud. Jones v. Abriani, (1976) 169 Ind.App. 556, 350 N.E.2d 635; Capitol Dodge, Inc. v. Haley, (1972) 154 Ind.App. 1, 288 N.E.2d 766.
The building contractor occupies a position of trust with members of the public for whom he agrees to do the desired construction. Few people are knowledgeable about this industry, and most are not aware of the techniques that must be employed to produce a sound structure. Necessarily, they rely on the expertise of the builder. Here, the builder has been found to have engaged in fraudulent or deceptive practices by constructing a building with latent deviations from the plans which resulted in damage to the owner. Further, the builder has attempted to disclaim responsibility for such damage when it may be inferred that it knew or should have known that its work was the cause. Under these circumstances, certainly the imposition of punitive damages furthers the public interest.
We find no reversible error in the judgment of the trial court and the judgment should be affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.
GIVAN, C. J., and PIVARNIK, J., concur.
DeBRULER, J., dissents with opinion in which PRENTICE, J., concurs.
. “Borkholder presented evidence after making the motion. Generally, the subsequent presentation of evidence constitutes a waiver of any error in the denial of such a motion. City of Indianapolis v. Nickel (1975), 165 Ind.App. 250, 331 N.E.2d 760. And, generally, a conclusion by this Court that the evidence was sufficient to support the judgment would eliminate the need for a discussion of the propriety of the denial of a motion for an involuntary dismissal. Winston v. State (1975), 165 Ind.App. 369, 332 N.E.2d 229.
“Here, however, the trial commenced on September 6, 1977. After two days of testimony the trial was recessed for five months. The trial resumed on February 14, 1978. Sandock concluded its case-in-chief the next day, at which time Borkholder made its motion. The trial judge indicated that because of the five month recess he would have to review the first *570two days’ testimony before he could rule on the motion. Because of the congestion of the court calendar and because of the delay that would result if the trial was recessed so that the judge could review the earlier testimony, the judge asked Borkholder if it would present its evidence with the understanding that he would reserve ruling on the motion until he had an opportunity to review the prior testimony. Borkholder consented and then presented its case-in-chief. The motion was implicitly denied when judgment was entered for Sandock. Under these circumstances we do not believe that Borkholder’s decision to proceed constituted a waiver of any error in the denial of the motion. Nor is our conclusion in Section 1, supra, that the judgment was supported by sufficient evidence dispositive of this issue. In reviewing the sufficiency of the evidence, we were able to examine all of the evidence most favorable to Sandock, including that evidence elicited during Borkholder’s case-in-chief and during rebuttal. Our review of the denial of the motion for involuntary dismissal, however, is limited to an examination of the evidence most favorable to Sandock which was presented prior to the filing of the motion.
“Hence, we will proceed to discuss the denial of Borkholder’s motion for an involuntary dismissal.

=== CASE 9737727 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:33:10.030723+00 ===

DeBRULER, Justice,
dissenting.
The elements of a claim for fraud include false representation of a present or past fact by defendant, knowledge of falsity in the defendant, action in reliance thereupon by plaintiff, and injury resulting to plaintiff from such misrepresentation. Automobile Underwriters v. Rich, (1944) 222 Ind. 384, 53 N.E.2d 775. A false representation of fact may take the form of an opinion depending upon the surrounding circumstances. Rochester Bridge Co. v. McNeill, (1919) 188 Ind. 432, 122 N.E. 662. The evidence most favorable to the finding of fraud in this case is that there were several deviations between the plans and specifications for the building and the actual building as erected. These deviations were discovered by the plaintiff before the contract price was paid. Defendant was confronted with the deviations and stated that he would correct them. Upon the representation plaintiff paid the major portion of the contract price reserving a minor portion as security for corrections. The corrections were not made. This evidence establishes no more than one, perhaps two, breaches of contract by defendant. There is nothing beyond the breaches upon which to predicate a finding of fraud.
There is no false representation of fact by defendant, with scienter, resulting in injurious action in reliance. The damages awarded plaintiff on the count for breach of contract were complete. That award made plaintiff whole. It healed all wounds to plaintiff resulting as the natural consequences of the defendant’s breach of contract. That award fulfilled plaintiff’s expectancies legitimately arising from the contract it made, to the extent that the *572recovery of money in the aftermath of a breach can do so.
I likewise dissent on the basis of the opinion of Justice Prentice in Vernon Fire & Casualty Insurance Co. v. Sharp, (1976) 264 Ind. 599, 349 N.E.2d 173, in which I concurred. The law should treat torts occurring in the season of a breach of contract as separate wrongs. Furthermore, I continue to be troubled with the absence of an express limitation of the extent of punitive damages. Hibschman Pontiac, Inc. v. Batchelor, (1977) 266 Ind. 310, 362 N.E.2d 845 (Concurring Opinion). They should be no more than is necessary to deter unwanted behavior. In this regard it may be noted that the Legislature has made the judgment that the crime of theft in its class D felony manifestation should carry a penalty of two (2) years imprisonment and a fine of not more than $10,000.
PRENTICE, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9737728 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:33:12.138883+00 ===

PRENTICE, Justice.
Defendant (Appellant) was convicted in a jury trial of conspiracy to commit battery with a deadly weapon, Ind.Code § 35-41-*5735-2 (Burns 1979) and of being an habitual offender, Ind.Code § 35-50-2-8 (Burns 1979). He was sentenced to thirty-five (35) years imprisonment. This direct appeal presents six issues relating to jury instructions given and refused, in addition to an assignment that the evidence was insufficient, but because we have determined that there was insufficient evidence from which the jury could find the defendant guilty upon the conspiracy charged, we reverse the judgment, and it is unnecessary for us to address the instructions issues.
The information filed in this case reads in pertinent part:
“On or about the 21st day of January, 1978, in Fountain County, in the State of Indiana, David Woods, Rick Kiger and Larry Kiger, each with intent to commit a felony, to — wit: Touch another in a rude, insolent, or angry manner, with a deadly weapon, to-wit: Clubs, did agree with each other to commit the said felony, namely Battery with a Deadly Weapon, and the said David Woods and Rick Kiger did perform an overt act, to-wit: Exit Wood’s (sic) car armed with clubs in furtherance of the agreement, to-wit: To commit battery.”
The elements of a charge of conspiracy are an agreement between two or more persons to commit the felony charged, and an overt act performed in furtherance of the agreement. Ind.Code § 35-41-5-2 (Burns 1979); Coughlin v. State (1950) 228 Ind. 393, 395, 92 N.E.2d 718, 719; Johnson v. State (1935) 208 Ind. 89, 95, 194 N.E. 619, 621. The existence of the agreement may be inferred from the conduct of the parties or proved by circumstantial evidence. Patterson v. State (1979) 386 N.E.2d 936, 942, cert. denied (1979) 444 U.S. 935, 100 S.Ct. 283, 62 L.Ed.2d 194; Robertson v. State (1952) 231 Ind. 368, 369, 108 N.E.2d 711, 712-13. But it cannot be inferred from the commission of the criminal act alone, or from the overt act alone taken pursuant to the criminal activity.
The conspiracy charge arose from a Saturday night gang fight participated in by teen aged boys and young men in Veeders-burg. The fight was a culmination of earlier hostilities between Kenny Kiger and Randy Day and between Junior Shumaker and the defendant. Kenny Kiger and Day had had an altercation at school on the preceding day and another earlier Saturday evening at the town skating rink. The defendant, and Rick Kiger had had an unrelated altercation, also at the skating rink, with Junior Shumaker earlier Saturday evening.
During their incident at the skating rink, Day called Kenny a seemingly innocuous name, which apparently was nevertheless, offensive to Kenny. He also struck Kenny twice. Kenny did not fight back but said. “I’ll find my older brother (meaning Rick Kiger) and we’ll see about that later.”
Delilah Rusk, a fourteen or fifteen year old girl, was with Kenny both at the time of the altercation at school and the one at the skating rink.
The only direct evidence of a conspiracy came from her and was as follows:
Following the fight at the rink, Delilah and Kenny left in search of Kenny’s brother, Rick. They found him at Delilah’s home, where he had just arrived in the company of the defendant and Larry Kiger. The three were in the defendant’s automobile. Meanwhile, Day had repaired to a nearby poolroom and joined other young friends there, J. R. Sullivan, Percy Sandlin and Greg Fleck. Apparently this was known to Delilah and Kenny.
Delilah and Kenny got into the defendant’s automobile and said that Day was looking for them and that he had struck Kenny. Rick said, “Well, I don’t want nobody picking on my little brother,” and “Well, let’s just go down and get ’em.”
Defendant, accompanied by Rick, Larry, Kenny and Delilah drove directly to the poolroom a short distance away. On the way, one of the boys asked how many there were, and Kenny replied, lots of them, to which Rick responded, “Well, we can just go to Cates (a neighboring town) and get enough to take care of them.”
*574The defendant parked the automobile at the front of the establishment, where they could see inside and the occupants of the poolroom could see them. Upon arrival of defendant and his companions, they again became concerned about their being outnumbered by the group inside. The defendant exhibited a chain with a handle attached to it and said, “I got something to take care of that.” The others looked about the automobile, as if searching for weapons, but the witness saw no other weapons. Cates was mentioned again, and they considered going there for reinforcements, but no decision was made.
For some ten or fifteen minutes the two adversary groups contented themselves with shouting obscenities and making obscene gestures at each other. Ultimately, Delilah stepped into the poolroom and shouted, to the group, but to no one in particular, “They’re ready any time you are!” and returned to the automobile.
Meanwhile, two of the boys inside the pool hall had gone to a nearby truck repair garage and advised Mark Hinote, Junior Shumaker and Daniel Shumaker, that the defendant and his friends were waiting for them in front of the poolroom. Hinote and the Shumakers walked to the scene.
The group inside the poolroom did not respond immediately to Delilah’s message, but did so just as Hinote and the Shumak-ers arrived. They exited from the poolroom, and Rick Kiger upon seeing that they were substantially outnumbered, said “Let’s go to Cates. Tell them we’ll be back.” Simultaneously, the defendant started to drive away.
There was packed snow and ice in the streets, and as the defendant moved the automobile to leave, Randy Day threw a large ice clod or snow ball, which struck the windshield of the automobile. With that, the defendant stopped the vehicle,1 saying, “That son of a bitch has had it!” and got out of the car. Rick and Kenny Kiger immediately followed, and a general melee broke out. Delilah and Larry Kiger remained in the automobile. Defendant had an iron rod, also referred to as a “pipe” and as a “bar,” identified as an automobile jack handle extension. He was swinging it at the crowd from the poolroom. As they scattered, he went towards Mark Hinote with it, but a spectator interceded and disarmed him before he could strike anybody.
Rick Kiger had a chain to which a handle was attached when he got out of the vehicle. He started swinging it at Kenny Parker, missing him on the first try but hitting him in the head on the second attempt. Parker, however, with assistance from Junior Shumaker, took the chain away from Rick and struck him with it.
Kenny Kiger swung a weapon variously described as a club and as a stick at Randy Day. Day, however, grabbed it and fended the blow. At the same time, Sullivan stabbed Kenny with a knife. Kenny ran up the street yelling that he had been stabbed, and the brawl ended.
It is the State’s position that a conspiracy, by Defendant and Rick and Kenneth Kiger, to commit battery with a deadly weapon could be inferred from the circumstances. Its argument is as follows:
“Certainly a conspiracy can be inferred from the prior arguments between the parties, the fact that the younger Kiger went to get his brother before he would fight, the fact that all the co-defendants sat in the car issuing challenges and sent Delilah to report that they were ready to fight. If any occupant of the car had not chosen to become involved in the attack, there was time to leave the car before it began. It was reasonable to infer from their actions that they planned to attack those people in the pool hall. Defendant does not deny that the weapons were ‘deadly weapons’ as charged in the information. There is also no disputing the fact that Defendant and his co-conspirators committed the necessary ‘overt acts’ required by statute. Rick Kiger even *575committed an actual battery which is more evidence than is required to be shown in a conspiracy charge.”
We are of the opinion, however, that only an agreement to brawl can be inferred from the evidence most favorable to the State. Although paraphernalia that, in context, can be regarded as deadly weapons were used by the defendant and his companions, we find no evidence from which an agreement among them to do so can be found beyond a reasonable doubt.
“Upon a review for sufficient evidence, this Court will look only to the evidence most favorable to the State and all reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom. If the existence of each element of the crime charged may be found therefrom, beyond a reasonable doubt, the verdict will not be disturbed.” (citation omitted). “In such a review, we will not weigh conflicting evidence nor will we judge the credibility of the witnesses.” (citation omitted). Loyd v. State (1980) Ind., 398 N.E.2d 1260, 1264.
Upon a claim of insufficient evidence, however, it does become our duty to examine the evidence closely, not with a view towards resolving conflicts thereon, but for the purpose of determining whether or not, after resolving all reasonable doubts in favor of the verdict, it may be said that, upon such evidence, a reasonable man could have reached such verdict, beyond a reasonable doubt.
In the leading case in this State establishing the duty of this Court to so review the evidence, Baker v. State (1956) 236 Ind. 55, 138 N.E.2d 641, we said:
“In considering the standard by which we review the evidence where it is challenged as being insufficient to sustain a verdict or finding, this court has often said there must be substantial evidence of probative value before we can decide an accused has been proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. ‘This last rule places the evidence before the court on appeal, not for the purpose of weighing it, or for the purpose of determining the facts when there is actual conflict, but for the purpose of deciding, as a question of law, whether or not there is substantive evidence in support of the required material facts essential to a conviction. It is not enough to sustain a conviction that the evidence, when given full faith and credit, may warrant a suspicion or amount to a scintilla.” 236 Ind. at 60, 138 N.E.2d 641.
“ ‘... We use the word “substantial” as meaning more than “seeming or imaginary.” ’ ” 236 Ind. at 60, 138 N.E.2d at 641.
“The rule of law defining proof beyond a reasonable doubt has been well settled for many years and requires each juror to be so convinced by the evidence that as a prudent man he would feel safe to act upon such conviction in matters of the highest concern and importance to his own dearest and most important interests, under circumstances where there was no compulsion or coercion upon him to act at all. Chambers v. State (1953), 232 Ind. 349, 356, 111 N.E.2d 816; Morgan v. State (1921), 190 Ind. 411, 130 N.E. 528; Bradley v. State (1870), 31 Ind. 492. The standard of a prudent man is that of a reasonable man. If different persons might reasonably arrive at different conclusions from that reached by the trial jury, the verdict will not be set aside for that reason. Davidson v. State (1933), 205 Ind. 564, 576, 187 N.E. 376. On the other hand if no reasonable man could find the evidence has proved an accused guilty beyond a reasonable doubt, a verdict would not be sustained by sufficient evidence.” 236 Ind. at 61, 138 N.E.2d 641.
We further quoted, with approval, from State v. Gregory (1936), 339 Mo. 133, 96 S.W.2d 47, as follows:
“ * * * ‘Now since the test of substantial evidence is whether a jury reasonably could find the issue thereon, the result must depend in some measure upon the degree of persuasion required. In a criminal case liberty and sometimes life are involved, and there cannot be a conviction *576except upon a finding of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. Necessarily, therefore, it becomes the duty of an appellate court as a matter of law to decide whether the evidence was sufficient to induce a belief of the defendant’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt in the minds of jurors of average reason and intelligence. * * * In no other way can the rights of the defendant be protected. It would be an incongruous situation if the court were compelled to let a conviction stand as being supported by evidence warranting a verdict of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, when for any reason made manifest on the record the court is convinced the evidence reasonably could not support a conviction.’ ” Baker v. State, supra, 236 Ind. 55, 62-63, 138 N.E.2d 641.
We borrow no problem concerning the credibility of the testimony from the State’s chief witness, Delilah Rusk. Some of her most incriminating testimony was the product of leading questions reciting the prosecutor’s conclusions as to her prior answers. In some instances, however, the recited conclusions were not fairly inferable from the prior answers and, in fact were in conflict with them. For example:
Q. “Did anyone else find any weapons?”
A. “I think so but I wasn’t looking. I couldn’t have saw it.”
Q. “Now after Dave pulled this out, the other members in your car also looked for weapons in the car.”
A. “Yes.”
We are, therefore, left to wonder whether it was the witness or the prosecutor who testified that the boys looked for weapons at that time. There had been no previous testimony that the defendants “looked for weapons.”
Be that as it may, however, and crediting all such testimony to Delilah and assuming it to be true, we, nevertheless, find no evidence of a conspiracy by the defendant and his companions to attack any of their adversaries with clubs, in particular, or with deadly weapons, in general.
A conspiracy entails an intelligent and deliberate agreement, a meeting of the minds. Although such an agreement may be inferred from the circumstances and need not be proved by direct evidence, it must, nevertheless, be proved. A conspiracy may not be established by mere suspicion. Mattingly v. State (1957) 237 Ind. 326, 145 N.E.2d 650.
In reversing the Mattingly conviction, we summarized the evidence as follows:
“Giving the State the full benefit of every reasonable inference that may be drawn from the evidence above set out and summarized, there is some evidence from which the court might have concluded that (1) Wilson Mattingly and William Ausley, while returning from Evansville to Mount Vernon-in an advanced state of intoxication — and in the presence of appellant while he was driving the car, talked about places they might ‘break into,’ but there is no evidence that appellant entered into or participated in these conversations between Wilson Mattingly and William Ausley; (2) Reed’s Barber Shop was one of the places mentioned in such conversations; (3) appellant overheard and understood at least the general object of Wilson Mattingly and William Ausley’s conversations; (4)appellant drove the car-his own-and stopped it a block or so from the barber shop where Wilson Mattingly and William Ausley got out; and (5) the final decision of Wilson Mattingly and William Ausley to break into the barber shop was made after they got out of the car and out of the presence of appellant.” 237 Ind. at 338, 145 N.E.2d 650.
We concluded, “There is, we believe, also a complete lack of evidence to show a common plan or purpose * * Id. at 339, 145 N.E.2d 650.
Robertson v. State (1952) 231 Ind. 368, 108 N.E.2d 711 was similar to Mattingly v. State. The incriminating evidence was summarized and held to establish no more than a suspicion of a conspiracy by the appellant.
*577“Analyzing the evidence as summarized above, it appears that there was sufficient evidence of probative value together with certain facts from which the jury might have legally inferred that (1) the safe here involved was stolen from the place of business described in the affidavit by someone on the night of March 15, 1951; and (2) that the safe had been broken open and $1,201.90 taken from it before it was abandoned on a country road outside of Bloomington; (3) that appellant owned a Dodge truck and that the stolen safe was transported in appellant’s truck sometime between 10:10 p. m. on March 15 and eight o’clock a. m. on March 16, 1951, to the place where it was abandoned on the country road outside of Bloomington; (4) that appellant was in the place of business from which the safe was stolen for a few minutes on or about March 2, 1951; (5) that Arthur and Bowers, two of the alleged conspirators, were in the place of business from which the safe was stolen on or about March 6, 1951; (6) that appellant had known Arthur and Bowers for a number of years, and that the three of them were together frequently both before and after March 15, 1951 in taverns other than the one from which the safe was stolen, and on occasions in appellant’s truck, and at one time in his home; and (7) that Bowers, one of the alleged conspirators, had some connection with the theft.” 231 Ind. 375-76. 108 N.E.2d 711.
“ * * * There is no evidence directly proving an agreement between appellant and Arthur and Bowers, or either of them, to steal the safe in question, nor is the state of facts here presented such that an agreement can be legally inferred.” Id. at 376, 108 N.E.2d 711.
Throughout the Indiana cases wherein we have examined the evidence of charged conspiracies, we have said that concurrence of sentiment and cooperative conduct in the criminal enterprise are the essential ingredients. Mattingly v. State, supra; Robertson v. State supra; Coughlin v. State (1950) 228 Ind. 393, 395, 92 N.E.2d 718.
From the evidence in the case before us, it is clear that the defendant and his companions agreed to engage in a brawl. It is also clear that they did engage in that brawl and in so doing assaulted their adversaries with weapons, albeit unsuccessfully. However, there is not one iota of evidence that there was an agreement, a meeting of the minds, a concurrence of sentiment, concerning the use of weapons. In fact, the evidence clearly reflects that, although the defendant indicated that he would “equalize” the adventure by use of the chain, if necessary to compensate for meeting superior numbers, and although it may be fairly inferred that the group deliberated upon the suggestion, the plan ultimately adopted was to flee the scene and enlist reinforcements in Cates. That decision had been made and the plan embarked upon when an intervening force, a clod of ice or snow thrust against the windshield, sparked a spontaneous attack by the defendant, followed immediately by the others. If we were called upon to determine whether or not the evidence warranted a conclusion that the defendant intended a battery with a weapon, we would be compelled to say that such could be fairly inferred from the use of the weapon. But a conspiracy, a meeting of the minds upon a deliberate scheme or plan cannot be inferred, beyond a reasonable doubt, from such meager evidence.
“ * * * Concurrence of sentiment and cooperative conduct in the unlawful and criminal enterprise are the essential ingredients of criminal conspiracy. There must be an agreement and there must be evidence to prove the agreement directly, or such a state of facts that an agreement may be legally inferred. Conspiracies cannot be established by the (sic) mere suspicion. Evidence of mere relationship or association between the parties does not show a conspiracy.” Coughlin v. State (1950) 228 Ind. 393, 395, 92 N.E.2d 718, and cases there cited.
“ * * * ‘ . .. The law is that the life or liberty of a citizen shall be taken only in case the right to do so is established beyond all reasonable doubt; * *
*578Penn v. State (1957) 237 Ind. 374, 379, 146 N.E.2d 240.
And while the foregoing statement is a rule for the guidance of the trier of fact, when it is apparent from an examination of the evidence and reasonable inferences favorable to the State, that no reasonable man could find guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, such a verdict is not sustained by the evidence. It is, therefore, contrary to law, and it becomes our duty to set it aside. Baker v. State, supra; Manlove v. State (1968) 250 Ind. 70, 232 N.E.2d 874.
The verdict is not sustained by the evidence. Accordingly, the judgment of the trial court is reversed.
DeBRULER and HUNTER, JJ., concur.
GIVAN, C. J., dissents with opinion in which PIVARNIK, J., concurs.
. Some of the State’s witnesses testified that the defendant’s vehicle had not yet started to move. Others, including Delilah Rusk, testified that it had. All agreed that the incendiary event was the throwing of the ice clod or snow ball.

=== CASE 2211803 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:11.998141+00 ===

90 Ill. App.3d 768 (1980)
413 N.E.2d 209
ILLINOIS VALLEY ASPHALT, INC., Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
J.F. EDWARDS CONSTRUCTION COMPANY, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 80-75.
Illinois Appellate Court  Third District.
Opinion filed November 26, 1980.
Frederick P. Kopp, of Spector, Tappa, Kopp & Nathan, of Rock Island, for appellant.
Larry D. Kuster, of Rammelkamp, Bradney, Hall & Dahman, of Jacksonville, for appellee.
Judgment affirmed.
Mr. JUSTICE STOUDER delivered the opinion of the court:
This is an appeal from a judgment of the circuit court of Henry County finding in favor of plaintiff, Illinois Valley Asphalt, Inc. (Illinois Valley), and against defendant, J.F. Edwards Construction Company (Edwards Construction). Plaintiff brought the action to recover damages caused by the refusal of the defendant to perform construction subcontract work in accordance with a bid proposal made to plaintiff.
*769 In mid-May of 1976 the State of Illinois notified contractors of its proposed construction work at Capital Airport in Springfield, Illinois. Bids for the project were to be opened at the airport on June 7, 1974, at approximately 10 a.m. Illinois Valley prepared and submitted a bid as general contractor. Edwards Construction submitted bids for the electrical subcontract work to several general contract bidders.
Plaintiff and defendant had never done business prior to this time and the first contact between the parties occurred the day before the bid letting. John Edwards, Sr., president of Edwards Construction, telephoned James Bruner, the secretary-treasurer of Illinois Valley, on June 6, 1974, inquiring as to whether Illinois Valley was interested in receiving Edwards Construction's price quotations for the electrical work. Bruner asked Edwards to call back when Edwards could give him prices. Edwards called him back at about 11:30 p.m. with firm prices. The content of the conversation is disputed, with Edwards testifying at trial that they discussed material prices and Bruner testifying there was no such discussion. It is undisputed that when Edwards asked how his prices looked, Bruner said he would have to compare them against other quotes to see how they looked.
The next contact between Edwards and Bruner occurred at the bid letting the next morning. Edwards testified that he arrived early and began to pass out letters to various contractors which confirmed Edwards Construction's price quotations for the electrical work. He gave one of Illinois Valley's representatives a letter containing a typed enclosure sheet and several pages of price quotes confirming the quotes given to Bruner the previous evening. The second paragraph of the enclosure letter stated:
"Due to the instability of copper and other critical materials priced from our suppliers and consolidated into our quotation, we must request an intent of award no later than June 10, 1974 so as to hold material pricing and make our quotation firm beyond that date."
The bids were opened and Illinois Valley was the low bidder. However, there was doubt as to whether the State would award the contract since all the bids exceeded the State's estimated costs.
Subsequent to the bid opening, Edwards followed Illinois Valley's representatives into the hallway, introduced himself, and asked Bruner how his prices were. The substance of the ensuing conversation is disputed. Edwards testified Bruner responded "Your prices are in line" and walked away. Bruner testified that he told Edwards that if Illinois Valley got the job then Edwards Construction would get the job.
There was no further contact between Illinois Valley and Edwards Construction until Illinois Valley sent Edwards Construction the subcontracts for execution. They were mailed around June 24, 1974, and *770 received around June 26 or 27. Edwards Construction returned the subcontracts on July 3, stating that its letter of June 6 had requested an intent of award by June 10 and that defendant was therefore unable to execute the contracts as submitted.
At trial both parties presented evidence as to what constitutes an intent of award in the construction industry and whether the conversation in the hallway constituted an intent of award. Illinois Valley called two witnesses who testified that the phrase "If I get a job, you have got a job" constituted an intent of award in the construction industry if given orally by a general contractor to a subcontractor. Edwards Construction called a witness who testified that the phrase "If I get the contract, you get the contract" would be an acknowledgment that the subcontractor was the low bidder. He also testified that the normal practice would be to send a letter to show an intent of award, although he conceded on cross-examination that it could be done orally.
The trial court found in favor of Illinois Valley on a theory of promissory estoppel and awarded a sum of $14,681.75. On appeal, defendant raises two issues: (1) whether the evidence establishes that plaintiff rejected defendant's bid and therefore, there was no contract as a matter of law; and (2) whether the doctrine of promissory estoppel is inapplicable in the instant case. We affirm.
 1 We initially note that defendant's first issue dealing with contract theory is irrelevant to this appeal in that plaintiff has proceeded on a theory of promissory estoppel, not contract. Promissory estoppel is a doctrine under which a plaintiff may recover without the presence of a contract, and Illinois courts have permitted suit on this theory in the absence of a contract. (See Jenkins & Boller Co. v. Schmidt Iron Works, Inc. (1976), 36 Ill. App.3d 1044, 344 N.E.2d 275; S.M. Wilson & Co. v. Prepakt Concrete Co. (1974), 23 Ill. App.3d 137, 318 N.E.2d 722.) Therefore, the absence of a contract does not preclude a recovery by plaintiff under a theory of promissory estoppel.
We now turn to the issue of whether or not promissory estoppel is appropriate in the case at bar. The elements of promissory estoppel are: (1) a promise unambiguous in terms; (2) reliance on such promise by the party to whom it is made; (3) this reliance is expected and foreseeable by the party making the promise; and (4) the one to whom the promise is made must rely on the promise to his injury. (S.M. Wilson & Co. v. Prepakt Concrete Co.) Whether or not these factors are all present is a question of fact to be determined by the trial court, and we cannot reverse the trial court's decision unless it is against the manifest weight of the evidence. In its judgment order, the court specifically made the factual finding that each element was present. The court found that on *771 June 6, Edwards Construction made a promise to Illinois Valley that was unambiguous in its terms in the form of a subcontract bid. This fact is undisputed. The court next found that Illinois Valley relied on the subcontract bid in preparing its bid to the State. This fact is also undisputed.
 2 The court next found that Illinois Valley's reliance was expected and foreseeable by Edwards Construction. It is this fact which Edwards Construction contends is against the manifest weight of the evidence. Defendant contends that the letter which was given to Illinois Valley on June 7 required that Illinois Valley make an intent of award, that Illinois Valley did not do so, and therefore, Illinois Valley could not reasonably rely on the subcontract bid. Illinois Valley contends, however, that it did make an intent of award and therefore its reliance was expected and foreseeable. In view of Bruner's testimony that he told Edwards "If I've got a job, you've got a job" and other witnesses' testimony that this constituted an intent of award in the custom and usage of the construction industry, we do not find the court's holding that Illinois Valley's reliance was expected and foreseeable to be against the manifest weight of the evidence.
The court's final finding, that Illinois Valley relied on the promise to its detriment in the sum of $14,681.75, is not disputed. Since none of the trial court's findings is against the manifest weight of the evidence, we find its holding that the defendant is liable under a theory of promissory estoppel is not against the manifest weight of the evidence.
For the abovementioned reasons, the judgment of the circuit court of Henry County is affirmed.
Affirmed.
ALLOY, P.J., and SCOTT, J., concur.

=== CASE 9737731 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:33:24.268496+00 ===

*241SHIRLEY S. ABRAHAMSON, CHIEF JUSTICE
¶ 76. (concurring). We granted review in this case to reconsider the standard of review of a circuit court's determination of competency announced in State v. Garfoot, 207 Wis. 2d 214, 558 N.W.2d 626 (1997).1 On reconsideration I conclude, as I did in my concurrence in Garfoot, that "a determination of competency, a determination of constitutional fact, should be decided by this court independently of the decisions of a circuit court or court of appeals, yet benefiting from the analy-ses of those courts and the observational advantage of the circuit court." Garfoot, 207 Wis. 2d at 231-32. The reasons for my conclusion are set forth in my Garfoot concurrence.
¶ 77. An issue raised in the petition and briefs in the present case, but not reached by the court, is whether the court of appeals is bound by the rules announced in its own published decision when this court has reversed the published decision on unrelated, independent grounds. Also unclear is the lasting effect, if any, of all or part of a court of appeals decision that has been reviewed by this court and affirmed. A decision by this court on these issues will have to await another cáse or a rule-making procedure.
¶ 78. For the reasons set forth I join the mandate but write separately.
For the reasons that the Garfoot majority opinion was viewed as being in jeopardy, see State v. Byrge, 225 Wis. 2d 702, 711 n.2, 594 N.W.2d 388 (Ct. App. 1999).

=== CASE 9737732 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:33:24.272557+00 ===

ANN WALSH BRADLEY, J.
¶ 79. (concurring). I agree with the standard of review set forth in the concurring opinion of Chief Justice Abrahamson. I write separately, however, to express my concern with that *242part of the majority opinion addressing parole eligibility information as a direct consequence of a plea.
¶ 80. The majority attempts to rein in the reach of its holding and asserts that parole eligibility information is a direct consequence only in the "limited circumstance" in which the circuit court has the statutory authority to fix the parole eligibility date under Wis. Stat. § 973.014(2). Majority op. at ¶ 67. Despite the majority's effort to narrow the reach, it nevertheless fails to address the broad implications of its holding.
¶ 81. I understand why the majority does not address the issue of retroactivity. It was neither briefed nor argued by the parties. Nevertheless, retroactive application is a critical concern because circuit courts now may face a number of collateral challenges asserting the failure to inform defendants of their parole eligibility. Implications for Truth in Sentencing purposes also may arise. The majority establishes a new legal principle yet provides little guidance to courts in addressing the ramifications of this newly articulated mandate. Accordingly, I concur.

=== CASE 9737733 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:33:24.594187+00 ===

Abrams, J.
The defendants (Associates) appeal from a judgment entered by a judge of the Superior Court ordering them to convey to the plaintiffs, Frank Kozdras and Bertha C. Kozdras, husband and wife as joint tenants, certain land in North Andover presently included in a certificate of title issued to the Associates pursuant to a decree by the Land Court. The Associates concede that the land had been owned by the plaintiffs prior to registration but claim that as a result of the registration proceedings any claim that the plaintiffs had to the land had been extinguished. The Associates argue that the evidence was insufficient to prove that they acted fraudulently. They therefore contend that the plaintiffs are not entitled to any relief, and that the judge should have entered a judgment for the defendants.
After a jury-waived trial limited to the issue of fraud,3 the judge entered findings and rulings which, in substance, concluded that the plaintiffs had proved fraud in the registration proceedings. The judge found that in the petition to register the land the Associates made statements “which are contrary to fact yet susceptible of accurate knowledge. *36These statements were made as of defendants’ own knowledge, but without such knowledge. They are technical and/or constructive fraud.” The judge, relying on our decision in State St. Bank & Trust Co. v. Beale, 353 Mass. 103 (1967), entered a judgment ordering a reconveyance of the land by the Associates to the Kozdrases. The Associates appealed from that judgment to the Appeals Court, and we caused the appeal to be transferred to this court on our own initiative, acting pursuant to G. L. c. 211 A, § 10 (A). We conclude that the judge’s findings are amply supported by the record. We therefore affirm the judgment.
We summarize the facts as they appear in the findings of the judge and in the record before us. On September 25, 1970, the Associates purchased some unimproved land by a deed which described the land conveyed as follows: “Three certain parcels of land on Salem Street and both sides of South Bradford Street, as shown on Sheets 1, 2 and 3 on a plan of land entitled: ‘Plan of Land Owned by Fuller Farm Trust, Located in North Andover, Mass., Dated January, 1970. Charles E. Cyr, Civil Engineer’ said plan being recorded in the said [North Essex] Registry of Deeds as Plan No. 6148, and containing collectively 195.9 acres more or less, according to said plan.”
At the time of the purchase the Associates through their counsel knew that the seller had deeds for only 34 of the 93.3 acres depicted on sheet 3 (the relevant portion of the Cyr plan). Counsel also knew that the assessor’s records showed the seller as the owner of only 32.6 acres in the deeded area.4 The official plan on file in the assessor’s office accurately depicted the location of the Kozdrases’ land.
*37On December 31, 1970, the Associates filed a petition in the Land Court to have their title to the land “registered and confirmed” under G. L. c. 185. In that petition they described each of the three parcels in detail by metes and bounds, with the names of the supposed abutting owners, all as shown on the plan referred to in their deed.
The plan filed by the Associates (the Cyr plan) had been prepared by a private civil engineering firm hired by the seller of the three parcels. This plan did not conform to the official assessor’s plan. A rough sketch of the parcel, which differed from the Cyr plan, was brought to the assessor’s office for certification of the names of the adjoining owners. The Kozdras plot was shown on the rough sketch as an abutting parcel. The assessor checked the plan submitted by the Associates to see if all the abutters were listed on the plan, then signed it.5 The Cyr plan, however, included twelve acres owned by the Kozdrases in the parcel to be registered. This was the map that was filed by the Associates with the petition for registration. See G. L. c. 185, § 33.6
The petition for registration described the parcel shown on the plan (sheet 3) filed with the Land Court as bound “Northerly and Northwesterly by land now or formerly of Frank Kozdras, 1113.75 feet.” By statute, the Associates *38were required to state in their petition “the names and addresses of the adjoining owners and occupants, if known; and if not known, [to] state what search has been made to find them.” G. L. c. 185, § 28, as amended by St. 1971, c. 423, § 3. The list which the Associates filed included the name and address of Frank Kozdras. The Associates also listed a mortgage and two easements which affected the parcel but made no reference to the ownership of any right, title or interest in the land by the Kozdrases.
The Land Court, as required by G. L. c. 185, § 37, referred the petition for registration to one of its title examiners to “search the records and investigate all facts stated in the petition, or otherwise brought to his notice, and [to] file in the case a report thereon, concluding with a certificate of his opinion upon the title.” The same statute provided that “[i]f the opinion of the examiner is adverse to the petitioner, he shall be allowed by the court a reasonable time in which to elect to proceed further or to withdraw his petition. The election shall be made in writing . . . .”7 The report of the examiner which was filed with the recorder is not a part of the record before us. However, it must have been adverse to the Associates in some respect because the Associates filed an election, under G. L. c. 185, § 37, to proceed further with the petition.
As a result of the Associates’ election, notice of the proceedings was published. G. L. c. 185, § 38.8 Additionally, the Land Court had a copy of the notice sent by registered mail to Frank Kozdras, as required by G. L. c. 185, § 39. The notice, as published, and as mailed to and received by Frank Kozdras,9 contained virtually the same description of *39land which was contained in the petition filed by the Associates, and listed Kozdras as an owner of abutting land. This was the only notice received by the Kozdrases. They had no notice that their land was actually included in the plan that was filed and used to identify the parcel being registered.10 The notice gave no indication that the Cyr plan differed from the plan in the assessor’s office. Nothing in the plan filed or the notice sent gave any indication of the fact that the Associates knew that their seller had deeds for less than 34 of the 93.3 acres shown on the relevant section (sheet 3) of the Cyr plan.
The notice sent made reference only to the Cyr plan as filed with the petition in the Land Court. It also stated that any person who desired “to make any objection or defense to said petition” had to file a written appearance and answer with the Land Court on or before August 23, 1971, and that “[ujnless an appearance is so filed by or for you, your default will be recorded, the said petition will be taken as confessed and you will be forever barred from contesting said petition or any decree entered thereon.”
Frank Kozdras took his notice to an attorney who advised him that since he was an abutter, he did not have to do anything with regard to the registration of the land or concern himself further with it. Frank Kozdras, therefore, filed no appearance in the Land Court proceedings, which culminated with the entry of a decree on May 24, 1973, for the confirmation and registration of title of the Associates in and to the land involved in the petition.
Two years later, in 1975, the Kozdrases learned for the first time that the petition by the Associates for the confirmation and registration of title, the description of the land covered thereby, and the Cyr plan filed with the petition, had included 12 acres of land actually owned by them. On *40November 19, 1975, the Kozdrases commenced the present proceeding by a complaint which concluded in part that the Associates “knew or had reason to know that part of the land which they were seeking to register belonged to the plaintiffs [the Kozdrases], or that the plaintiffs claimed an interest therein”; that the Associates’ Land Court petition “did not disclose that they knew that the plaintiffs claimed an interest in said land sought to be registered”; and that the Associates “were under a duty to disclose in said petition all adverse interests claimed in said lands, whether they be legitimate or otherwise.”
The Associates filed a motion for summary judgment on the issue of the Superior Court jurisdiction “to entertain the action.” After the motion for summary judgment was heard, the motion judge limited the plaintiffs to the issue of fraud. See note 3, supra. The matter was tried before a judge of the Superior Court, jury waived, and the judge made the following findings. “The petition for registration contains statements which are not true. The certificate concerning adjoining owners is not true. The sketch with the certificate concerning adjoining owners is not true.
“The Land Court Plan filed by defendants is erroneous. It does not show the land and its ownership as it really is in fact.
“Twelve acres belong to the plaintiffs. In this trial before me defendants made no real denial of this. They now know it is so. The testimony of the Title Examiner engaged by the plaintiffs clearly shows that the land belongs to the plaintiffs. An analysis of the Assessor’s Plans shows that the land belongs to the plaintiffs.
“There is no intentional wrongdoing. But statements were made by the defendants through their agents in the petition to register the land as above set forth which are contrary to fact yet susceptible of accurate knowledge. These statements were made as of defendants’ own knowledge, but without such knowledge. They are technical and/or constructive fraud.
*41“Plaintiffs relied on the statements in notice which resulted from statements in Land Court petition. The defendants have land to which they have no right or justifiable claim. The untrue statements, which amount to technical fraud, lulled the plaintiffs into inaction. These statements remain active and important throughout registration. They materially affect the outcome. When one listens to the Title Examiner testify and studies her plan, it seems incredible that this could have happened. What is said here is not read in any way as any reflection on the Land Court. The Land Court was put in the same position as were the plaintiffs.” The trial judge concluded that the conduct of the Associates required them to reconvey the land to its rightful owners.
The record before the judge and before us reveals that there are no bona fide purchasers involved with the registered land, and that these proceedings are solely between the Associates who registered the land and the plaintiffs who in fact owned the land.
The issue raised by this appeal is whether the foregoing facts support a conclusion that the Associates acted “with such wilful disregard of the facts as to be tantamount to fraud.” State St. Bank & Trust Co. v. Beale, 353 Mass. 103, 104 (1967). In the State St. Bank case, we concluded that the plaintiff was entitled to restitution where the defendant had failed to notify the plaintiff and the Land Court of the plaintiffs ownership interest in the land being registered, and where false affidavits were filed in the Land Court. We said that “the affiant, who was familiar with the actual facts, made the affidavit either with intent to defraud the Land Court or with such wilful disregard of the facts as to be tantamount to fraud.” Id. In holding that G. L. c. 185 does not bar an equitable remedy in cases involving fraud, we noted that there was no legislative policy against the traditional remedy of restitution as between the person fraudulently registering the land and the preregistration owner. We therefore followed the general rule that the land title registration system does not permit an imperfect *42title to be perfected by fraud. See, e.g., Rock Run Iron Co. v. Miller, 156 Ga. 136, 141 (1923); In re Sanborn, 57 Haw. 585, 591-592 (1977); Chicago Title & Trust Co. v. Darley, 363 Ill. 197, 203-204 (1936); Boart v. Martin, 99 Minn. 197, 206-213 (1906); Kirk v. Mullen, 100 Or. 563, 574 (1921).
While the facts in the case at bar are not so egregious11 as the facts in the State St. Rank case, we agree with the judge that the statements made by the defendants in their petition were “contrary to fact yet susceptible of accurate knowledge,” and that the Associates’ disregard of the facts as shown by the official records brings this case within the ambit of our language in State St. Rank & Trust Co., supra. The evidence is sufficient to show that the Associates made false statements, and the evidence is overwhelming that the Associates acted in reckless disregard of the actual facts. At no time did the Associates disclose to the Land Court or to the Kozdrases that the Cyr plan did not conform to the official plan on file in the assessor’s office. The statements as to the location of the Kozdrases’ land were erroneous. The Kozdrases relied on the false statements, and, as a result, the Kozdrases’ property was registered to the Associates.
Further, the Associates knew before purchasing the land that receipts for taxes levied against the Fuller Farm Trust indicated ownership of fewer acres than were shown on the Cyr plan. The record does not indicate that they disclosed this fact to the Land Court. The Associates should also have been aware from their own records that, following the registration, they were being assessed taxes on fewer acres than they had registered. The record does not disclose *43whether the Associates corrected this error with the taxing authorities.12
It is the general rule that “[i]f a statement of fact which is susceptible of actual knowledge is made as of one’s own knowledge and is false, it may be the basis for an action of deceit without proof of an actual intent to deceive.” Pietrazak v. McDermott, 341 Mass. 107, 110 (1960). See McMahon v. M & D Builders, Inc., 360 Mass. 54 (1971); Maxwell v. Radcliffe, 356 Mass. 560 (1969). We adhered to that rule in State St. Bank & Trust Co., supra, and held that statements made in wilful disregard of the facts, if proved, would be sufficient to require a registrant to reconvey to the preregistration owner land registered as a result of such false statements. We conclude that the Associates had actual knowledge of a discrepancy between the assessor’s plan and the plan filed by them, see note 4, supra. In spite of this discrepancy, the Associates disregarded facts susceptible of actual knowledge. Thus, the plan filed by the Associates was false. Such wilful disregard of the actual facts is fraud. See State St. Bank ir Trust Co., supra at 104. Therefore, the Associates must reconvey to the Kozdrases the land which the Kozdrases formerly owned.
The Associates contend that to order reconveyance in these circumstances would undermine the Land Registration Act. We do not agree. The Massachusetts registration statute is a direct descendant of the Australian Torrens System. McQuesten v. Commonwealth, 198 Mass. 172, 177 (1908). Sir Robert Torrens modeled his statute on the procedures used by the British Ships Registry in recording ownership interests in ships. B. Schick & I. Plotkin, Torrens in the United States 17 (1978). The intent of the statute was to simplify land transfer and to provide bona fide purchasers with conclusiveness of title. See Boart v. Martin, supra at 205. In 1891 the potential benefits of the Torrens system were articulated by Governor William E. Russell in *44his inaugural address. St. 1891, at 1110, 1130. The need addressed by the Governor was reform of the existing land transfer system. In a special message to the Legislature, Governor Russell suggested that the proposed system would ensure that “transfers can be made quickly, easily and at small expense; and, further, there is absolute security in the possession of the premises bought, resulting from the indefeasibility given to the certificate of title issued by the state” (emphasis supplied). St. 1891, at 1147.
The Torrens system was deemed advantageous since “[t]he difficulty with the old system is that no one can be absolutely certain whether he is buying a good title or a bad one. . . . The great purpose of the Torrens System is to rid land titles of this peril, for with its disappearance disappears all the expense, trouble and delay that attend running the title back through previous transfers.” Hurd, Exposition of the Torrens System of Registration of Title, in The Torrens System of Registration and Transfer of the Title to Real Estate 88-89 (Yeakle ed. 1894).
A report published in Massachusetts just after the new land registration act was passed expressed hope that the system would provide an answer to the problem, “arising as far back in our history as the time when our ancestors first settled on the shores of Massachusetts Bay, providing a safe and practicable method ‘for avoyding all fraudulent conveyances, & that every man may know what estate or interest other men may have in any houses, lands, or other hereditaments they are to deal in.’” C. Rackemann, The Land Registration Act of Massachusetts xviii, xix (1898), quoting from 1 Records of the Governor and Company of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, 1640, at 306 (Shurtleff ed. 1853).
It is clear from the history of the Torrens system that the underlying purpose of title registration is to protect the transferee of a registered title. There are no transferees or bona fide purchasers involved in this case. Thus, our decision today does not threaten the integrity of the Massachusetts land registration system. “The purpose of land *45registration is to provide a means by which title to land may be readily and reliably ascertained. . . . But these benefits of the registration system are intended primarily for those who act in good faith. It is not a purpose of the system to afford those who deal with registered land in bad faith any greater protection than they would have in similar dealings with unregistered land.” State St. Bank & Trust Co. v. Beale, 353 Mass. 103, 107 (1967).
A petitioner in the Land Court who fails to disclose a major discrepancy between the plan submitted and official records may not profit from such nondisclosure. There is no integrity in a system which permits petitioners to submit their own plans to the Land Court knowing they are in variance with official records and then reap benefits at the expense of those who rely on the integrity of the submitted plan.
We emphasize again that in this case there are no bona fide purchasers of registered land to be protected and no evidence of any change in position by the Associates.13 There was, therefore, no error in requiring the Associates to convey the Kozdrases’ land back to them. “Since the remedy of restitution operates only against the person who has committed the fraud, our holding does not run counter to the land registration act’s purpose of furnishing good faith purchasers with a ready and reliable means of ascertaining title to land.” State St. Bank & Trust Co., supra.
The Land Registration Act is a system of conveyancing, not a means for defrauding rightful owners of their property. The Torrens System merely permits correction of defective official record titles. It does not permit registrants to ignore official records which are not defective. Restitution in this case leaves the Land Court judgment intact, and merely requires the Associates to give back to the plaintiffs land which had been owned by them since 1954.
Judgment affirmed.
In their complaint the plaintiffs among other claims also challenged the constitutionality of G. L. c. 185, § 45, and the failure of the Associates to comply with several sections of G. L. c. 185. The Associates filed a motion for summary judgment and the motion judge (who was not the trial judge) ruled that the decree of registration “may not be collaterally attacked here in the Superior Court.” See Bell v. Eames, 310 Mass. 642, 645 (1942). He also ruled that G. L. c. 185 is constitutional, and that “there were no violations of any constitutional rights of the plaintiffs in connection with any aspect of the Land Court proceedings.” See Tyler v. Court of Registration, 175 Mass. 71, appeal dismissed, 179 U.S. 405 (1900). The motion judge left open “only two possible issues, namely, the issue of fraud so far as it might create a constructive trust under the doctrine of State Street [Bank &]Trust Co. v. Beale, 353 Mass. 103 (1967), or give rise to an action of tort for damages under G. L. c. 185, § 45.” He ordered “that further proceedings in this case shall therefore be limited to the question of fraud just mentioned.”
A letter from the Associates’ counsel to the seller’s counsel dated July 7, 1970, states in part: “I would like to know if you are able to justify the area of 93.3 acres shown as Section C on Sheet 3 of the plan by Charles E. Cyr dated January, 1970 (recorded as Plan 6148). It seems to me that your tide is based on die deed from William M. Johnson et al to Abijah P. Fuller dated March 15,1869, Book 94, Page 78, describing a 9 acre parcel, and the deed from Sarah Carleton to Abijah P. Fuller dated January 10,1888, Book 94, Page 75, describing a 25-acre parcel, thus making a total of 34 acres. I believe the assessors show this area as comprising only 32.6 acres. My *37clients naturally expect that they are acquiring 93.3 acres and I presume that Mr. Cyr had some basis for placing the boundary lines where he did. I would appreciate it if you could explain this discrepancy.”
The discrepancy was never explained, but the seller added the following clause to the purchase and sale agreement: “Acreage based on tax rolls for the Town of North Andover is what is to be quitclaimed. The excess above that figure is not to be quitclaimed but shall be understood as between the parties to be whatever right, title and interest the first party may own at the time of transfer.”
The rough sketch was not checked by the assessor for accuracy of boundary lines. The boundaries of the Kozdras plot as shown on the sketch, while not accurate, were not so different from the assessor’s records as to put him on notice of the discrepancy.
The record before us indicates that at no time during the registration proceedings did the Associates file the plan on file in the assessor’s office. The record also indicates that at no time did the Associates reveal to the Land Court that they knew that the assessor’s plan showed that their seller owned by deed only 32.6 acres with respect to the plan as depicted on sheet 3.
The section was amended by St. 1977, c. 151, § 1, by eliminating the requirement that an election be made.
At that time, G. L. c. 185, § 38, provided in part that “if the petitioner, after an adverse opinion of the examiner, elects to proceed further, the recorder shall, immediately upon the . . . filing of the petitioner’s election . . . cause notice of the filing of the petition to be published in a newspaper published in the district where any portion of the land lies.”
Since the plaintiff Bertha Kozdras does not rest her claim on the failure of Associates to send her notice, and since she did not appeal from the *39order of the motion judge, we express no view on the failure to send her notice. No reason appears for this lapse by the Associates.
There is little difference between giving no notice to the rightful owners and giving notice falsely listing them as abutters rather than as persons having an interest in the land in question.
In their complaint, the plaintiffs alleged that a representative of one or more of the defendants attempted to purchase their property in 1969 or 1970, and failed. At trial the plaintiffs did not produce any evidence to that effect. They also admitted that they had no reason to believe that the Associates “had done anything which was intentional on their part, knowingly to deny [the Kozdrases] the ownership of [their] property.” The judge concluded that there was “no intentional wrongdoing” and limited his consideration of the facts to statements made in wilful disregard of the actual facts.
In fact, the Kozdrases were assessed by the town for taxes on the land from the time of their purchase in 1954 through 1976.
The Associates could have suggested (but did not) to the judge that in the event he found for the plaintiffs, damages would be a more appropriate remedy. Since land is unique, and the Associates failed to show any special circumstances warranting damages, reconveyance is the more appropriate remedy.

=== CASE 9737734 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:33:24.600707+00 ===

*46Quirico, J.,
(dissenting, with whom Wilkins, J., joins). The court today holds that a party whose land has been registered to another may, through collateral proceedings, successfully attack the decree of registration without proving any fraudulent intent on the part of the registrant. I disagree on two grounds. First, I think that the effort to bring this case within the rule of State St. Bank & Trust Co. v. Beale, 353 Mass. 103 (1967), has forced the court to rely on a number of assumptions which are unsupported by the record before us. Second, and more fundamentally, I do not believe that by its use of the word “fraud” in G. L. c. 185, § 45, and elsewhere in the Land Registration Act, the Legislature intended to authorize collateral attack on decrees of registration in circumstances like those presented here. In my view, today’s decision creates an exception to the comprehensive scheme enacted by G. L. c. 185, §§ 26-56A “almost as broad as the scope of the general rule otherwise contained in that [chapter].” National Academy of Sciences v. Cambridge Trust Co., 370 Mass. 303, 313 (1976) (Wilkins, J., dissenting in part). The extension of the doctrine announced in the State St. Bank & Trust Co. case to the facts of this case leaves entirely unclear the degree of care a would-be registrant of title must exercise to obtain the benefits of the land registration procedure provided by the Legislature. The result reached by the Superior Court, and today affirmed by this court, thus injects into our system for land registration precisely the element of uncertainty and the concomitant potential for litigation that the system was designed to protect against.
To understand what is at stake in this case, it is necessary to expand somewhat on the court’s account of the facts giving rise to this controversy. Some time prior to September, 1970, the Associates entered into negotiations with the “Fuller Farm Trust” for the purchase of a tract of unimproved land located in the town of North Andover. This tract, known as the “Fuller Farm,” lies in an area of North Andover which had historically been a “common,” an area of some three thousand acres in which, as the prior owner *47put it, “everybody agrees the titles were bad and nobody knows who owns what.” In the course of the negotiations with the Associates, Charles Cyr, a registered Land Court engineer, surveyed the estate held by the Fuller Farm Trust and prepared a plan of that estate displaying some 195 acres. According to uncontradicted testimony taken before the Superior Court judge, Cyr prepared the plan under the supervision of the seller and was paid eleven thousand ($11,000) dollars by the seller.
As the seller also testified in the proceeding below, the Cyr plan was the only survey of the Fuller Farm which was available at the time of the sale, there was no reason to assume it to be inaccurate, and the Associates relied on it. It is true that on sheet 3 of the plan, which set forth the Kozdrases’ boundary, there is a discrepancy of some 60 acres between the area for which the Fuller Farm Trust held deeds and the area shown on the Cyr plan. The Associates apparently thought this discrepancy to be accounted for by the generally faulty state of title in the area and by the seller’s claim of adverse possession. Significantly, the Land Court found that claim of adverse possession to be valid, a finding that has not been challenged except by the Kozdrases. Also significant is the fact that the twelve acres now claimed by the Kozdrases comprise less than a tenth of the entire parcel purchased by the Associates. In my view, there was sufficient evidence to support the Superior Court judge’s finding that the inclusion of the Kozdras land in the Cyr plan did not result from any intentional wrongdoing on the Associates’ part.
In any event, the Cyr plan was filed by the Associates with their petition for registration as their description of the land sought to be registered. See G. L. c. 185, § 28. The apparent reason for the registration proceeding was to ascertain the area of, and to settle title to, the land the Associates had purchased. There is nothing suspect or even unusual in this use of the land registration procedure. We have repeatedly recognized that a registration proceeding provides an appropriate forum for establishing a title ac*48quired by adverse possession. Rothery v. MacDonald, 329 Mass. 238, 242 (1952). Hurlbut Rogers Mach. Co. v. Boston & Me. R.R., 235 Mass. 402 (1920). See Keith v. Kennard, 222 Mass. 398 (1916) (upholding registration of title gained by prescription).
The court suggests that the Kozdrases “reified] on the integrity of the submitted plan,” supra at 45, thereby clearly implying that the defect in the notice to the Kozdrases was caused by the defect in the Associates’ registration petition. These conclusions reflect an incomplete understanding of the statutory procedure. The filing of the petition for registration merely initiates the registration proceeding; the Land Court is then charged with protecting the interests of persons who might be adversely, affected by a decree of registration. After a petition is filed, the Land Court is required to refer it to an examiner of title who must then “search the records and investigate all facts stated in the petition, or otherwise brought to his notice, and . . . file in the case a report thereon, concluding with a certificate of his opinion upon the title.” G. L. c. 185, § 37, as amended by St. 1977, c. 151, § 1. Section 37 at the time of this proceeding further provided that if the examiner’s opinion proved to be adverse to the petitioner, the petitioner could nevertheless elect to proceed.1 The Associates did so elect.
It was only at this point in the proceeding that notice to the Kozdrases was required. It is significant, however, that the required notice is based on the facts as stated in the examiner’s report, not the petition for registration. This point is explicit in G. L. c. 185, § 38, which provided at the time of this proceeding that “the recorder shall, immediately upon the filing of the examiner’s opinion, or upon the filing of the petitioner’s election, as the case may be, cause notice of the filing of the petition to be published in a newspaper published in the district where any portion of the land lies.” *49The published notice must name “all persons known to have an adverse interest,” as well as all adjoining owners and occupants. “The court shall also, within seven days after publication of said notice in a newspaper, cause a copy thereof to be sent by the recorder by mailing a registered letter to every person named therein whose address is known.” G. L. c. 185, § 39.
The Kozdrases’ status as an abutter seems clearly to have been a “[fact] stated in the petition” within the meaning of § 37, and thus within the scope of the examiner’s mandatory investigation. That the discrepancy between the Cyr plan and the official records escaped both the Associates and the Land Court is, as the Superior Court judge put it, “incredible.” Neither party put the examiner’s report on the record, and in its absence, I do not mean in any way to question its accuracy. As it stands, however, the record before us shows only that the Associates’ petition for registration included an error in their description of the land sought to be registered, and that that error was somehow incorporated into the notice received by Frank Kozdras.
This case is thus wholly distinguishable from State St. Bank & Trust Co. v. Beale, supra, which the court cites as controlling. That case involved the sufficiency of a bill in equity filed in the Land Court by the plaintiff, alleging that the defendant had perpetrated a fraud on the court resulting in the issuance to him of a certificate of title to a parcel of land which he knew at all times belonged to the plaintiff. The alleged fraud included the following acts by the defendant: (a) falsely stating in his petition for registration that he did not know of any other persons having an interest in the property when he knew that the plaintiff was the owner thereof, with the result that the published notice of the petition did not name the true owner and no registered mail notice was sent to the owner, and (b) obtaining two affidavits, which the defendant knew to be false, that he and predecessors in interest had acquired title to the property by adverse possession. The judge of the Land Court held that this was in the nature of a petition for review under *50G. L. c. 185, § 45, which was not seasonably started within one year after the entry of the decree of registration, and further that the Land Court had no jurisdiction to award damages in equity for fraud in procuring the decree, and he therefore sustained the defendant’s demurrer. This court held that to be error: “It is well settled that a traditional remedy for a person who has been deprived of land through fraud is specific restitution. ‘A person who has tortiously acquired or retained a title to land ... is under a duty of restitution to the person entitled thereto.’ Restatement: Restitution, § 130. The duty to make such restitution is often enforced by imposing a constructive trust. In Barry v. Covich, 332 Mass. 338, [342 (1955)], we said, ‘A constructive trust may be said to be a device employed in equity, in the absence of any intention of the parties to create a trust, in order to avoid the unjust enrichment of one party at the expense of the other where the legal title to the property was obtained by fraud . . ..’ Restatement: Restitution, § 160.” State St. Bank & Trust Co., supra at 105.
In reaching the result described above in the State St. Bank & Trust Co. case, this court relied in part on the fact that G. L. c. 185 provides (a) in § 45, that “any person aggrieved by such decree [of registration] in any case may pursue his remedy in tort against the petitioner or against any other person for fraud in procuring the decree,” (b) in § 62 which deals with the presentation of the owner’s duplicate certificate upon the transfer of registered land, that “ [i]n all cases of registration procured by fraud, the owner may pursue all his legal and equitable remedies against the parties to such fraud,” and (c) in § 75, that “[w]hoever claims an interest in registered land by reason of any implied or constructive trust shall file for registration with the assistant recorder a statement thereof containing [specified information].”
As is evident from this discussion, the State St. Bank & Trust Co. case involved a deliberate plan by the defendant to seize title to a parcel of land which he knew belonged to the bank. He pursued a preconceived plan to impose a fraud on the Land Court by withholding the name of the *51known owner of the property, and then filing false affidavits as to adverse possession, one executed by an assessor who swore to facts which he and the defendant knew were false. The differences between that case and this are, to my mind, differences not of degree, but of kind. First, the error in the Associates’ petition did not put the Land Court “in the same position as were the plaintiffs,” a finding made below and quoted by the court with apparent approval, supra at 41. The court’s notice to the Kozdrases was presumably based on its own investigation of the Associates’ petition. Second, although the court today repeatedly speaks in terms of “knowing,” “wilful,” or “reckless” actions on the part of the Associates, I think the judge’s finding that the Associates were guilty of no intentional wrongdoing is supported by the record, and thus binding on this court. The Associates’ failure to investigate fully the boundaries shown on the Cyr plan can plausibly be explained by the fact that they thought any record discrepancy would be accounted for by their claim of adverse possession. Third, nothing which the Associates did in the present case deprived Kozdras of notice of the Land Court proceedings. The name “Frank Kozdras” appeared near the beginning of the legal notice which was published in an area newspaper, and the name “Kozdras” appeared in the body of the notice. A copy of the notice was mailed to Frank Kozdras by registered mail, and was actually received by him. The notice expressly referred to a plan which had been filed with the petition and which showed the land sought to be registered. The notice expressly informed Kozdras and other persons named as follows: “If you desire to make any objection or defense to said petition you or your attorney must file a written appearance and an answer under oath ... in the office of the Recorder of said Court in Boston . . . or in the office of the Assistant Recorder of said Court at the Registry of Deeds at Lawrence . . . where a copy of the plan filed with said petition is deposited, on or before the twenty-third day of August next.”
Kozdras took his copy of the notice of the Land Court proceeding to an attorney for professional advice. He was *52aware of his right to file an appearance and answer, but, believing that his land was not affected, he elected not to do so. An examination of the plan filed with the Associates’ petition might have alerted Kozdras to the fact that it actually included the Kozdras land in that proposed to be registered as the land of the Associates. His failure to examine the plan and to file an appearance and answer in the Land Court resulted ultimately in the entry of a default against him, and the entry of the decree declaring the Associates to be the owners of what had theretofore been the Kozdras land. “One who has neglected to take the necessary and essential steps provided by a statute creating a remedy [in the instant case, G. L. c. 185, § 41, permitting the filing of an appearance and an answer] has no right to the remedy.” St. George’s Church v. Primitive Methodist Church, 315 Mass. 202, 204 (1943) (involving the failure of a party to file a sworn statement of its adverse claim in a Land Court proceeding).
I therefore think that today’s opinion must be read as squarely adopting the doctrine of “constructive” fraud as a ground on which to attack a decree of registration. This court has recognized the doctrine of either “technical fraud” or “constructive fraud,” or both, in a number of decisions. Many of the cases on this point were cited or discussed most recently in our opinion in National Academy of Sciences v. Cambridge Trust Co., 370 Mass. 303, 308-310 (1976). We pointed out there that this doctrine “has been developed primarily in the context of actions seeking rescission of contracts and of tort actions for deceit.” Id. at 309. Those actions usually involved a situation where a person purported to speak of his own knowledge about a fact which was capable of ascertainment, and about which the speaker had no such knowledge and his statement was not true. In that decision we cited the case of Page v. Bent, 2 Met. 371, 374 (1841), where the court said: “The principle is well settled, that if a person make a representation of a fact, as of his own knowledge, in relation to a subject matter susceptible of knowledge, and such representation is not true; if the *53party to whom it is made relies and acts upon it, as true, and sustains damage by it, it is a fraud and deceit, for which the party making it is responsible.”
In National Academy of Sciences, supra at 309, we then noted that “an analogous standard might be applicable to misrepresentations in the accounts of fiduciaries” and then cited several cases applying that “analogous standard.” The vital basis for all such cases was the existence of a fiduciary relationship between the person who allegedly made the misrepresentation and the person who claimed to have been damaged thereby. There was no such relationship in this case between the Kozdrases and the Associates. Instead, they were adversaries in a judicial proceeding. There is nothing in the record to indicate that the Associates violated any fiduciary duty which they owed to Kozdras.
More important than the result in this specific case, however, is the extent to which today’s decision impairs the carefully balanced system of rights and remedies contained in the Land Registration Act as a whole. The statutory provisions and the prior decisions of this court, as well as other relevant commentary, all emphasize the preeminence of the policies of certainty and finality there embodied. Today’s recognition of “constructive” or “technical” fraud as an exception to those policies in my opinion represents a drastic and unwarranted inroad into the legislative scheme.
In our prior cases, we have said that a petition for the registration of title to land is “a proceeding in rem dealing with a tangible res [and it] may be instituted and carried to judgment without personal service upon claimants within the State or notice by name to those outside of it, and not encounter any provision of either Constitution [State or Federal]. Jurisdiction is secured by the power of the court over the res.” Tyler v. Court of Registration, 175 Mass. 71, 75 (1900). It is “a judicial proceeding to clear titles against all the world . . . , for the very meaning of such a proceeding is to get rid of unknown as well as known claims.” Id. at 73. “Registration is the act which passes title and is the act of the court. . . . The purpose of registration law is to *54bind the land and to quiet title to it. Registration is conclusive upon every one, with a few exceptions not material to the issues in this case, and the rights of innocent purchasers for value are given special protection. . . . Persons dealing with the land in the future may rely on the files at the registry and the interests of no one require changes in the records.” Malaguti v. Rosen, 262 Mass. 555, 567-568 (1928). General Laws c. 185, has been described as “a statute that is ... an elaborate legislative plan for the registration of titles to land, where, subject to certain exceptions, all rights of ownership and interests in the land are shown by certificates of title.” St. George's Church v. Primitive Methodist Church, 315 Mass. 202, 205 (1943).
Much the same point is made by nonjudicial commentators on the system. “The Torrens System, developed because of the need of a judicial process for forever settling the title to real estate, establishes an indefeasible title that is free of all claims, so that anyone dealing with the property can be sure that the only claims on the property are the ones that are registered (with some minor exceptions as specified in the statute [G. L. c. 185, § 46]). The system takes much of the uncertainty and expense out of title searching. Uncertainty is taken out by the judicial decree which cuts off all speculation or doubts as to the title’s validity as of the time of the decree. Money and time are saved by the short title search made possible by the decree.” G.P. Davis, Massachusetts Conveyancers’ Handbook § 125, at 193-194 (2d ed. 1967).
The circumstances in which collateral attack on a decree of registration is permitted by the statute are accordingly limited. General Laws c. 185, § 38, as amended by St. 1977, c. 151, § 2, prescribes the form of the notice of the filing of the petition. The notice is required to name all persons known to have an adverse interest in the property in question, and is then addressed generally “to all whom it may concern.” The notice contains a description of the land. It informs persons desiring to object that they must file a written appearance and an answer at a stated office of *55the court where a copy of the plan filed with the petition is on file; and it warns that unless such an appearance is so filed a default will be recorded, the petition will be taken for confessed, and the party “will be forever barred from contesting said petition or any decree entered thereon.” General Laws c. 185, § 42, states that “[b]y the description in the notice, ‘to all whom it may concern’, all the world are made parties defendant and shall be concluded by the default and order [that the petition be taken for confessed].” It provides further that “[a]fter such default and order, the court may enter a decree confirming the title of the petitioner and ordering registration thereof.”
General Laws c. 185, § 45, states that the “decree of confirmation and registration . . . shall be conclusive upon and against all persons, including the commonwealth, whether mentioned by name in the petition, notice or citation, or included in the general description ‘to all whom it may concern’. Such decree shall not be opened by reason of the absence, infancy or other disability of any person affected thereby, nor by any proceeding at law or in equity for reversing judgments or decrees; subject, however, to the right of any person deprived of land, or of any estate or interest therein, by a decree of registration obtained by fraud to file a petition for review within one year after the entry of the decree, provided no innocent purchaser for value has acquired an interest.... But any person aggrieved by such decree [of registration] . . . may pursue his remedy in tort against the petitioner or against any other person for fraud in procuring the decree” (emphasis supplied).
These provisions of the statute, as well as our prior decisions based upon them, indicate to me that proof of something more than inadvertence is required to overcome the finality of a decree of registration. The instant case is an anomaly; the petitioners, the court, and the Kozdrases all failed to discover the error in description, and as a result the statutory safeguards against such errors failed. In the absence of proof of intentional wrongdoing, however, I believe that the Legislature intended that a decree of registra*56tion, once final, be immune to collateral attack.2 I am not unsympathetic to the Kozdrases’ plight, nor do I mean to condone the morality of the position now taken by the Associates. Here, however, we are called upon to ascertain and enforce the intent of the Legislature as expressed in a statute, not to decide as an initial matter whether the Associates should be held liable for their actions or inaction. Cf. National Academy of Sciences v. Cambridge Trust Co., supra at 313-314 (Wilkins, J., dissenting in part). Because I cannot agree that today’s opinion does justice to the letter and spirit of the land registration statute, G. L. c. 185, I dissent.
The 1977 amendment to § 37, see note 7, supra, has eliminated the requirement that a petitioner elect in writing to proceed further following an adverse report from the title examiner. This change is not relevant here.
I note in this regard that the possibility of losses arising through “error, omission, mistake or misdescription,” G. L. c. 185, § 101, did not escape the Legislature’s attention; the Assurance Fund established by G. L. c. 185, § 99-109, creates a remedy specifically directed to such losses without sacrificing the other benefits of the registration system. The section strengthens my belief that the Legislature intended to distinguish “fraud” from “error, omission, mistake or misdescription,” a distinction largely erased by today’s decision.

=== CASE 2211829 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:12.284252+00 ===

614 N.W.2d 689 (2000)
241 Mich. App. 159
Peter CRUZ, Jr., Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
STATE FARM MUTUAL AUTOMOBILE INSURANCE COMPANY, Defendant-Appellee.
Docket No. 206120.
Court of Appeals of Michigan.
Submitted September 7, 1999, at Grand Rapids.
Decided May 16, 2000, at 9:05 a.m.
Released for Publication August 9, 2000.
*691 R. Kevin Thieme, Grand Rapids, for the plaintiff.
Tolley VandenBosch Walton Korolewicz & Brengle, P.C. (by Lawrence Korolewicz and Mark J. Colon), Grand Rapids, for the defendant.
Before McDONALD, P.J., and NEFF and SMOLENSKI, JJ.
*690 McDONALD, P.J.
Plaintiff appeals as of right from the trial court's order granting defendant's motion for summary disposition pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(10). We affirm in part and reverse in part.
On October 26, 1994, plaintiff was involved in an automobile accident. Plaintiff alleges that he was seriously injured when an uninsured motorist negligently struck his automobile. At the time of the accident, plaintiff was insured by defendant. Plaintiff's policy included uninsured motorist coverage and the statutorily mandated first-party coverage. The policy also includes the following examination under oath (EUO) provision, contained in an amendatory endorsement to the policy:
2. REPORTING A CLAIMINSURED'S DUTIES
a. The following provision is added to item 5:
The person making the claim also shall answer questions under oath when asked by anyone we name, as often as we reasonably ask, and sign copies of the answers.
Plaintiff made a claim with defendant seeking both first-party no-fault benefits and uninsured motorist benefits. Pursuant *692 to the above policy provision, defendant initially requested that plaintiff make "a recorded statement" and later, through its attorney, repeatedly asked plaintiff to submit to an EUO in this matter. Defendant claimed that it needed to obtain the EUO to investigate plaintiff's claim. Plaintiff had been involved in an earlier automobile accident in December 1992, which resulted in a brain injury, and defendant claimed it needed to discuss the circumstances of both automobile accidents and plaintiff's current medical status. Plaintiff refused to submit to the EUO, arguing that the Michigan no-fault statute did not require him to do so. Ultimately, defendant denied plaintiff's claims for uninsured motorist benefits, in November 1995, and first-party no-fault benefits, in December 1995, because plaintiff had refused to answer questions under oath.
After defendant denied plaintiff's claim for uninsured motorist benefits, plaintiff demanded arbitration pursuant to provisions in the policy providing for arbitration where the insured and defendant do not agree on whether the insured is "legally entitled to collect damages from the owner or driver of the uninsured motor vehicle." Defendant responded that plaintiff was not entitled to arbitration because he had breached the insurance contract by failing to submit to an EUO. However, plaintiff unilaterally proceeded to arbitration, appointing his arbitrator and scheduling an arbitration hearing.[1] Defendant refused to participate in the arbitration process and did not select its own arbitrator. In light of defendant's failure to select an arbitrator, plaintiff's arbitrator selected a "neutral arbitrator" and an arbitration hearing was held. The two arbitrators found that plaintiff had not breached his policy, that the uninsured motorist was at fault in the accident, and that plaintiff was entitled to $150,000. Plaintiff contended this decision was binding on defendant because the insurance policy provides that "[t]he written decision of any two arbitrators shall be binding on each party." When defendant did not respond to plaintiff's request for payment, he filed the instant action.
Plaintiff's complaint had two counts. Count one sought to confirm the arbitration award and count two sought first-party no-fault benefits. Plaintiff and defendant filed cross-motions for summary disposition. The trial court granted defendant's motion in part, dismissing count one of plaintiff's complaint and ordering plaintiff to submit to an EUO as a condition precedent to proceeding with his claim set forth in count two. Plaintiff then filed an application for leave to appeal this interlocutory order of the trial court in this Court.
While the appeal in this Court was pending, defendant scheduled an EUO, which plaintiff refused to attend. Defendant then moved for summary disposition in the trial court, and the trial court granted defendant's motion, dismissing count two of plaintiff's complaint. Plaintiff then appealed as of right to this Court. His earlier application for leave to appeal the trial court's interlocutory order was denied. Cruz v. State Farm Mut Auto Ins Co., unpublished order of the Court of Appeals, issued October 1, 1997.
Plaintiff first argues the trial court erred in granting summary disposition to defendant on count two of his complaint, seeking first-party no-fault benefits, on the basis of plaintiff's noncompliance with the EUO policy provision. Plaintiff argues the EUO provision is contrary to the no-fault insurance act. This is an issue of first impression in Michigan.
This Court reviews a motion for summary disposition de novo. Spiek v. *693 Dep't of Transportation, 456 Mich. 331, 337, 572 N.W.2d 201 (1998). We also review issues of statutory interpretation de novo. Haworth, Inc. v. Wickes Mfg. Co., 210 Mich.App. 222, 227, 532 N.W.2d 903 (1995).
A motion pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(10) tests the factual support for a claim. Spiek, supra at 337, 572 N.W.2d 201. The motion may be granted pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(10) when, except with respect to damages, there is no genuine issue of material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Michigan Mut. Ins. Co. v. Dowell, 204 Mich.App. 81, 85, 514 N.W.2d 185 (1994). The trial court must consider the documentary evidence submitted by the parties, and giving the benefit of any reasonable doubt to the nonmoving party, the trial court must determine whether a record might be developed that would leave open an issue on which reasonable minds might differ. Id.
The purpose of Michigan's no-fault insurance system is to provide victims of automobile-related accidents with assured, adequate, and prompt payment for economic losses. Shavers v. Attorney General, 402 Mich. 554, 578-579, 267 N.W.2d 72 (1978); Miller v. Farm Bureau Mut. Ins. Co., 218 Mich.App. 221, 225-226, 553 N.W.2d 371 (1996). The no-fault act mandates that insurers "pay benefits for accidental bodily injury arising out of the ownership, operation, maintenance or use of a motor vehicle as a motor vehicle." MCL 500.3105(1); MSA 24.13105(1); Miller, supra at 226, 553 N.W.2d 371. Because personal protection insurance benefits are mandated by the no-fault statute, the statute is the "rule-book" for deciding the issues involved in questions regarding awarding those benefits. Rohlman v. Hawkeye-Security Ins. Co., 442 Mich. 520, 524-525, 502 N.W.2d 310 (1993); Mate v. Wolverine Mut. Ins. Co., 233 Mich.App. 14, 19, 592 N.W.2d 379 (1998).
We recognize that the no-fault act does not specifically preclude or permit an EUO provision. However, we agree with plaintiff that the no-fault act sets forth the insured's duties of cooperation, and because it does not provide for an EUO provision, the provision is contrary to the no-fault act.
First, M.C.L. § 500.3145; MSA 24.13145 provides that the insured cannot bring suit for personal protection insurance benefits later than one year after the date of the accident giving rise to the injury, unless written notice has been given to the insurer within the year after the accident or if the insurer had previously made a payment of personal protection insurance benefits for the injury.
In addition to the notice of injury provision, the no-fault act provides that the insured will submit to a mental or physical examination if the mental or physical condition of the person is material to a claim that has been made, or may be made, for personal protection insurance benefits. MCL 500.3151; MSA 24.13151. This section of the no-fault act also allows a personal protection insurer to "include reasonable provisions in a personal protection insurance policy for mental and physical examination of persons claiming personal protection insurance benefits." MCL 500.3151; MSA 24.13151.
The no-fault act also provides insurers with a means for gathering information regarding a claimant's earnings and medical history, condition, and treatment. MCL 500.3158(1); MSA 24.13158(1) provides that, upon request, an employer of the injured person must furnish the insurer with information pertaining to the injured person's earnings since the injury and for a reasonable time before the injury. MCL 500.3158(2); MSA 24.13158(2) provides that upon request of the insurer, a written report of the history, condition, treatment, and dates and costs of treatment of the injured person must be furnished, and that the records regarding the injured person's history, condition, treatment, *694 and dates and costs of treatment must be produced and permitted to be inspected and copied.
Finally, the no-fault act includes a discovery provision. MCL 500.3159; MSA 24.13159 allows a court to enter, upon good cause shown, an order for discovery in a dispute "regarding the insurer's right to discovery of facts about an injured person's earnings or about his history, condition, treatment and dates and costs of treatment."
Although defendant recognizes these provisions of the no-fault act, it contends that the statute does not provide a means for it to determine whether plaintiff's injuries were accidental. We agree with defendant that pursuant to M.C.L. § 500.3105; MSA 24.13105, it is only obligated to pay benefits for accidental injuries. MCL 500.3105(4); MSA 24.13105(4) defines bodily injury as accidental "unless suffered intentionally by the injured person or caused intentionally by the claimant." In order to find an intentional injury, plaintiff must have intended both the act and the injury. Miller, supra at 226, 553 N.W.2d 371; Schultz v. Auto-Owners Ins. Co., 212 Mich.App. 199, 201, 536 N.W.2d 784 (1995).
We disagree with defendant that an EUO provision is necessary to determine whether the injuries are accidental. In both Miller, supra at 224, 553 N.W.2d 371, and Schultz, supra at 200, 536 N.W.2d 784, the insurers denied the plaintiff's claims upon concluding the injuries were not accidental. Nothing precludes defendant from doing the same in this case. We find the no-fault act provides defendant with ample means of gathering the information necessary for it to determine whether plaintiff is entitled to no-fault benefits. If the Legislature wants to extend the tools available to insurers by allowing an EUO provision, it is free to do so, but it is not within our province to do so. The trial court erred in granting summary disposition in favor of defendant on count two of plaintiff's complaint.
In reaching our holding today, we reject defendant's argument that the fact that the EUO provision was filed with the Michigan Department of Insurance and approved by the Commissioner of Insurance shows that the provision is consistent with the no-fault act. In Michigan, the Commissioner of Insurance may reject forms that are in conflict with the statute. Franklin Life Ins. Co. v. Comm'r of Ins., 159 Mich. 636, 124 N.W. 522 (1910). However, the approval of a form by the Commissioner of Insurance is not conclusive proof that the endorsement complies with the statute. Instead, the approval of the Commissioner of Insurance is only somewhat persuasive that the policy complies with the statute. Drogula v. Federal Life Ins. Co., 248 Mich. 645, 648, 227 N.W. 692 (1929); Progressive Mut. Ins. Co. v. Taylor, 35 Mich.App. 633, 643, 193 N.W.2d 54 (1971). Moreover, we have examined the cases from other jurisdictions defendant cites and that have upheld EUO provisions, but we decline to follow these cases.
In light of our holding that the EUO provision is contrary to the no-fault act, it is not necessary for us to address plaintiff's arguments that he substantially complied with the EUO provision and that defendant must demonstrate that it suffered actual prejudice from plaintiff's noncooperation.
Next, plaintiff argues the trial court erred in granting summary disposition in favor of defendant on count one of his complaint, seeking uninsured motorist benefits. Again, our standard of review is de novo. Spiek, supra at 337, 572 N.W.2d 201.
Plaintiff first argues that when uninsured motorist benefits are afforded by the insurance policy, the insurer should be limited by the discovery provisions in the no-fault act. We disagree. Uninsured motorist benefits are not statutorily required by the no-fault act, and the language of the insurance policy controls. *695 Berry v. State Farm Mut. Automobile Ins. Co., 219 Mich.App. 340, 346, 556 N.W.2d 207 (1996); Auto-Owners Ins. Co. v. Harvey, 219 Mich.App. 466, 472, 556 N.W.2d 517 (1996). Accordingly, the EUO provision is enforceable in the context of plaintiff's claim for uninsured motorist benefits.
Plaintiff argues he substantially complied with the EUO provision by signing requested medical authorizations, providing requested wage and salary authorizations, presenting himself for independent medical examination, and agreeing to give a statement limited to "non-medical causation questions." While defendant does not dispute that plaintiff agreed to give a statement, it emphasizes that plaintiff in fact never gave any statement. Accordingly, we disagree with plaintiff that he substantially complied with the EUO provision. See Gordon v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Ins. Co., 197 Mich. 226, 229-231, 163 N.W. 956 (1917); Gibson v. Group Ins. Co. of Michigan, 142 Mich.App. 271, 275-276, 369 N.W.2d 484 (1985).
This Court has held, in the context of a homeowner's insurance policy, that the remedy for failing to comply with a requirement to submit to an EUO is dismissal of the insured's action. Thomson v. State Farm Ins. Co., 232 Mich.App. 38, 45, 592 N.W.2d 82 (1998); Yeo v. State Farm Ins. Co., 219 Mich.App. 254, 257, 555 N.W.2d 893 (1996). We see no reason to distinguish between a valid EUO in a homeowner's insurance policy and a valid EUO in a policy providing uninsured motorist benefits. An insurance policy is much the same as any other contract; it is an agreement between the parties. Auto-Owners Ins. Co. v. Churchman, 440 Mich. 560, 566, 489 N.W.2d 431 (1992). Generally an insurance policy provision is valid as long as it is "clear, unambiguous and not in contravention of public policy." Auto-Owners Ins. v. Harrington, 455 Mich. 377, 382, 565 N.W.2d 839 (1997), quoting Raska v. Farm Bureau Mut. Ins. Co. of Michigan, 412 Mich. 355, 361-362, 314 N.W.2d 440 (1982). Because the no-fault statute does not require uninsured motorist benefits, there is no public policy against enforcing the EUO provision in this context, and we must honor the intent of the parties' contract.
However, there is a question whether the dismissal should be with or without prejudice. This was the issue in Yeo, supra at 258, 555 N.W.2d 893. In Yeo, supra at 258-259, 555 N.W.2d 893, this Court held that as a general rule, dismissal on the basis of failure to comply with an EUO provision should be without prejudice. In Yeo, supra at 259, 555 N.W.2d 893, this Court found no evidence of wilful noncompliance and, therefore, found it unnecessary to address the effect of wilful noncompliance on the general rule. In Thomson, supra at 46, 592 N.W.2d 82, this Court recognized that wilful noncompliance "involves something more than merely knowingly failing to appear for an EUO." This Court then went on to explain:
"[W]ilful noncompliance" in the context at hand refers to a failure or refusal to submit to an EUO or otherwise cooperate with an insurer in regard to contractual provisions allowing an insurer to investigate a claim that is part of a deliberate effort to withhold material information or a pattern of noncooperation with the insurer. [Id. at 50-51, 592 N.W.2d 82 (emphasis in original).]
The burden is on plaintiff to demonstrate that his refusal to submit to an EUO was not part of a deliberate effort to withhold material information or a pattern of noncooperation with the insurer. Id. at 51, 592 N.W.2d 82. We find plaintiff has met his burden in this case. The only way plaintiff refused to cooperate in this case was by failing to submit to the EUO. Accordingly, plaintiff's claim should have been dismissed without prejudice in accordance with the general rule. Yeo, supra at 259, 555 N.W.2d 893.
Finally, plaintiff argues that in order for defendant to deny benefits on the *696 basis of plaintiff's noncooperation, it must show actual prejudice. Plaintiff cites Allen v. Cheatum, 351 Mich. 585, 88 N.W.2d 306 (1958), in support of his argument. Plaintiff's reliance on Allen is misplaced. There the insurer was seeking to defeat the claim of a third party, not its insured, in a garnishment action on the basis of noncooperation by its insured.[2]
Affirmed in part and reversed in part.
NOTES
[1]  The policy provides:
Each party shall select a competent and impartial arbitrator. These two shall select a third one. If unable to agree on the third one within 30 days either party may request a judge of a court of record in the county in which the arbitration is pending to select a third one. The written decision of any two arbitrators shall be binding on each party.
[2]  We also note that in Coburn v. Fox, 425 Mich. 300, 309-310, 389 N.W.2d 424 (1986), the Michigan Supreme Court recognized that this rule was abrogated by the passage of the no-fault act.

=== CASE 9737735 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:33:27.565847+00 ===

ON PETITION TO TRANSFER
PIVARNIK, Justice.
This case comes to us on a petition to transfer from the Second District Court of Appeals. Plaintiff Robert Blake appealed from a summary judgment entered in favor of Defendant Dunn Farms, Inc. The primary issue in the case was the duty of the landowner to persons on an adjacent public road, particularly as that duty applies to the ownership and keeping of domestic animals. In addition, a procedural issue was raised on appeal and is presented to us here on transfer regarding the fact that the judgment by the trial court purported to be a judgment on the pleadings as set forth in Ind.R.Tr.P. 12(C). Rule 12(C) provides that when matters other than those in the pleadings are considered by the trial court, the determination is then transformed into a summary judgment. The judgment was so considered by the Court of Appeals. This case remained in the trial court in various pleading stages for approximately four years. Plaintiff Robert Blake had filed a motion for summary judgment early on in the proceedings, and the court overruled the motion at that time. After the case was set for trial and the issues had been established early by the pleadings, the defendant filed a motion for judgment on the pleadings under Trial Rule 12(C). All parties agreed that the court could consider the pleadings, depositions, affidavits and interrogatories filed by the parties to determine this motion. The court did consider all of these documents in making its determination, and entered judgment in favor of the defendant. We agree with the Court of Appeals that under Trial Rule 12(C), the court, in considering the depositions, affidavits, and interrogatories, treated the motion as one for summary judgment and entered judgment accordingly; therefore, the case *562is properly reviewed on appeal on that basis. We further find that this case presents an issue of such public import that this Court should pass judgment on it. We accordingly grant transfer and vacate the opinions of the Court of Appeals. This vacation applies to the original opinion issued by the Court of Appeals on November 5, 1979, Blake v. Dunn Farms, Inc., (1979) Ind.App., 396 N.E.2d 415 and the opinion on Petition for Rehearing issued on January 22, 1980, Blake v. Dunn Farms, Inc., Ind.App., 399 N.E.2d 431.
There is not a great deal of dispute on the facts of this case. Plaintiff Blake was a passenger in an automobile which struck a horse at night. The accident occurred on a portion of a state highway running through Dunn’s land. Plaintiff was severely injured and brought action against Love, the owner of the horse, and Dunn Farms, the landowner. The complaint alleged that Dunn and Love were negligent in allowing the fences to fall into a state of disrepair, and that Dunn and Love were negligent in permitting a horse to run on the state right-of-way and highway.
Dunn Farms was a family-owned corporation, the officers residing in Arizona. The farm manager and attorneys for the corporation were located in Marion, Indiana, and these agents supervised the leasing of the property. In about 1969, Robert McConnell rented the house, barn, and the property on both sides of the highway. Seventeen acres of the property were on the west side of State Highway Fifteen, and the remaining property, including the house and barn, was on the east side of the highway. Along with other farming endeavors, McConnell kept horses in the pasture fields. In June, 1971, McConnell and Love agreed that Love would pasture his horses in the west pasture. Love maintained horses and ponies in the west pasture during 1971 and 1972, including the date of the incident herein, November 21, 1972. Love claims he paid cash rent to McConnell and performed services in exchange for the right to pasture his animals.
In March, 1972, McConnell and his wife were divorced. He vacated the property, and Mrs. McConnell stayed on as the lessee and made a new agreement with Love, under which he paid additional rent and performed certain services. In June, 1972, Mrs. McConnell married Clarence Auler, and she and her new husband lived on the property as lessees until August 28 or 29, 1972. She paid rent to Dunn Farms through October, 1972. Dunn Farms and the Aulers were unable to agree upon a lease, and the Aulers left the property on that date. Apparently Love continued to maintain his horses and ponies in the west pasture.
One or more of the stockholders and officers made occasional trips to Indiana for business purposes. They were in Marion twice in 1969, and in October, 1970, and August, 1972. The president and secretary of Dunn Farms came to Indiana on November 18, 1972, and went to the property on that day and each succeeding day, to and including the day of November 21, 1972, when this accident occurred. Their purpose for being on the property was to clean up the buildings and make arrangements to find a new renter for the property. There was evidence that, in their trips to the house and building area, one or more of the owners (Dunns) saw some horses in the fields.
The summary judgment entered by the trial court here was based on Dunn Farms’ contention that a landowner who is neither the owner not custodian of a horse cannot be held liable for injury caused by the alleged escape and running at large of such horse. The court reasoned that mere ownership of land cannot serve as a basis for liability. The uncontroverted evidence showed that Dunn Farms was neither the owner nor the custodian of the horse in question, had no material relation to such horse, and had no material relation to the owner-keeper of such horse. Although there was evidence that Love’s horses had been out or the pastures before, there was no evidence that Dunn Farms’ owners had any knowledge of these incidents.
*563The keeper of an animal has the duty and responsibility to provide for the restraining and confinement of that animal. Those cases which have been presented with this issue were, in fact, decided on the basis of this responsibility for the keeping and confinement of the animal. See, e. g., Thompson v. Lee, (1980) Ind.App., 402 N.E.2d 1309. In Corey v. Smith, (1954) 233 Ind. 452, 120 N.E.2d 410, this Court followed that rule of law in affirming a judgment against defendant Corey. Corey had rented a black angus bull from Harvey Case, who was also named as a defendant in the lawsuit. While Corey had the bull in his possession, it escaped its enclosure and was on and about the highway adjacent to the land. There was evidence that Corey knew of this and yet did not cause the bull to be removed from the highway and safely returned to its enclosure. The bull was struck by the plaintiff’s vehicle, and the accident and damages resulting to her were therefore found to be Corey’s responsibility. A directed verdict was entered for Case at the close of the plaintiff’s evidence. The court found that Corey was responsible for the damage caused to plaintiffs because of his negligence in allowing the angus bull under his care to run at large, noting that it was not essential to plaintiff’s cause of action to establish that the anus was vicious or had a propensity to attack automobiles. “He could have been gentle as a cat or dog, yet seven hundred pounds of black animal on a black-top state highway constituted a menace in the nighttime to the traveling public.” Id. at 456, 120 N.E.2d at 412. Notably, there was a statute in effect in Indiana at that time that provided for a criminal penalty for any person owning or harboring horses, mules, cattle, sheep, goats or swine, to permit such animals to roam at large upon the highways of the State or to feed upon or pasture upon the lands of another. Corey’s violation of this statute was found to be negligence per se in Smith’s action against him. Today the law in Indiana states that “A person responsible for a domestic animal who recklessly permits the animal to run at large commits a class B misdemeanor.” Ind. Code § 15-2.1-21-8 (Burns 1980 Supp.).
Thus, it is the duty of the owner and the keeper of the animal to keep him confined, and the mere possession or ownership of land from which an animal strays is not sufficient to make the landowner liable, so long as the landowner is not the keeper of such animal. This is and has always been the law in Indiana. See Cook v. Morea, (1870) 33 Ind. 497. If the landowner is neither the owner nor keeper, he has no duty to confine or restrain the animal. If an animal is allowed by its keeper to escape from its confinement and harm results, that damage results from the negligent confinement, not from the condition of the land. To the extent that the condition of the land made it inadequate or unsuitable for confinement, the responsibility for selecting an adequate method of confinement is upon the keeper, not upon the landowner who neither owned nor kept the animal. See Grigg v. Southern Pacific Co., (9th Cir. 1957) 246 F.2d 613, reh. denied, 248 F.2d 949; Heyen v. Willis, (1968) 94 Ill.App.2d 290, 236 N.E.2d 580. See generally 59 A.L.R.2d 1328, 1341, 1343; 4 Am.Jur.2d Animals, § 92.
The fact that Dunn Farms, in the person of one or more of their officers, had casually observed horses in the field on their property created no duty in them to be concerned that the horses might escape and cause injury; thus, Dunn Farms had no duty to take action to prevent or guard against such an occurrence. First, of course, domestic animals in a farm field do not present an unusual situation, or one which causes concern that a dangerous condition might be present, such that we can expect a reasonable person to make an immediate inspection of the property to determine if the enclosure is properly fenced to prevent such an eventuality. Moreover, in the case before us, under the terms of the lease that Dunn Farms had with these tenants, the tenants were to keep the place in repair, including the fences. Additionally, it appears that Dunn Farms contemplated a use of the property which did not require fencing, since Dunn Farms was not keeping *564any animals for its use on the property. These animals belonged to a sub-tenant of the tenant to which Dunn Farms was leasing. Dunn Farms had no knowledge of the bad condition of the fences, and had no reason to inspect them to determine their condition. In fact, as noted above, under the terms of McConnell’s lease, the tenant was to keep the property, including the fencing, in good and usable repair.
The facts in this case do not bring it within the rule set out in Pitcairn v. Whiteside, (1941) 109 Ind.App. 693, 34 N.E.2d 943, where it was held to be the duty of a property owner adjacent to a highway to exercise reasonable care to prevent injury caused by the property’s defective or dangerous condition. The defective or dangerous condition in Pitcairn was heavy smoke going across the traveled portion of the highway, caused by a railroad, through its employees, in burning off the right-of-way. We emphasize that in that case, the railroad itself was causing the dangerous condition that visited itself upon the traveled portion of the highway. This condition was heavy smoke, which billowed across the roadway so that drivers collided because they could not see other vehicles through the smoke. In that case, the dangerous condition existed for several hours throughout the day, with no effort on the part of the railroad employees to flag down moving vehicles approaching the smoke, or in any way to warn them of the dangerous condition.
Though we agree with the decision in Pitcairn, that case in no way parallels the facts and circumstances in the case before us. Here, the owner of the property had no relationship to the agency causing the problem, and no duty to investigate to determine if there was a problem, emergency, or dangerous condition. To hold otherwise would place a duty on a property owner to continually inspect the perimeters of his property, particularly along an adjacent highway, to make sure that dangerous conditions do not arise for those traveling on the highway.
Further, we must totally reject the conclusion of the Court of Appeals that the duty of a landowner to a person on an adjacent road is similar to that of a landowner to a business invitee. The duty of the business property owner to an invitee is an extra burden based on the relationship of the owner or occupier of the land to the one he invites for the benefit of the owner or occupier. Virtually every useable piece of property in the State of Indiana is adjacent to a roadway or highway. The road is a means of common ingress and egress to all of the properties along the highways, for this property owner and all other property owners. A particular landowner does not invite all persons using the highway for their own purposes to make that' use or traverse that part of the highway adjacent to his own property.
Therefore, the holding in Siegel v. 1536-46 St John’s Place Corp., (1945) 184 Misc. 1053, 1054-55, 57 N.Y.S.2d 473, 474, relied on by the Court of Appeals, has no applicability to this case. In Siegel, the defendant was a corporate landlord of apartments in which a corporation employee kept a vicious dog that harmed one of the tenants. Liability was based on the use of the land and the relationship between the damaged party and the corporate owner, not merely on ownership of the land. The same is true in Parr v. McDade, (1974) 161 Ind.App. 106, 314 N.E.2d 768, where the parties had a landlord tenant relationship, and damage to a tenant from fire was caused by the landlord’s employee on the premises. See also Fletcher v. Baltimore & P. R. Co., (1897) 168 U.S. 135, 18 S.Ct. 35, 42 L.Ed. 411. It is well settled that a business invitor owes a higher duty to those he invites on the property than he owes to one who is a trespasser or a licensee. Hammond v. Allegretti, (1974) 262 Ind. 82, 311 N.E.2d 821.
For all the foregoing reasons, opinions of the Court of Appeals are vacated and the trial court is affirmed.
GIVAN, C. J., and HUNTER and PRENTICE, JJ., concur.
DeBRULER, J., dissents with separate opinion.

=== CASE 9737736 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:33:27.570762+00 ===

*565DeBRULER, Justice,
dissenting.
Dunn Farms, Inc., was in the business of renting farms with fenced lots for enclosing domestic animals. The lot from which the animal escaped in this case had been rented to a tenant who had let it to a sub-tenant. The tenancy expired and the lot and fences were surrendered to Dunn. Upon taking it back Dunn discovered that domestic animals had been left in the lot by the former tenant. The fences enclosing the lot had become deteriorated and an animal strayed across them into the public thoroughfare causing severe injury to a passer-by. At common law the owner or keeper of domestic animals having the propensity to rove have a duty to confine them. Myers v. Dodd, (1857) 9 Ind. 290; Cook v. Morea, (1870) 33 Ind. 497. More recently that duty is placed upon persons “responsible for a domestic animal.” Ind. Code § 15-2.1-21-8. Also Ind. Code § 15-2-4-21, now repealed.
Dunn, as occupier of the land and fences at the time the animal strayed into the public road had authority to repair the fences or remove the animals. It had charge of the land upon which the animals stood, the fences which served to enclose them, the ingress and egress of the lot and thereby the availability of any food or water to them. It knew the animals were present. It was therefore in control and charge of them. As far as the public is concerned, Dunn should be considered the keeper of the animal which strayed into the path of the plaintiff’s car or in the alternative Dunn was responsible for the animal. I cannot therefore concur with the majority view that Dunn had no legal duty to protect others from its natural propensities. Neighbors and other concerned citizens could not lawfully go on the Dunn property to feed and water the animals and repair the fences so as to keep them from straying onto the road. These were not domestic animals which had strayed onto the Dunn land from adjoining lands of others. They were not wild animals. These were domestic animals left as a dangerous by-product of the rental business of the Dunn Farms, easily controlled and rendered harmless by proper care and fencing.

=== CASE 9737737 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:33:29.808574+00 ===

Corrigan, J.
We granted leave in this case to determine whether an indigent defendant is entitled to the appointment of appellate counsel at public expense when applying for leave to appeal a plea-based conviction. We hold that neither the state nor the federal constitution requires the appointment of counsel under these circumstances. Under our federalist scheme of government, Michigan remains free to decide the conditions under which appellate counsel will be provided where our state constitution commands that the mechanism of appellate review is discretionary. Const 1963, art 1, § 20.
Accordingly, we vacate the order of the Court of Appeals that remanded this case to the trial court for *500reconsideration in light of People v Najar, 229 Mich App 393; 581. NW2d 302 (1998), reinstate the trial court’s order denying defendant’s motion for appointment of appellate counsel, and remand this case to the trial court so that defendant may pursue his application for leave to appeal his convictions.
I. UNDERLYING FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
Defendant pleaded guilty in Saginaw Circuit Court on July 10, 1995, to possession with intent to deliver less than fifty grams of cocaine, MCL 333.7401(2)(a)(iv); MSA 14.15(7401)(2)(a)(iv), and possession of marijuana, MCL 333.7403(2)(d); MSA 14.15(7403)(2)(d). The trial court sentenced him to concurrent terms of imprisonment of six to twenty years for the cocaine conviction and one hundred forty-five days for the marijuana conviction. Defendant subsequently requested that the trial court appoint counsel to prepare his application for leave to appeal to the Court of Appeals. The trial court denied defendant’s request. Defendant, along with several similarly situated defendants, then sought superintending control in this Court. This Court dismissed the complaint, but granted defendant and the other petitioners twenty-one days in which to move for appointed appellate counsel in the trial court. This Court further ordered the trial court to appoint counsel to argue the motion.
Defendant thereafter moved for the appointment of appellate counsel. The trial court appointed counsel to represent defendant for purposes of the motion and any resulting appeal. Following argument, the trial court denied defendant’s motion in an opinion and order. The court noted that, in November 1994, *501the people of Michigan ratified Proposal B, which amended Const 1963, art 1, § 20 to state that “as provided by law an appeal by an accused who pleads guilty or nolo contendere shall be by leave of the court,”1 but left the provision regarding the appointment of counsel unchanged. The trial court further observed that, following the approval of Proposal B, this Court amended MCR 6.425(F)(1)(c) to provide that “[i]n a case involving a conviction following a plea of guilty or nolo contendere the court should liberally grant the request [for appointment of an attorney] if it is filed within 42 days after sentencing.”
In denying counsel, the trial court reasoned that appointing counsel for every indigent defendant who seeks leave to appeal a plea-based conviction would defeat the purpose of Proposal B, which was to reduce costs and burdens on the criminal justice system arising from guilty plea appeals. It also observed that the need for counsel is less compelling in applications from plea-based convictions because the simplicity of the proceedings makes the process of identifying errors easier. The court further concluded that appointment of counsel was not constitutionally required. The court then reviewed the plea and sentencing proceedings in this case and, noting the lack of apparent error, denied defendant’s request for counsel.
Defendant applied for leave to appeal the denial of his motion for appointed counsel. In lieu of granting leave, the Court of Appeals remanded the case to the *502trial court for reconsideration in light of Najar, supra. The Court stated:
Najar neither requires the appointment of appellate counsel under MCR 6.425(F)(1)(c) in every case, nor forecloses the ability of a trial court to exercise its discretion to appoint counsel under MCR 6.425(F)(1)(c) in any case in which it concludes that the defendant is in need of assistance to pursue an application for leave to appeal. [Unpublished order, entered July 21, 1998 (Docket No. 209031).]
In Najar, the Court of Appeals addressed the question presented in the instant case. The Court reasoned that while Const 1963, art 1, § 20 entitles a defendant to “reasonable assistance in perfecting and prosecuting an appeal[,] . . . [a]n application for leave to bring an appeal is plainly and simply not an appeal.” Najar, supra at 398. The Court further concluded that neither the state nor the federal constitution guarantees a right to appointed counsel to pursue an application for leave to appeal. Finally, the Court considered the language of MCR 6.425(F)(1)(c), and concluded that the trial court has discretion to appoint counsel, but should appoint counsel when a defendant
raises any issue other than one relating to (1) the facial regularity of the plea-taking procedure, (2) the trial court’s adherence to a sentencing agreement, (3) a plain correction of clerical error in court documents, such as a misspelling or a mathematical miscalculation, or (4) other instances absolutely devoid of merit .... [Najar, supra at 403-404.]
Following the order of the Court of Appeals remanding this case to the trial court for reconsideration in light of Najar, defendant sought leave to *503appeal to this Court, which we granted. 459 Mich 873 (1998).
II. HISTORY OF RELEVANT STATE AUTHORITIES
Before the ratification of the 1963 Michigan Constitution, Const 1908, art 2, § 19 provided that an accused was entitled “in courts of record, when the trial court shall so order, to have such reasonable assistance as may be necessary to perfect and prosecute an appeal.” Criminal defendants, however, were not entitled to an appeal as of right. Const 1963, art 1, § 20, provided before the adoption of Proposal B in 1994 that a defendant had “an appeal as a matter of right; and as provided by law, when the trial court so orders, to have such reasonable assistance as may be necessary to perfect and prosecute an appeal.” (Emphasis added.)2
Art 1, § 20, in its earlier form, thus provided defendants an appeal of right from all criminal convictions. Accordingly, this Court held in People v Smith, 402 Mich 72; 259 NW2d 558 (1977), that defendants could appeal by right from plea-based convictions. Moreover, the Court of Appeals held that a defendant’s right to appeal plea-based convictions included a corollary right to appointment of appellate counsel. People v Gazaway, 35 Mich App 39, 42; 192 NW2d 122 (1971).
Before the ratification of Proposal B in 1994, Michigan was one of only a handful of states that provided an unconditional right of appeal for those who *504pleaded guilty.3 In 1994, the Legislature submitted Proposal B to the electorate to decide whether to make appeals from plea-based convictions discretionary. “Eliminating appeals as a matter of right from plea-based convictions was suggested as a way to help control the case load [sic] of the Michigan Court of Appeals.” Note, Limiting Michigan’s guilty and nolo contendere plea appeals, 73 U Det Mercy L R 431 (1996). By 1992, the Court of Appeals had a backlog of more than 4,000 cases awaiting decision, and “[p]lea-based appeals constitute^] approximately thirty percent of all appeals facing the Michigan Court of Appeals.” Id., p 438. Eliminating appeals of right from plea-based convictions was one method proposed to reduce a crushing burden on our appellate courts.
The voters approved Proposal B by a margin of sixty-four percent to thirty-six percent. Id., p 431. As amended, Const 1963, art 1, § 20 now states that an accused is entitled “to have an appeal as a matter of right, except as provided by law an appeal by an accused who pleads guilty or nolo contendere shall be by leave of the court . . . .” (Emphasis added.) Proposal B did not alter the provision of art 1, § 20 that grants defendants “as provided by law, when the trial *505court so orders, . . . such reasonable assistance as may be necessary to perfect and prosecute an appeal.” The Legislature subsequently enacted MCL 770.3(l)(e); MSA 28.1100(l)(e), providing for appeals from plea-based convictions by application for leave to appeal.
On December 30, 1994, this Court acted “to preserve the issue of appointment of counsel and payment therefor pending legislative clarification” because of “the absence of legislative action clarifying the Legislature’s position regarding the right to appointment of counsel in guilty plea cases in light of the November 1994 amendment of Const 1963, art 1, § 20 . . . .” 447 Mich cl. We adopted, on an interim basis, MCR 6.425(F)(1)(c), which provides that “[i]n a case involving a conviction following a plea of guilty or nolo contendere the court should liberally grant the request [for appointed counsel] if it is filed within 42 days after sentencing.” 447 Mich cliii.
This Court extended the expiration date of the amended court rule on several occasions “in anticipation of legislation regarding the appointment of appellate counsel in guilty plea cases.” 455 Mich lxxx (1997). Concluding after several years of interim rules that the Legislature was not moving to address the problem, this Court extended the rule indefinitely. Id. In joining this Court’s order, Justice Boyle explained:
Absent legislative implementation of the constitutional amendment and consistent with our reluctance to prejudge legal issues through exercise of the rule-making power, we have entered four interim orders authorizing appointment of counsel in order to protect an indigent defendant’s ability to have the assistance of counsel in pursuing appellate remedies.
*506We have therefore repeatedly sought clarification of the Legislature’s understanding of the amendment to avoid imposing costs on local funding units through court rules, expressing concern that the Legislature’s failure to act reflects Headlee considerations.
Every indication is that we have reached stalemate. Rather than deprive defendants of the assistance of counsel that the voters might not intend, I agree that the Court should extend the rules indefinitely. [Id., pp Ixxx-lxxxi.]
While this case has been pending in this Court, statutory amendments were enacted requiring the appointment of appellate counsel in guilty plea cases in certain defined circumstances, permitting appointment in another, and otherwise providing that appellate counsel shall not be appointed. 1999 PA 200, MCL 770.3a; MSA 28.1100a. This act took effect on April 1, 2000. Because this new statute does not apply to defendant, the question of its constitutionality is not before us.4
HI. RIGHT TO COUNSEL UNDER CONST 1963, ART 1, § 20
We first address defendant’s contention that Const 1963, art 1, § 20 entitles him to appointed counsel. As amended, art 1, § 20 provides, in part:
In every criminal prosecution, the accused shall have the right ... to have an appeal as a matter of right, except as provided by law an appeal by an accused who pleads guilty or nolo contendere shall be by leave of the court; and as provided by law, when the trial court so orders, to have *507such reasonable assistance as may be necessary to perfect and prosecute an appeal. [Emphasis added.]
We emphasize that, after the ratification of Proposal B, indigent defendants who plead guilty or nolo contendere are no longer entitled to appeal their convictions as a matter of right. Rather, they must apply for leave to appeal. Defendant contends that, when applying for leave to appeal, he is entitled to the appointment of counsel as “reasonable assistance” that is “necessary to perfect and prosecute an appeal.” A defendant, however, is entitled to “reasonable assistance” only when it is “provided by law” and “the trial court so orders.” As discussed below, we conclude that defendant has no right to appointed counsel under our state constitution because the appointment of appellate counsel for an indigent defendant applying for leave to appeal from a plea-based conviction was not provided by law at any relevant time in this case.
In construing our constitution, this Court’s object is to give effect to the intent of the people adopting it. Charles Reinhart Co v Winiemko, 444 Mich 579, 606; 513 NW2d 773 (1994). ‘ Hence, the primary source for ascertaining its meaning is to examine its plain meaning as understood by its ratifiers at the time of its adoption.” Id. Since the 1972 amendment, art 1, § 20 has provided that a defendant is only entitled, as provided by law, and when the trial court so orders, to such reasonable assistance as is necessary to perfect and prosecute an appeal. Before the passage of Proposal B, however, no reason existed for this Court to construe the “as provided by law” language. Since guilty plea appeals were as of right, and the United States Constitution requires that the state provide *508counsel in a first appeal of right, Douglas v California, 372 US 353; 83 S Ct 814; 9 L Ed 2d 811 (1963), this Court was never called upon to decide whether the appointment of appellate counsel in guilty plea appeals was “provided by law.” Because the ratification of Proposal B made guilty plea appeals discretionary, we must now consider that question.
The drafters of the 1963 Constitution used the phrase “provided by law” in several provisions. See, e.g., Const 1963, art 6, §§ 10, 15, 28. This Court has consistently construed the “provided by law” language as vesting authority to act in the Legislature. For example, Const 1963, art 6, § 15 provides that the jurisdiction, powers, and duties of the probate courts “shall be provided by law.” In Buback v Governor, 380 Mich 209, 226; 156 NW2d 549 (1968), this Court held that art 6, § 15 grants the Legislature the power to define the probate courts’ jurisdiction and noted as follows regarding the meaning of the phrase “provided by law” in our constitution:
The committee on style and drafting of the constitutional convention of 1961 made a distinction in the use of the words “prescribed by law” and the words “provided by law.” Where “provided by law” is used, it is intended that the legislature shall do the entire job of implementation. Where only the details were left to the legislature and not the overall planning, the committee used the words “prescribed by law.” See 2 Official Record, Constitutional Convention of 1961, pp 2673, 2674. [380 Mich 226.]
See also In re Kasuba Estate, 401 Mich 560, 566; 258 NW2d 731 (1977) (“[t]he Constitution provides for statutory definition of the jurisdiction of probate courts and our power to make rules of practice and *509procedure cannot be used to expand that jurisdiction without legislative consent”).
The drafters also used the phrase “provided by law” in art 6, § 10: “The jurisdiction of the court of appeals shall be provided by law and the practice and procedure therein shall be prescribed by rules of the supreme court.” The plain language of this section clearly reveals that the phrase “provided by law” does not include this Court’s rulemaking powers. Accordingly, this Court stated in People v Cooke, 419 Mich 420, 430; 355 NW2d 88 (1984), that “[t]he Legislature, not this Court, has the power under the constitution to prescribe the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeals.”
Further, Const 1963, art 5, § 29, provides, in part, that the Civil Rights Commission “shall have other powers provided by law to carry out its purposes.” In Beech Grove Investment Co v Civil Rights Comm, 380 Mich 405, 419; 157 NW2d 213 (1968), Justice Adams, writing for a plurality of the Court, construed art 5, § 29 to afford the Legislature the task of granting such “other powers” to the Civil Rights Commission. Thus, this Court has consistently held that use of the phrase “provided by law” in our constitution contemplates legislative action. Where action by this Court pursuant to its rulemaking powers is contemplated, the constitution explicitly says so. See, e.g., Const 1963, art 6, §§ 10, 30.
The constitutional provision presently under consideration, art 1, § 20, provides that an accused has the right “as provided by law, when the trial court so orders, to have such reasonable assistance as may be necessary to perfect and prosecute an appeal.” (Emphasis added.) Given the use of the phrase “as provided by law” in this section, our state constitu*510tion entitles defendant to the appointment of counsel only to the extent that such assistance is legislatively required. When defendant requested appointment of appellate counsel at state expense, the Legislature had not acted to provide appointed counsel for indigent defendants seeking leave to appeal from plea-based convictions. Since the Legislature had not acted, the appointment of counsel for defendant was not “provided by law.” Accordingly, Const 1963, art 1, § 20, does not afford defendant the right to appointed counsel.
Defendant does not contend in this Court that 1999 PA 200 governs his case as his request for counsel occurred before the effective date of the act. Nor does defendant argue that, if the statute applied, he would satisfy any of the conditions for appointing counsel to pursue the application.
Defendant’s reliance on MCR 6.425(F)(1)(c) is likewise misplaced. When defendant requested counsel, the court rule provided:
In a case involving a conviction following a plea of guilty or nolo contendere the court should liberally grant the request [for appointed counsel] if it is filed within 42 days after sentencing.
Under Const 1963, art 1, § 20, however, this Court lacked the authority to adopt MCR 6.425(F)(1)(c). The phrase “provided by law” permits action by the Legislature only. Accordingly, this Court could not use its rulemaking powers to provide for appointed appellate counsel in the absence of legislative action.5 *511The Michigan Constitution does not afford indigent defendants seeking leave to appeal from plea-based convictions the right to appointed counsel absent legislative action.
IV. RIGHT TO COUNSEL UNDER THE FEDERAL CONSTITUTION
We next address defendant’s argument that the federal constitution guarantees him the right to appointed appellate counsel when seeking leave to appeal his guilty plea conviction. Of course, the federal constitution does not require the fifty states to provide any appeal whatsoever to criminal defendants. Ross v Moffitt, 417 US 600, 606; 94 S Ct 2437; 41 L Ed 2d 341 (1974); McKane v Durston, 153 US 684; 14 S Ct 913; 38 L Ed 867 (1894). As discussed, after the enactment of Proposal B, Michigan no longer affords an appeal of right to defendants who plead guilty or nolo contendere. Art 1, § 20. A defendant who pleads guilty or nolo contendere may only appeal his conviction by seeking and obtaining leave from the Court of Appeals.
Our research discloses no authority that recognizes the right to appeal a plea of guilty as a fundamental right. Under the due process-equal protection test of Ross v Moffitt, supra, Michigan’s scheme gives guilty-pleading defendants a fair opportunity to have their claims heard in our appellate courts. Further, Michigan’s current arrangements for inmate access to the courts, including law libraries, paralegal assistance, and staff attorney programs, satisfy the so-called right to meaningful access. Accordingly, we conclude that Michigan’s scheme does not offend the Fourteenth Amendment.
*512The United States Supreme Court has never specifically held that the federal constitution commands that an indigent defendant who pleads guilty or nolo contendere, and whose appeal therefrom is purely discretionary, is entitled to the appointment of appellate counsel. In Douglas, the California District Court of Appeals denied the defendants’ request for appointed appellate counsel in their appeal of right following their convictions at trial. Douglas, supra, pp 353-355. The Court required the states to furnish appellate counsel for indigent defendants in their first appeal as of right. Id., pp 356-357. The Douglas Court relied on Griffin v Illinois, 351 US 12; 76 S Ct 585; 100 L Ed 891 (1956), in which the Court, in a plurality opinion, held that a state cannot deny a defendant an appeal because he lacks the financial resources to purchase a trial transcript. In Douglas, the Court reasoned, in part, as follows:
There is lacking that equality demanded by the Fourteenth Amendment where the rich man, who appeals as of right, enjoys the benefit of counsel’s examination into the record, research of the law, and marshalling of arguments on his behalf, while the indigent, already burdened by a preliminary determination that Ms case is without merit [under California’s then-existmg system for deciding whether to appoint counsel], is forced to shift for himself. The indigent, where the record is unclear or the errors are hidden, has oMy the right to a meamngless ritual, wMle the rich man has a meanmgful appeal. [Id., pp 357-358.]
The Court also noted, however, “that a State can, consistently with the Fourteenth Amendment, provide for differences so long as the result does not amount to a *513denial of due process or an ‘invidious discrimination.’ ” Id., p 356.6
In Ross, North Carolina provided the defendant appointed counsel in his appeal of right to their intermediate appellate court following a conviction at trial. Id., pp 603-604. That court affirmed the convictions, and the defendant then sought to invoke the discretionary review procedure of the North Carolina Supreme Court. Id. The North Carolina Supreme Court refused to appoint counsel for review in that court. Id.
The Supreme Court affirmed the North Carolina Supreme Court. It held that the federal constitution does not require the appointment of appellate counsel on discretionary review to the North Carolina Supreme Court. Id., pp 610-612. Unlike Douglas, Ross separately analyzed the issue under both the Due Process and Equal Protection Clauses. In its due process analysis, the Court noted a fundamental difference between the trial and appellate stages of criminal proceedings. Id., pp 610-611. At trial, due process requires that the state provide the accused counsel as a shield to fend off the state’s efforts to convict him. Id. “By contrast, it is ordinarily the defendant, rather than the State, who initiates the appellate process, seeking not to fend off the efforts of the State’s prosecutor but rather to overturn a finding of guilt made by a judge or jury below.” Id., p 610. Appellate counsel serves as a sword rather than a shield. Id., pp 610-*514611. The Court thus concluded that “[ujnfaimess results only if indigents are singled out by the State and denied meaningful access to the appellate system because of their poverty. That question is more profitably considered under an equal protection analysis.” Id., p 611.
In its equal protection analysis, the Ross Court explained that the Fourteenth Amendment does not require absolute equality, but does require an appellate system that is free of unreasoned distinctions. Id., p 612.
The duty of the State under our cases is not to duplicate the legal arsenal that may be privately retained by a criminal defendant in a continuing effort to reverse his conviction, but only to assure the indigent defendant an adequate opportunity to present his claims fairly in the context of the State’s appellate process. [Id., p 616.]
In concluding that appointed counsel is not required for a discretionary appeal to a state Supreme Court, the United States Supreme Court noted that the defendant had “received the benefit of counsel in examining the record of his trial and in preparing an appellate brief on his behalf for the state Court of Appeals” in his first appeal of right. Id., p 614. The United States Supreme Court thus reasoned:
We do not believe that it can be said, therefore, that a defendant in respondent’s circumstances is denied meaningful access to the North Carolina Supreme Court simply because the State does not appoint counsel to aid him in seeking review in that court. At that stage he will have, at the very least, a transcript or other record of trial proceedings, a brief on his behalf in the Court of Appeals setting forth his claims of error, and in many cases an opinion of the Court of Appeals disposing of his case. These materials, *515supplemented by whatever submission respondent may make pro se, would appear to provide the Supreme Court of North Carolina with an adequate basis for its decision to grant or deny review. [Id., p 615.]
The doctrinal basis of the Griffin/Douglas line is difficult to ascertain. To the extent that Griffin and Douglas rely on equal protection principles, Washington v Davis, 426 US 229; 96 S Ct 2040; 48 L Ed 2d 597 (1976), undermined their validity by making proof of discriminatory puipose an essential element of an equal protection claim. Const 1963, art 1, § 20 is unquestionably facially neutral. Defendant in this case has not shown that the state intended to discriminate against criminal defendants on the basis of indigency. Recently, however, the Supreme Court in MLB v SLJ, 519 US 102; 117 S Ct 555; 136 L Ed 2d 473 (1996), rejected the notion that Davis had implicitly overruled the Griffin/Douglas line. In MLB, the Court extended the Griffin rationale to require Mississippi to supply a record to an indigent parent whose parental rights had been terminated to permit proper appellate consideration of her claims. While noting that the Griffin line of cases have reflected both equal protection and due process concerns, the MLB Court reasoned that most decisions in this area rest on an equal protection framework since “due process does not independently require that the State provide a right to appeal.” Id., p 120. The Court distinguished termination of parental rights cases from the “mine run,” id., p 116, of civil cases on the ground that they involve the permanent destruction of “the most fundamental family relationship.” Id., p 121. The Court did not explain, however, why the Davis purposeful discrimination requirement is inapposite. Indeed, the *516Supreme Court has yet to articulate any constitutional underpinnings for its “access to appeal” decisions in light of its own modem equal protection jurisprudence.
Despite the muddled state of its jurisprudence, we adhere to our duty to attempt to understand and apply what the Supreme Court has opined regarding the right of meaningful access. As explained below, we conclude that meaningful access does not require the appointment of counsel for defendants who seek discretionary leave to appeal from their guilty pleas. Our current system already provides those defendants with an adequate opportunity to present their claims fairly.
A. DISTINCT NATURE OF PLEA PROCEEDINGS
Appeals from plea-based convictions and appeals from convictions obtained following trials, like those appeals at issue in Douglas and Ross, are fundamentally different. Foremost, a defendant who tenders a plea has admitted guilt of the offense in open court. “[A] guilty plea represents a break in the chain of events which has preceded it in the criminal process. When a criminal defendant has solemnly admitted in open court that he is in fact guilty of the offense with which he is charged, he may not thereafter raise independent claims relating to the deprivation of constitutional rights that occurred prior to the entry of the guilty plea.” Tollett v Henderson, 411 US 258, 267; 93 S Ct 1602; 36 L Ed 2d 235 (1973).
Further, the state has a “fundamental interest in the finality of guilty pleas . . . .” Hill v Lockhart, 474 US 52, 58; 106 S Ct 366; 88 L Ed 2d 203 (1985). A guilty *517plea evidences a defendant’s desire to terminate the prosecution. Thus, a defendant who concedes his guilt has acceded to the state’s fundamental interest in finality.
Plea proceedings are also shorter, simpler, and more routine than trials; the record most often consists of the “factual basis” for the plea that is provided to the trial court. In contrast with trials, less danger exists in plea cases that the record will be so unclear, or the errors so hidden, that the defendant’s appeal will be reduced to a meaningless ritual. Also, a concession of guilt limits considerably the potential issues that can be raised on appeal. See 1A Gillespie, Michigan Criminal Law & Procedure (2d ed), § 16:30, pp 94-104 (discussing the effect of a plea on the availability of various appellate claims).7 These are all reasoned distinctions that are relevant to determining whether Michigan provides “meaningful access” to the appellate courts.
*518B. INDIGENT GUILTY PLEA DEFENDANTS IN MICHIGAN HAVE MEANINGFUL ACCESS TO THE APPELLATE SYSTEM
Given the obvious differences between trial-based and guilty plea convictions, it is clear that our current guilty plea procedures provide sufficient methods of assistance to meet the Ross meaningful access requirement. To preserve an issue for appeal, a defendant must move to withdraw his plea before the trial court. MCR 6.311(C). MCR 6.005(H)(4) states that “unless an appellate lawyer has been appointed, [appointed trial counsel is responsible for the] filing of postconviction motions the lawyer deems appropriate, including motions ... to withdraw plea, or for resentencing." (Emphasis added.) Thus, our court rules require trial counsel to assist the defendant in organizing and presenting to the trial court any potential appellate issues that warrant preservation. Accordingly, a pro se defendant seeking discretionary review will have the benefit of a transcript, trial counsel's framing of the issues in the motion to withdraw, and the trial court’s ruling on the motion. As in Ross, these factors will aid the defendant in identifying and asserting claims. Further, prison inmates filing discretionary applications will have the same access to law libraries, paralegal assistance, and staff attorneys that Michigan provides to them in other postconviction proceedings. While trial counsel cannot be relied on to advise the defendant of ineffective assistance of counsel claims, those claims that have merit likely will be apparent on the record.8
*519We acknowledge that the tools available to indigent defendants seeking leave to appeal from their guilty pleas are not equivalent to those present in Douglas and Ross. However, Douglas and Ross both involved appeals from convictions following trial. Neither Douglas nor Ross addressed the issue before us, namely, whether a defendant is entitled under the federal constitution to appointed counsel in a first discretionary appeal from a plea-based conviction. As stated, the differences between trial- and plea-based convictions are undeniable. Thus, any statements in Douglas and Ross suggesting the necessity of a reasoned lower court decision and a brief prepared by an attorney in the lower court must be considered in the context in which those cases were decided.
Finally, we acknowledge that the Court has, since Ross, continued to expand its “meaningful access” line of cases in the context of filing fees and transcripts. See, e.g., MLB, supra. However, we note that none of those decisions have expanded on the right to counsel recognized in Douglas. Thus, we conclude *520that the free transcript and counsel cases are really on separate trajectories. Indeed, compare the Court’s expansive jurisprudence in the free transcript/filing fees cases against its contracting jurisprudence regarding the right to counsel in identical settings. See, e.g., 3 LaFave, Israel & King, Criminal Procedure (2d ed), §§ 11.2(c) and (d). The Court has extended the right to transcripts at state expense in collateral attack cases and habeas corpus proceedings. In the analogous postconviction setting, the Court has never voted to expand the Douglas right to counsel. Since Douglas itself, the Supreme Court has never, not once, even in the case of inmates on death row, ordered counsel appointed for individual petitioners as a component of the right of meaningful access.9
V. CONCLUSION
No one questions that the appointment of appellate counsel at state expense would be more efficient and helpful not only to defendants, but also to the appellate courts. The distinct character of plea proceedings, however, will “make this relative handicap far *521less than the handicap borne by the indigent defendant denied counsel on his initial appeal as of right,” Ross, supra, p 616, from a trial conviction.10 Even more important, “the fact that a particular service might be of benefit to an indigent defendant does not mean that the service is constitutionally required.” Id. “The Fourteenth Amendment ‘does not require absolute equality or precisely equal advantages,’ . . . nor does it require the State to ‘equalize economic conditions.’ ” Id., p 612. “We address not what is prudent or appropriate, but only what is constitutionally compelled.” Smith v Robbins, 528 US 259,_; 120 S Ct 746, 763; 145 L Ed 2d 756 (2000) (internal quotation omitted).11
In summary, defendant is not entitled to appointed appellate counsel under either the state or federal constitution. Defendant is not entitled to the appointment of appellate counsel under art 1, § 20 because such assistance was not “provided by law” when defendant requested counsel. Moreover, the federal constitution does not mandate appointment of counsel under the present circumstances because defend*522ant has not been denied meaningful access to Michigan’s appellate courts. Accordingly, we vacate the Court of Appeals order, reinstate the trial court’s order denying appointment of counsel, and remand the case to the trial court so that defendant may pursue his application for leave to appeal his convictions.12
Weaver, C.J., and Taylor and Young, JJ., concurred with Corrigan, J.
The Legislature subsequently enacted MCL 770.3(l)(e); MSA 28.1100(l)(e), providing that appeals from plea-based convictions shall be by application for leave to appeal.
The “as provided by law” language in this portion of Const 1963, art 1, § 20 was added by a constitutional amendment approved at a special election held on August 8, 1972.
See Krull, Eliminating appeals from guilty pleas, 29 Oct Ariz Atty 34, 35 (1992). Before a 1992 rule change in Arizona, that state
was but one of a small minority of states (seven in all) that allowed for the unrestricted appeal from judgments and sentences imposed pursuant to plea agreements. Of the remaining states, 21 do not allow for any appeals from plea agreements, six allow for appeals from plea agreements but restrict the issues that can be raised, and 16 allow for the express waiver of the right to appeal as a condition of a plea agreement. Arizona apparently has elected to become a member of this last group.
Following the statute’s enactment, we amended our court rules to eliminate the “liberally grant” standard of MCR 6.425(F)(1)(c) and to provide for the appointment of counsel in those circumstances directed by the statute.
To the extent that the Court of Appeals relied on and construed MCR 6.425(F)(1)(c) in Najar, supra, that decision is overruled.
As the Court later noted in Ross, the Douglas Court did not explicitly indicate whether its holding was based on the Due Process Clause or the Equal Protection Clause. “Neither Clause by itself provides an entirely satisfactory basis for the result reached, each depending on a different inquiry which emphasizes different factors.” Id., 417 US 609.
By pleading guilty or nolo contendere, a defendant waives the following issues: search and seizure claims, defective complaint and warrant claims, claims of error as to the preliminary examination (including sufficiency of the proofs to bind over), Fifth Amendment claims, noiyurisdictional evidentiary issues, challenges to operating a vehicle while under influence of alcohol predicate offenses, claims (including constitutional claims) relating to the defendant’s factual guilt and the prosecution’s ability to prove the case, claims of error in juvenile waiver proceedings, speedy trial claims (if the plea is unconditional), claims of violation of the statutory 180-day rule, claims of speedy trial under MCL 768.1; MSA 28.1024, claims of failure to timely file the habitual information, statute of limitations claims, unpreserved entrapment claims, double jeopardy claims that are unpreserved so that the necessary facts to support the claim are missing, and ineffective assistance of counsel claims in which the underlying issues are waived by a guilty plea. Gillespie, Michigan Criminal Law & Procedure, Practice Deskbook (2d ed), § 10:50, pp 10-15 to 10-17.
The dissent asserts that “a ‘correct adjudication of guilt’ involves more than just an admission of guilt. Claims of failures to honor plea bargains, coercion or involuntariness of a plea, or lack of mental capacity to *519knowingly enter a plea, for example, all address the correctness of the ‘a<Jjudication of guilt.’ ” Post, p 560.
The dissent utterly fails to explain why the constitution compels appointment of counsel to identify and assert those guilty plea issues that the dissent labels as involving a “ ‘correct adjudication of guilt.’ ” Id. Claims of failures to honor plea bargains, coercion or involuntariness of a plea, and lack of mental capacity to enter a plea are all examples of issues that require preservation by a motion to withdraw under MCR 6.311(C). A defendant will accordingly have assistance of appointed trial counsel in identifying and raising those issues worth preserving. MCR 6.005(H)(4).
Moreover, most of these claims would likely be apparent to the defendant either from the record or through his own knowledge; a defendant normally would not require the assistance of an appellate attorney to know, for example, that he was coerced into pleading guilty or that the prosecutor made a promise that has not been honored. The possibility that an attorney might prove helpful in some cases does not mean that the constitution requires the appointment of appellate counsel.
The dissent continually asserts that our decision in this case creates a new scheme. In truth, the people of Michigan created a new scheme. Their approval of Proposal b made guilty plea appeals discretionary. Also, the people’s representatives in the Legislature had not acted to provide appellate counsel at taxpayer expense to upset guilty pleas during the relevant period in this case. Rather than creating a new scheme, our decision upholds the system created by the people directly and through their elected representatives.
Similarly, the dissent suggests that our holding creates the “system we will come to know in Michigan.” Post, p 553. The dissent overlooks the fact that our decision concerns only those guilty pleas appeals after the passage of Proposal b but before the enactment of 1999 PA 200. Thus, the “system we will come to know in Michigan” is the one recently chosen by the Legislature, barring a successful challenge on constitutional grounds.
The dissent accuses us of “sandwiching this quotation from Ross between [our] own modifiers” and of “relying on snippets from Ross without accounting for its reasoning that counsel could be denied on a discretionary appeal following an appeal where counsel was provided.” Post, p 560. This accusation is baseless. We have fully and fairly discussed Ross’ reasoning and holding. We obviously do not suggest through the above quotation that Ross decided the precise issue in this case.
The dissent devotes much of its analysis to showing that appointment of counsel would aid a defendant in identifying potential errors and asserting claims. This line of reasoning is based on a faulty premise, i.e., that the constitution requires states to do everything that would make appellate practice easier and more efficient. Ross, supra, p 616. By arguing, in effect, that appointment of counsel would be “prudent or appropriate,” the dissent fails to explain why it is “constitutionally compelled.” Smith, supra, 120 S Ct 763.
We observe that the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan recently enjoined the enforcement of 1999 PA 200 and the provisions of MCR 6.425 designed to implement it following that court’s earlier declaration that the statute is unconstitutional. Tesmer v Kowalski, unpublished opinion of the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan, issued June 30, 2000 (Docket No. 00-CV-10082). However, the district court expressly limited the scope of its ipjunctive order to the enforcement of 1999 PA 200. Accordingly, as the federal district court itself acknowledged, the decision in Tesmer does not affect the proceedings in this case.

=== CASE 9737738 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:33:29.823266+00 ===

Cavanagh, J.
I dissent from the majority opinion. That opinion swerves and dodges the decisions of the United States Supreme Court to generate a rationale for denying counsel in this case, and in doing so sets up a system that requires payment at the door for access to justice. Those who cannot pay that fee are offered only a meaningless ritual, although those who can afford it will have a meaningful appeal. By denying counsel to indigent defendants and setting up this system, the majority commits structural error, which presumptively results in prejudice. See Penson v Ohio, 488 US 75, 88; 109 S Ct 346; 102 L Ed 2d 300 (1988). I profoundly hope that this matter will make its way to the United States Supreme Court, so that Court can correct the constitutional miscarriage committed by the majority, and so that it can issue the *523decision that is uniformly directed by its past opinions.
i
After announcing that the United States Supreme Court has never addressed the precise question before this Court, the majority pursues a path that would allow it a free hand to take this case to the desired destination. That path begins with the statement that the “doctrinal basis” of Douglas v California, 372 US 353; 83 S Ct 814; 9 L Ed 2d 811 (1963), and Ross v Moffitt, 417 US 600; 94 S Ct 2437; 41 L Ed 2d 341 (1974), is “difficult to ascertain.” Ante at 515. Having left the designated path by searching for doctrinal clarity, which the Supreme Court itself has disclaimed by admitting that the precise rationale for these cases has never been articulated, see Smith v Robbins, 528 US 259, 120 S Ct 746, 759; 145 L Ed 2d 756 (2000), the majority proceeds down a road it calls “meaningful access.” Ante at 522.
The Court’s decisions in Douglas and Ross, and what those constitutional decisions require in the instant case, are not so difficult to understand, though, by considering the understanding the Supreme Court itself has had of those cases. Throughout the cases following Douglas and Ross, the Court has stated that it has “held again and again, an indigent defendant is entitled to the appointment of counsel to assist him on his first appeal . . . .” Entsminger v Iowa, 386 US 748, 751; 87 S Ct 1402; 18 L Ed 2d 501 (1967). By closely examining Douglas, Ross, and their progeny, why counsel was required in Douglas, and why the Court concluded that counsel *524was not constitutionally- required in Ross, become clear.
Indeed, those decisions of our nation’s highest Court poignantly outline the route laid out by the constitution. Though the majority views these decisions as land mines, and weaves to and fro to avoid them, I find them to construct a path. By following that constitutional path, I conclude that, as a matter of federal constitutional law, indigent defendants must have appointed counsel to assist them in pursuing their appeals by leave, their first and only appeal on the merits.
A. OUR JOURNEY BEGINS: GRIFFIN v ILLINOIS1
In our society, sometimes a sense prevails that if some of its members have not provided for themselves all that they need, they have only themselves to blame. Despite this social sense, in the context of a criminal prosecution, it clearly runs headlong into the view, embodied in our constitution, that all people are equal before the law and are entitled to basic protections in its face. The United States Supreme Court first recognized the supremacy of this latter view, as it relates to the availability of avenues of appeal from *525criminal convictions, in Griffin v Illinois, 351 US 12; 76 S Ct 585; 100 L Ed 891 (1956). In that case, the Court held that a state may not grant appellate review in a way that discriminates because of poverty or financial status. Although on its face this rule appears clear enough, it has proven difficult in practice. From this simple beginning, the federal courts have been called on repeatedly to define the lines of constitutional protection, first as various states continued to operate systems that failed to grasp the rule’s essence, and then as states created systems that attempted to skirt the lines of past decisions to yield savings in financial or judicial resources.2
B. DOUGLAS v CALIFORNIA: AN END TO MEANINGLESS RITUAL IN THE FIRST APPEAL
Our nation’s Supreme Court first passed directly on the right to appointed counsel on appeal in Douglas v California, supra. There, the defendants, following conviction on a variety of felonies, sought review in the California District Court of Appeal. In the course of seeking review, the defendants sought, and were denied, appointed counsel. The district court reasoned that it had “gone through” the record and concluded that “no good whatever could be served by appointment of counsel.” Id. at 354-355.
*526The Supreme Court believed this entire concept most troubling:
In spite of California’s forward treatment of indigents, under its present practice the type of an appeal a person is afforded in the District Court of Appeal hinges upon whether or not he can pay for the assistance of counsel. If he can the appellate court passes on the merits of his case only after having the full benefit of written briefs and oral argument by counsel. If he cannot the appellate court is forced to prejudge the merits before it can even determine whether counsel should be provided. At this stage in the proceedings only the barren record speaks for the indigent, and, unless the printed pages show that an injustice has been committed, he is forced to go without a champion on appeal. Any real chance he may have had of showing that his appeal has hidden merit is deprived him when the court decides on an ex parte examination of the record that the assistance of counsel is not required. [Id. at 355-356.]
Save the gracious comments regarding California’s treatment of indigency in other circumstances, this statement applies with equal force, and in fact describes, the system approved by the majority today. The only difference is that when the indigent is “deprived of a champion,” the prosecutor faces no such burden, and can command all his knowledge, experience, and resources to rebut any arguments the unskilled indigent could offer on his own.
Nonetheless, the Douglas Court, showing admirable restraint, limited itself to the facts before it. The Court cautioned:
We are not here concerned with problems that might arise from the denial of counsel for the preparation of a petition for discretionary or mandatory review beyond the stage in the appellate process at which the claims have once been presented by a lawyer and passed upon by an *527appellate court. We are dealing only with the first appeal, granted as a matter of right to rich and poor alike .... [Id. at 356.313]
The Court concluded this portion of the discussion by-noting that “where the merits of the one and only appeal an indigent has as of right are decided without benefit of counsel, we think an unconstitutional line has been drawn between rich and poor.” Id. at 357.4
Thus, from Douglas, several lessons are apparent. First, the type of appeal a person is afforded may not “hinge[] upon whether or not he can pay for the assistance of counsel.” Id. at 355-356. Second, the Court appears to link in large measure counsel’s availability to an indigent defendant on his first appeal with “[a]ny real chance he may have had of showing that his appeal has hidden merit . . . .” Id. at 356. The deprivation of one equals the deprivation of the other. Id.
*528Not precisely clear from the face of Douglas is the scope of the opinion as it applies to first appeals not of right. The language of the case addresses first appeals as of right, and thus could be read, as the majority demonstrates, to preclude applicability regarding first appeals not of right. However, other portions of the opinion’s language, and certainly its logic, dictate that the limitation precludes the opinion’s application only to discretionary appeals following first appeals.5
Fortunately, the Supreme Court has not left us without guidance on this matter, but has discussed its view of the holding in Douglas on many occasions. The first of these, and thus the next stop on our journey, is Ross v Moffitt, supra.
Before proceeding onward, though, we must pause at the point that has come to define the evil that Douglas sought to eradicate:
The present case, where counsel was denied petitioners on appeal, shows that the discrimination is not between “possibly good and obviously bad cases,” but between cases where the rich man can require the court to listen to argument of counsel before deciding on the merits, but a poor man cannot. There is lacking that equality demanded by the Fourteenth Amendment where the rich man, who appeals as of right, enjoys the benefit of counsel’s examination into the record, research of the law, and marshalling of arguments on his behalf, while the indigent, already burdened by a preliminary determination that his case is without merit, is forced to shift for himself. The indigent, where the record is unclear or the errors are hidden, has only the right *529to a meaningless ritual, while the rich man has a meaningful appeal. [Id. at 357-358.]
Mindful of this, we proceed on to Ross.
C. ROSS v MOFFITT: THE OUTER BOUNDARY DEFINED
In Ross, the Court was presented with the opportunity to decide the essential question left open in Douglas, whether the right to appointed counsel would extend to discretionary appeals following an appeal of right. The Court was actually presented with two distinct discretionary appellate routes for which counsel was sought, one for assistance in seeking to appeal to the North Carolina Supreme Court, and the other for assistance in seeking certiorari before the United States Supreme Court.
Following two separate forgery convictions, the respondent, while represented by appointed counsel, appealed to the North Carolina Court of Appeals. That court affirmed his convictions. Afterward, the defendant was denied counsel in his quest to seek review before both the North Carolina and the United States Supreme Courts. Appeal to the latter Court, of course, is available in this context only by way of an entirely discretionary grant of certiorari. Likewise, appeal to the North Carolina Supreme Court was also discretionary and available only by leave of court. In determining which cases to grant leave, the North Carolina Supreme Court, much as our Court does, followed particular rules that embodied concepts beyond the mere correctness of the result in a particular case.
In North Carolina, the court had the discretion to grant leave if it found that the application satisfied *530the applicable statute. To grant, the court had to find “(1) The subject matter of the appeal has significant public interest, or (2) The cause involves legal principles of major significance to the jurisprudence of the State, or (3) The decision of the Court of Appeals appears likely to be in conflict with a decision of the Supreme Court.” Ross, supra at 613-614, quoting NC Gen Stat 7A-31(c). These rules bear a close resemblance to our own rules for granting leave, in our case delineated by MCR 7.302(B).6
Writing for the Court, Justice Rehnquist began with a review of the Court’s past cases addressing indigent appeals. Referencing Griffin, Draper v Washington, 372 US 487; 83 S Ct 774; 9 L Ed 2d 899 (1963), Smith v Bennett, 365 US 708; 81 S Ct 895; 6 L Ed 2d 39 (1961), and Burns v Ohio, 360 US 252; 79 S Ct 1164; 3 L Ed 2d 1209 (1959), Justice Rehnquist noted that the “decisions discussed above stand for the proposition that a State cannot arbitrarily cut off appeal *531rights for indigents while leaving open avenues of appeal for more affluent persons.” Ross, supra at 607. From this rule, he then noted that Douglas “departed somewhat from the limited doctrine of the transcript and fee cases and undertook an examination of whether an indigent’s access to the appellate system was adequate.” Id. He reasoned further:
The Court in Douglas concluded that a State does not fulfill its responsibility toward indigent defendants merely by waiving its own requirements that a convicted defendant procure a transcript or pay a fee in order to appeal, and held that the State must go further and provide counsel for the indigent on his first appeal as of right. [Id.]
Discussing Douglas, Justice Rehnquist also noted the key distinction discussed above:
that under this system an indigent’s case was initially reviewed on the merits without the benefit of any organization or argument by counsel. By contrast, persons of greater means were not faced with the preliminary “ex parte examination of the record,” but had their arguments presented to the court in fully briefed form. [Id. at 608 (internal citations omitted).]
As the Court stated, “[t]he precise rationale for the Griffin and Douglas lines of cases has never been explicitly stated, some support being derived from the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, and some from the Due Process Clause of that Amendment.” Id. at 608-609.
Justice Rehnquist, though first recognizing the viability of a Due Process Clause analysis, nonetheless found that such a path would not lead to appointing counsel in the case before the Court, focusing on the differences between trial and appellate situations. *532“The fact that an appeal has been provided does not automatically mean that a State then acts unfairly by refusing to provide counsel to indigent defendants at every stage of the way.” Id. at 611.
Justice Rehnquist then noted that “[l]anguage involving equal protection notions is prominent in both Douglas and in other cases treating the rights of indigents on appeal.”7 Although the states cannot “adopt procedures which leave an indigent defendant ‘entirely cut off from any appeal at all,’ by virtue of his indigency,” id. at 612, quoting Lane v Brown, 372 US 477, 481; 83 S Ct 768; 9 L Ed 2d 892 (1963), or “extend to such indigent defendants merely a ‘meaningless ritual’ while others in better economic circumstances have a ‘meaningful appeal,’ ” id., quoting Douglas, supra at 358, “[t]he question is not one of absolutes, but one of degrees.” Id. Thus, it appears that, although Douglas clearly represented a level of disparate treatment that could not be tolerated by the Court, other situations, in some way degrees apart, but less invidious than the procedure in Douglas, might be acceptable. Rather than an absolute rule, Douglas instead offers a stick against which other procedures must be measured.8
The Douglas Court itself, in its exercise of restraint, spoke only of the situation before it, offer*533ing little insight into such degrees. Thus, we turn to the rationale of the Ross Court for tools to evaluate and measure this question of degree.
In approaching this question, Justice Rehnquist first offered an in-depth review of the procedure of the North Carolina Supreme Court, previously noted. These procedures are similar to those of our own Court.9 The question to be answered in determining whether the North Carolina Supreme Court would grant discretionary review was not the correctness of the result or the rationale evidenced below, but rather the importance of the case to the state’s jurisprudence. Indeed, though our own court rule specifically recognizes clear error and manifest injustice as potential bases supporting intervention, no equivalent provision was found for the North Carolina Supreme Court.10 Accordingly, the North Carolina Supreme Court was confined to the importance of the legal principles present in a case, rather than the particular merits of the case itself. This distinction was soon to be persuasive for Ross. Before returning to the function of North Carolina’s discretionary review, however, Justice Rehnquist came to the determination required under Douglas: whether the degree of restriction imposed on a defendant by the denial of counsel for a discretionary review would leave the indigent defendant with only a meaningless ritual, though a moneyed defendant would have a meaning*534ful appeal.11 If so, then an “unconstitutional line” would have been drawn.
On the other hand, as also recited by Justice Rehnquist, the Fourteenth Amendment “does not require absolute equality or precisely equal advantages.” Ross, supra at 612, quoting San Antonio Ind Sch Dist v Rodriguez, 411 US 1, 24; 93 S Ct 1278; 36 L Ed 2d 16 (1973). Likewise, the state is not required to “equalize economic conditions,” id., quoting Griffin, supra at 23 (Frankfurter, J., concurring), nor to be “free from unreasoned distinctions.”12
Thus, the “question of degree” requires measurement. To determine where the difference between the counseled application of a moneyed defendant and the uncounseled application of the indigent lies, Justice Rehnquist turned to the question most important to an appellate court, and one it is well positioned to answer. That is, whether the materials in the uncounseled application are sufficient to be helpful to the Court in reaching a decision.
*535The facts show that respondent, in connection with his Mecklenburg County conviction, received the benefit of counsel in examining the record of his trial and in preparing an appellate brief on his behalf for the state Court of Appeals. Thus, prior to seeking discretionary review in the state Supreme Court, his claims had “once been presented by a lawyer and passed upon by an appellate court.” We do not believe it can be said, therefore, that a defendant in respondent’s circumstances is denied meaningful access to the North Carolina Supreme Court simply because the State does not appoint counsel to aid him in seeking review in that court. At that stage he will have, at the very least, a transcript or other record of the trial proceedings, a brief on his behalf in the Court of Appeals setting forth his claims of error, and in many cases an opinion by the Court of Appeals disposing of his case. These materials, supplemented by whatever submission respondent may make pro se, would appear to provide the Supreme Court of North Carolina with an adequate basis for its decision to grant or deny review. [Pmss, supra at 614-615 (internal citations omitted; emphasis added).]
Therefore, the Ross Court’s focus was, and hence ours must be, whether the materials available to an indigent defendant, without the benefit of counsel, would be adequate to allow a court to determine whether to grant further review. We must compare the situation in Ross to what could come to be in the instant case, and what has come to be under the scheme imposed by the majority.
In the instant case, an indigent defendant is faced, by law, with only the ability to apply for leave to our Court of Appeals, and is now required to do so without the benefit of appointed counsel. He will have a transcript of the trial court proceedings. This is not all that he must have to offer our Court of Appeals, however; more is required for that Court’s “basis for its decision to grant or deny review.” Id. at 615. *536Return to the language above from Ross, and in particular, its italicized portions. Applying the dictates of our Supreme Court to the facts of the instant case, we need add but one word to describe the instant defendant’s situation, which we shall bracket:
At that stage he will [not] have, at the very least, ... a brief on his behalf in the Court of Appeals setting forth his claims of error, and in many cases an opinion by the Court of Appeals disposing of his case.[13]
Thus, rather than being comparable to the situation in Ross, the question before us presents a situation almost completely inapposite. Our Court of Appeals *537will have no brief, or even an identification of issues, by any counsel for the defendant. It will have, in nearly all instances, nothing in the way of an opinion of the court below on any substantive matter.14 Thus our Court of Appeals will have only the record before it, along with “whatever submissions respondent might make pro se . . . .”15 It may well have, however, an offering in opposition from the prosecutor, who is free to muster all the resources of the prosecutor’s office to oppose the application.16 This *538“question of degrees” between the instant case and Douglas, which Ross requires us to ask, instead becomes a vain search for distinctions between the instaut case and Douglas17 The degrees separating a “meaningless ritual” from a “meaningful appeal” are substantial, and the degrees separating the tools approved in Ross and those present in the instant case are equally substantial. Most importantly, though, in answer to the “question of degrees” Ross asks, which determines the constitutionality of the procedure before us, the degrees separating the meaningfulness of an indigent defendant’s appeal from that of a moneyed defendant are immense. Applying the analysis in Ross, we can ably conclude that the scheme imposed by the majority is unconstitutional under Ross because of its failure to separate itself from the gulf that existed between indigent defendants and moneyed defendants in Douglas.
Even before we depart from Ross, though, we can comfort ourselves that we are indeed correct in our determination by turning to the factors on which the Ross Court fortified its conclusion:
We are fortified in this conclusion by our understanding of the function served by discretionary review in the North Carolina Supreme Court. The critical issue in that court, as we perceive it, is not whether there has been “a correct adjudication of guilt” in every individual case, see Griffin v Rlinois, but rather whether “the subject matter of the *539appeal has significant public interest,” or whether “the cause involves legal principles of major significance to the jurisprudence of the State,” or whether the decision below is in probable conflict with a decision of the Supreme Court, The Supreme Court may deny certiorari even though it believes that the decision of the Court of Appeals was incorrect, since a decision which appears incorrect may nevertheless fail to satisfy any of the criteria discussed above. Once a defendant’s claims of error are organized and presented in a lawyerlike fashion to the Court of Appeals, the justices of the Supreme Court of North Carolina who make the decision to grant or deny discretionary review should be able to ascertain whether his case satisfies the standards established by the legislature for such review. [Ross, supra at 615 (citations omitted; emphasis added).]
Once again, we have added emphasis not only to aid the reader, but also as a tool for analyzing the stark contrast between the system underlying Ross and what now exists in our state under the majority decision. Turning to the first italicized section, with but a single modification, I offer the Ross logic as it now applies to indigent defendants seeking leave in the Court of Appeals:
The critical issue in that court, as we perceive it, is [] whether there has been “a correct adjudication of guilt” in every individual case, see Griffin v Illinois ....
Recall above the Supreme Court’s detailed analysis of the jurisdiction and practices of the North Carolina Supreme Court. Consider as well how it compared to the jurisdiction of this Court and MCR 7.302(B). Now, compare it to the jurisdiction and practice of our Court of Appeals. MCR 7.302(B) is applicable only to this Court. The rules applicable to our Court of Appeals are found in subchapter 7.200 of our court *540rules. MCR 7.203(B) governs the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeals for appeal by leave:
(B) Appeal by Leave. The court may grant leave to appeal from:
(1) a judgment or order of the circuit court, court of claims, and recorder’s court which is not a final judgment appealable of right;
(2) a final judgment entered by the circuit court or the recorder’s court on appeal from any other court;
(3) a final order of an administrative agency or tribunal which by law is appealable to or reviewable by the Court of Appeals or the Supreme Court;
(4) any other judgment or order appealable to the Court of Appeals by law or rule;
(5) any judgment or order when an appeal of right could have been taken but was not timely filed.
Appeal by leave in guilty-plea cases is provided by MCL 770.3(l)(e); MSA 28.1100(l)(e):
Subject to the limitations imposed by section 12 of this chapter, an aggrieved party shall have a right to appeal from a final judgment or trial as follows:
* * *
(e) All appeals from final orders and judgments based upon pleas of guilty or nolo contendere shall be by application for leave to appeal.[18]
Last, MCR 7.205 governs the mechanics of applications for leave to appeal. Of particular note is MCR 7.205(D):
Decision.
*541(1) There is no oral argument The application is decided on the documents filed and, in an appeal from an administrative tribunal or agency, the certified record.
(2) The court may grant or deny the application; enter a final decision; grant other relief; request additional material from the record; or require a certified concise statement of proceedings and facts from the court, tribunal, or agency whose order is being appealed. The clerk shall enter the court’s order and mail copies to the parties.
(3) If an application is granted, the case proceeds as an appeal of right, except that the filing of a claim of appeal is not required and the time limits for the filing of a cross appeal and for the taking of the other steps in the appeal, including the filing of the docketing statement (28 days), and the filing of the court reporter’s or recorder’s certificate if the transcript has not been filed (14 days), run from the date the order granting leave is certified.
(4) Unless otherwise ordered, the appeal is limited to the issues raised in the application and supporting brief.[19]
These quotations are unfortunately voluminous, but this is an inherent difficulty of demonstrating a negative. Neither the statute governing plea-based appeals nor the court rules governing jurisdiction of the Court of Appeals contain any limitation or jurisdictional statement comparable to MCR 7.302(B). More importantly, no authority contains any sort of jurisdictional basis limitation that even resembles that of the North Carolina Supreme Court discussed in Ross.20
This is so because the Court of Appeals, unlike this Court, or the North Carolina Supreme Court in Ross, *542is not limited in such a fashion. Rather, the function of the Court of Appeals is correcting errors. Thus, the function of that Court is precisely addressed by Griffin and Douglas, and conversely not at all by Ross. That function is determining whether there has been “a correct adjudication of guilt.”21 The very reason “fortifying” the Court’s decision in Ross cuts the opposite way in the instant case. The function of our Court of Appeals is determining the merits. As mentioned in the notes above, its order denying leave uniformly states that leave is denied for “lack of merit in the grounds presented.”
Once again, consider the second portion of the Ross fortifying rationale:
The Court may deny [leave] even though it believes that the decision of the [trial] court was incorrect.
The wording of this quotation leaves my editing less efficient, but it nonetheless contains a lesson. Nothing in our court rules or statute precludes the Court of Appeals from denying leave even though it may believe that the trial court’s decision was incorrect. Loosely defining “incorrect,” such a rule might well *543be appropriate, because it might be uneconomical, even pointless, for the Court of Appeals to correct a trial court decision on a minor point that would not affect the final decision. Likewise, this might be the case when a court below reached a correct result for an incorrect reason. Again, barring other considerations, concerns of judicial economy might counsel against granting leave. In the North Carolina situation considered in Ross, the correctness of the decision below was unmentioned and arguably irrelevant under the governing statute, but the function of our Court of Appeals is reviewing the merits and correcting errors made by the lower courts. Thus, any reliance by the majority on the Ross Court’s logic, and any comparison between the system in Ross, and that imposed by the majority, is wholly lacking in reason.
Finally, consider once more the last section of the Ross alternative supporting rationale:
Once a defendant’s claims of error are [not] organized and presented in a lawyerlike fashion to the Court of Appeals, the justices of the Supreme Court who make the decision to grant or deny discretionary review should be able to ascertain whether his case satisfies the standards established by the legislature for such review.
This quotation actually cuts two ways, and both do injury to our system. First, no organization or presentation of the defendant’s claims “in a lawyerlike fashion” to the Court of Appeals will occur in the absence of counsel. That Court will have no assistance from the indigent defendant’s comer, save whatever efforts he might make pro se. Moreover, whatever he offered to the trial court would be just that, offered to the trial court. At times, “making a record for appeal” could actually work on the basis of trial court offer*544ings. More common, though, are those errors that are less than apparent at the trial court level. To the extent that they are apparent, time to research and accurately marshal the law may not be. On some occasions, these errors may not be perceived at all, and be apparent only when the record is reviewed by a trained eye.
Second, as the quotation might be more readily understood, the justices of this Court would similarly face a lack of organized and supported claims of error on which to make a decision. We would be called on, were we to fulfill our duty, to review the application in each case to attempt to determine what the claims are. Then, we would have to turn to the record and attempt to locate the perceived source of errors, most likely without the benefit of citation, and finally to research the law to determine whether the claim is indeed justified. Further, that presumes we would confine ourselves only to those errors claimed by the pro se indigent defendant.
In the face of the above, this Court would certainly take a more efficient approach. It would strictly enforce the familiar rule that a litigant may not simply claim error and leave us to research the law. Mitcham v Detroit, 355 Mich 182, 203; 94 NW2d 388 (1959). It would refuse, even as it does now, to consider unpreserved errors, regardless of possible or apparent merit, and enforce the Court’s complex procedural and filing requirements.
As it takes each docket-clearing step, however, this Court would widen the gulf between a meaningful presentation of an appeal and a meaningless ritual of denial of leave. With each procedural denial, this Court will further fortify the barricade before the *545door that grants admission. Each passing day an order will move this Court ever closer to ripping from under itself the support that kept the North Carolina Supreme Court’s system in Ross, and our own system before the instant decision, within constitutional boundaries.
We are as bound by our constitution and Ross as our Court of Appeals, and equally likely, following the instant decision, to be forced to choose between sifting through an immense burden of pro se applications and taking actions that will immeasurably increase the gap between moneyed and indigent defendants.22 To be faithful to our oath, Michigan appellate judges will shoulder a significant burden. The alternative is to further prove what is likely in any event, that with the instant decision, this Court has undercut Ross so much that this Court’s own review will lack an adequate basis when an indigent defendant appears before this Court. The constitutional harbor offered by Ross will have dried up, and I welcome the review that drought will bring.
Finally, then, I could move on from Ross. Done with our journey we could be, the path clearly marked. Yet, I cannot, for with each citation by the majority of the “discretionary” nature of guilty-plea review, I face the grim realization that the Court has chosen to ignore the teachings of our Supreme Court, and instead has tried to pigeonhole the instant case into either a Douglas or Ross pre-formed box. *546Because it fits neither exactly, the majority concludes that it is free to decide this case as it chooses. Faced with this steadfast resistance to the language, logic, and authority of Douglas and Ross, I turn to a multitude of other cases, each of which reverberates with warning that the majority has left the designated road.
D. UNITED STATES v MacCOLLOM: CONSIDERABLE ASSISTANCE
As appellate judges, we do not have the blessing of requesting instructions from superior courts when we do not understand their decisions. Rather, we are left with only the Court’s written opinion; and when a point is less than clear, we are left with more in the way of academic debate than clarification from above. A chance for restatement occurs only when the higher court has the opportunity and again feels the need to address a similar area of law. Therefore, those who have misunderstood Ross should be grateful for the opportunity presented the Supreme Court in United States v MacCollom, 426 US 317; 96 S Ct 2086; 48 L Ed 2d 666 (1976).
MacCollom dealt not with a question of the right to counsel, but rather with the right to a transcript. Although that issue might seem, after Griffin and Draper v Washington, well settled, MacCollom dealt with an indigent prisoner seeking a transcript to prepare his petition for habeas corpus relief from a federal conviction. Under normal circumstances, a transcript would probably have been prepared in the course of that defendant’s direct appeal, but he had apparently elected to allow his direct appeal rights to *547expire without taking any action. Thus, no transcript had been prepared.
Because it dealt with a collateral rather than a direct appeal, such a question might seem to have little import for the instant case. Justice Rehnquist, in his lead opinion,23 began with a review of the Court’s decisions in Douglas and Ross. MacCollom was issued just two years after Ross, so it offers a fair barometer of how both the author and several members of the Court understood Ross when it was of recent vintage.
Justice Rehnquist, in his analysis of the equal protection issue, had cause to revisit both Douglas and his opinion in Ross: *548Justice Rehnquist, and those joining his opinion, found the distinctions between the acceptable situation in Ross and the unacceptable one of Douglas, when compared to the facts of MacCollom, offered considerable assistance. These same distinctions have come to the fore in the Supreme Court’s analysis in subsequent cases, a pattern that offers us guidance, but guidance for which the majority has no use.
*547In Douglas v California, sUpra, the Court held that the State must provide counsel for an indigent on his first appeal of right. But in Ross v Moffitt, supra, we declined to extend that holding to a discretionary second appeal from an intermediate appellate court to the Supreme Court of North Carolina. We think the distinction between these two holdings of the Court is of considerable assistance in resolving respondent’s equal protection claim. Respondent in this case had an opportunity for direct appeal, and had he chosen to pursue it he would have been furnished a free transcript of the trial proceedings. But having forgone that right, and instead some years later having sought to obtain a free transcript in order to make the best case he could in a proceeding under [28 USC] § 2255, respondent stands in a different position. [MacCollom, supra at 324-325.]
*548E. EVITTS v LUCEYANOTHER LESSON IN DISTINCTIONS
In Evitts v Lucey, 469 US 387; 105 S Ct 830; 83 L Ed 2d 821 (1985), the Court was called on to determine whether the right to assistance of counsel on a first appeal included a right to effective assistance of counsel. An indigent defendant, following conviction, had counsel appointed for his first appeal. Counsel failed to comply with the applicable Kentucky court rules, and the appellate court dismissed the defendant’s appeal. The defendant sought habeas corpus relief, claiming the dismissal was unconstitutional because it deprived him of a claimed right to effective assistance of counsel. See id. at 389-391.
The Supreme Court agreed with the defendant. It noted that “[j]ust as a transcript may by rule or custom be a prerequisite to appellate review, the services of a lawyer will for virtually every layman be necessary to present an appeal in a form suitable for appellate consideration on the merits.” Id. at 393. The essence of the Court’s rationale, though referring to a right to effective assistance of counsel, is nonetheless applicable to, and based on an express acknowledgment of, the right to any counsel at all:
*549In bringing an appeal as of right from his conviction, a criminal defendant is attempting to demonstrate that the conviction, with its consequent drastic loss of liberty, is unlawful. To prosecute the appeal, a criminal defendant must face an adversary proceeding that—like a trial—is governed by intricate rules that to a layperson would be hopelessly forbidding. An unrepresented appellant—like an unrepresented defendant at trial—is unable to protect the vital interests at stake. [Id. at 396.]
Most importantly, one question confronting the Supreme Court was whether the appeal Kentucky granted was of right or discretionary. The commonwealth argued that the appeal was permitted only if it complied with applicable rules, and thus, under Ross, it was a discretionary appeal. Rejecting that argument, the Court further charted the path taken by our analysis of the Ross “fortifying” rationale:
Unlike the appellant in the discretionary appeal in Ross, a criminal appellant in the Kentucky Court of Appeals typically has not had the benefit of a previously prepared trial transcript, a brief on the merits of the appeal, or a previous written opinion. In addition, petitioners fail to point to any source of Kentucky law indicating that a decision on the merits in an appeal like that of respondent—unlike the discretionary appeal in Ross—is contingent on a discretionary finding by the Court of Appeals that the case involves significant public or jurisprudential issues; the purpose of a first appeal in the Kentucky court system appears to be precisely to determine whether the individual defendant has been lawfully convicted. In short, a criminal defendant bringing an appeal to the Kentucky Court of Appeals has not previously had “an adequate opportunity to present his claims fairly in the context of the State’s appellate process.” It follows that for purposes of analysis under the Due Process Clause, respondent’s appeal was an appeal as of right, thus triggering the right to counsel recognized in Douglas v California. [Id. at 401-402 (citations omitted).]
*550The Court’s final discussion is also worthy of note:
The lesson of our cases, as we pointed out in Ross, is that each Clause triggers a distinct inquiry: “ ‘Due Process’ emphasizes fairness between the State and the individual dealing with the State, regardless of how other individuals in the same situation may be treated. ‘Equal Protection,’ on the other hand, emphasizes the disparity in treatment by a State between classes of individuals whose situations are arguably indistinguishable.” In cases like Griffin and Douglas, due process concerns were involved because the States involved had set up a system of appeals as of right but had refused to offer each defendant a fair opportunity to obtain an adjudication on the merits of his appeal. Equal Protection concerns were involved because the State treated a class of defendants—indigent ones—differently for purposes of offering them a meaningful appeal. Both of these concerns were implicated in the Griffin and Douglas cases and both Clauses supported the decisions reached by the Court. [Id. at 405 (citations omitted).]
On the other hand, the dissent in Evitts disagreed with any reliance on the due process clause.
Given the dispute in Evitts, the place of a due process analysis in the instant case is subject to academic disagreement. However, the Court believed a due process analysis was applicable, perhaps because even though the defendant was challenging his conviction, he was in a lesser position than the defendant in Ross, whose “claims had ‘once been presented by a lawyer and passed upon by an appellate court,’ ” Ross, supra at 614-615, quoting Douglas, supra at 356, and thus more akin to the defendant in Douglas, in which the Court concluded that due process concerns were present. See 3 LaFave, Israel & King, Criminal Procedure (2d ed), § 11.1(b), p 474. Whatever the role of the Due Process Clause, I have *551no difficulty applying an equal protection analysis to the instant case, and conclude that the system imposed by the majority leaves moneyed defendants with a meaningful appeal, but leaves indigent defendants with a meaningless ritual.24 The Court’s discussion in Evitts, though, suggests that the majority’s analysis is infirm under both clauses.
F. MURRAY v GIARRATANO: THE PATH STRAIGHTENS
By now we have crested the hills on our path, and can see its direction onto the horizon. Yet the wayward majority refuses to pause and seek directions, insisting that it understands Douglas and Ross “in the context in which those cases were decided,” ante at 519, without understanding the context in which the Supreme Court has understood those same cases. To illustrate the majority’s error, we continue on with our journey.
In the years following Ross, Chief Justice Rehnquist' was called upon to again revisit the essence of the Ross Court’s holding. In Murray v Giarratano, 492 US 1; 109 S Ct 2765; 106 L Ed 2d 1 (1989),25 a case involving a claim by indigent death row inmates for appointed counsel for state postconviction proceedings, Chief Justice Rehnquist wrote:
*552The Sixth and Fourteenth Amendments to the Constitution assure the right of an indigent defendant to counsel at the trial stage of a criminal proceeding, Gideon v Wainwright, 372 US 335 [82 S Ct 792; 9 L Ed 2d 799 (1963),] and an indigent defendant is similarly entitled as a matter of right to counsel for an initial appeal from the judgment and sentence of the trial court. Douglas v California, [supra]; Griffin v Illinois, [supra]. But we held in Ross v Moffitt, supra at 610, that the right to counsel at these earlier stages of a criminal procedure did not carry over to a discretionary appeal provided by North Carolina law from the intermediate appellate court to the Supreme Court of North Carolina. [Murray, supra at 7.]
Two points are apparent. The first is the by-now familiar distinctions between an initial and later appeal that were central to the holding of Ross. Second is that nowhere in this statement is found a limitation that the initial appeal must be “of right” for counsel to be required.26 Considering the foundations of Ross, and the “fortifying” justifications that have now become central to any discussion of that decision, this appears neither surprising nor inadvertent.
The majority notes, in apparent reference to Murray, that the Supreme Court has not extended the right to counsel, “even in the case of inmates on death row.” Ante at 520. Similarly, attempting to imply *553that its action is commonplace, it notes that other states have moved away from appeals of right in guilty plea cases. Id. at 504, n 3. No authority prevents states from doing so, but with regard to the provision of counsel in such cases, or in the mentioned capital cases, it is imperative to recall that whenever the Court has mentioned Ross, a discussion of the presence of the intermediary appellate step inevitably follows. The presence of counsel on that intermediary step has been the reason the Court has denied counsel in later steps.27 After the majority’s decision, indigent Proposal B defendants will go without counsel on their first appeal to an intermediate appellate court, and the reason the Supreme Court has relied on to deny counsel vanishes from the horizon.
G. MATA AND BILLOTTI: PREVIOUS TRAVELERS ON THIS PATH
For a moment, I will pause in my review of Supreme Court decisions to consider a few more indications that the majority has indeed gone astray. Each of these offers an insight into a particular problem with the majority decision, and the system we will come to know in Michigan.
*5541. MATA v EGELER
In Mata v Egeler, 383 F Supp 1091 (ED Mich, 1974), the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan held that an indigent defendant filing a delayed application for leave to appeal after failing to file a timely appeal as of right was entitled to the appointed appellate counsel. Although the defendant in Mata had pleaded guilty, at that time he was entitled to an appeal of right. Nevertheless, because of his nonnegligent delay in filing such an appeal, he was left with only an appeal by leave to the Michigan Court of Appeals. Thus, the defendant in Mata was in precisely the same situation as the instant defendant.
Mata was decided shortly after the decision in Ross, and the district court showed the benefit of having both that opinion and Douglas available:
It is “invidious discrimination” for the Michigan Court of Appeals to consider the merits of an indigent’s first late appeal without benefit of counsel while allowing a rich man to employ counsel. The “relative handicap” Michigan indigents face when applying for leave to appeal is even greater than the handicap petitioners faced in Douglas. There, the California appellate court independently examined the record before concluding that “no good whatever could be served by appointment of counsel.” Here, the only person examining the record for possible errors is petitioner—an indigent untrained in law. Furthermore, Mata’s appeal is discretionary rather than as of right; if he fails to persuade the Court of Appeals his case has merit, he will not receive his first appeal, as petitioners in Douglas would have. While one can distinguish the principal case from Douglas—the appeal in the principal case is discretionary, whereas in Douglas it was as of right—in the context of the Michigan appellate system, this is a distinction without a difference. Whether the appeal is as of right or discretionary is irrelevant if “indigents are . . . denied meaningful access to that system because of their poverty. Ross v Moffitt . . . .”
*555The nature of discretionary review in the Michigan Court of Appeals differs substantially from the limited review available to Moffitt in the North Carolina Supreme Court. By statute Michigan gives late filing but non-negligent petitioners a route back to the appellate system. Yet, “meaningful access” to this system is denied indigents: they are forced to travel this route without a vehicle. Unlike Moffitt, Mata has not been assisted by counsel at any stage of appeal. Until an attorney scrutinizes the record and prepares argument for appeal, the Court of Appeals does not have an “adequate basis on which to base its decision to grant or deny review.” Although the state procedure does not completely foreclose petitioner from presenting his claims to the Michigan appellate courts, depriving him of counsel at the initial review, simply because of his indigency, will degrade the entire appellate process to a “meaningless ritual.” [Id. at 1093-1094.]
The district court, only a few short months after Ross was issued, follows a track in its opinion paralleling what would emerge in so many later opinions of the United States Supreme Court.28 That alone *556makes the opinion of the district judge remarkable for its insight.29 The majority does not even consider the guidance of Mata, but marches onward to deny counsel to indigent defendants.
2. BILLOTTI v LEGURSKY
No authority suggests that providing only an appeal by leave in guilty plea, or any other, cases would be constitutionally infirm. Indeed, states have discretion to deal with difficult problems of policy. However, authorities do provide that states cannot deny a meaningful appeal to an indigent defendant when it is allowed for a moneyed defendant. The United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit has suggested that the system set up by the majority today may effectively expose the whole of Proposal B to constitutional difficulty.
In Billotti v Legursky, 975 F2d 113 (CA 4, 1992), the court reviewed the appellant’s claim that the West *557Virginia system, in which “the Supreme Court of Appeals provides the sole avenue of appellate review from courts of general jurisdiction” was unconstitutional because it denied him an appeal of right. Id. at 115. The decision to grant review was discretionary with the West Virginia court. Id. Even so, the state provided extensive appellate procedural protections:
Nonetheless, the right to petition for appeal to the Supreme Court of Appeals is accompanied by an array of procedural protections. These procedural protections mirror the requirements that the United States Supreme Court has held to be mandatory when a state grants appeal as of right. The right to petition is guaranteed under W VA Const, Art VIII, § 4, and denial of that right renders the conviction void. State v Eden, 163 W Va 370; 256 SE2d 868, 875 (1979). Indigent criminal defendants are entitled to court-appointed counsel for their petition. Rhodes v Leverette, 160 W Va 781; 239 SE2d 136, 140 (1977). Accord Douglas v California, 372 US 353; 83 S Ct 814; 9 L Ed 2d 811 (1963). Counsel’s performance must meet constitutional standard of effectiveness. State ex rel Bratcher v Cooke, 155 W Va 850; 188 SE2d 769 (1972). Accord Evitts v Lucey, 469 US 387 (1985). Criminal defendants are entitled to a transcript for appeal. State ex rel Johnson v McKenzie, 159 W Va 795; 226 SE2d 721, 724 (1976). Accord Griffin v Illinois, 351 US 12; 76 S Ct 585; 100 L Ed 891 (1956). West Virginia has thus provided Billotti with the same resources for discretionary review that the Supreme Court has held are required in cases involving appeal as of right.
* * *
Petitioner’s counsel has also conceded that the relevant procedural safeguards were observed here—Billotti’s counsel filed a substantial petition on Billotti’s behalf, accompanied by the transcript, and made an oral presentation *558before all of the justices of the Supreme Court of Appeals. [Billotti, supra at 115-116.][30]
The court relied on the presence of these protections to dispose of Billotti’s claim:
It is plain that West Virginia has afforded Billotti an adequate opportunity to challenge the alleged errors in his trial. The Fourteenth Amendment does not authorize the federal courts to micromanage state criminal justice systems. In our federal system, the states are allowed to structure their systems of criminal justice as they see fit, as long as their systems satisfy the basic demands of due process. . . . It is enough that they serve the needs of the state which adopted them, and that they afford an ample measure of procedural fairness to criminal defendants seeking an appeal. [Id. at 116 (citations omitted; emphasis added).]
Thus, although the question is not as well defined as some that are raised by the majority’s decision in the instant case, it is arguable that, if review of the constitutionality of a system that offers only appeal by leave is to be decided as the Fourth Circuit believes, the presence or absence of counsel’s assistance in the appellate process, whatever that process is called, is a crucial component of the system’s constitutionality.31 Through its decision, the majority has left that component of Michigan’s system by the roadside, and invites a challenge not only to the denial of *559counsel, but to the whole of Proposal B, which Michigan approved.
ii
The United States Supreme Court and the lower federal courts have compared the position of appealing defendants to the position of the defendant in Ross when determining whether counsel must be appointed. In cases including MacCollom, Murray, and Pennsylvania v Finley, 481 US 551; 107 S Ct 1990; 95 L Ed 2d 539 (1987), the Supreme Court has denied indigent defendants counsel in second-tier appeals and postconviction proceedings because counsel has been present in first appeals, in accord with Douglas. When counsel has not been present on a first appeal, as in Mata, the courts have appointed counsel. By its decision, the majority denies indigent defendants any counsel at all on appeal. In lieu of an indigent defendant’s right to counsel on a first appeal, the majority offers indigent defendants assurances that the trial court proceedings in guilty plea cases will be so simple that the indigent defendants will not need any appellate counsel, and even if they did, their trial counsel will already have acted as appellate counsel. Although distinctions can be drawn between guilty plea and trial cases, when they are offered as a reason to depart from the constitutional mandates in Douglas and Ross, they fail. Similarly, comparing the position of a Proposal B defendant with that of the defendant in Ross finds the former woefully under equipped to have “meaningful access” to our Court of Appeals.
*560A. THE “SIMPLICITY” OF GUILTY PLEA PROCEEDINGS
The majority believes that because a defendant has pleaded guilty, guilt is then beyond question and a court does not function to determine whether that is accurate. It then concludes that it can deny counsel because “[t]he distinct character of plea proceedings . . . will ‘make this relative handicap far less than the handicap borne by the indigent defendant denied counsel on his initial appeal as of right,’ from a trial conviction.” Ante at 520-521, quoting Ross, supra at 616 (citation omitted). By sandwiching this quotation from Ross between its own modifiers, the majority exemplifies its error, relying on snippets from Ross without accounting for its reasoning that counsel could be denied on a discretionary appeal following an appeal where counsel was provided. A point that the majority does not choose to quote from Douglas and Ross is that both cases focus on “a correct adjudication of guilt.”
First, a “correct adjudication of guilt” involves more than just an admission of guilt. Claims of failures to honor plea bargains, coercion or involuntariness of a plea, or lack of mental capacity to knowingly enter a plea, for example, all address the correctness of the “adjudication of guilt.” As evidenced by our adoption of MCR 6.302, we have long recognized that a mere admission of guilt, even if accompanied by an absolute and all-knowing certainty, is but one component of a “correct adjudication of guilt” under our system.
Further, although the majority notes the claims that are waived by a guilty plea, many others remain appealable, and deal with a “correct adjudication of *561guilt.” Even though he pleads guilty, an indigent defendant can still appeal constitutional defects that are irrelevant to his factual guilt, People v Webb, 89 Mich App 50, 54; 279 NW2d 573 (1979), double jeopardy claims requiring no further factual record, People v Johnson, 396 Mich 424, 444; 240 NW2d 729 (1976), jurisdictional defects, id., challenges to the sufficiency of the evidence at the preliminary examination, People v Schaffer, 129 Mich App 287, 290; 341 NW2d 507 (1983), preserved entrapment claims, People v White, 411 Mich 366, 387; 308 NW2d 128 (1981), mental competency claims, People v Parney, 74 Mich App 173, 176; 253 NW2d 698 (1977), factual basis claims, People v Mitchell, 431 Mich 744, 748; 432 NW2d 715 (1988), claims that the state had no right to proceed in the first place, including claims that a defendant was charged under an inapplicable statute, People v Beckner, 92 . Mich App 166, 169; 285 NW2d 52 (1979), and claims of ineffective assistance of counsel. See People v Haynes (After Remand), 221 Mich App 551, 558; 562 NW2d 241 (1997); People v Harris, 148 Mich App 506, 512; 384 NW2d 816 (1986); People v Snyder, 108 Mich App 754, 755-756; 310 NW2d 868 (1981).32
In addition to these claims, our Legislature recently enacted law providing for appeals of sentencing decisions. The statute itself, MCL 769.34(7)-(10); MSA *56228.1097(3.4)(7)-(10), does not address the form of appeal, whether from a trial conviction or a guilty plea conviction. Rather, it evidences the Legislature’s intent that both errors in scoring the new legislative guidelines and departures from those guidelines shall be reviewable on appeal, without limiting the review in guilty plea cases.
Despite the matters that can result in error in a guilty-plea case, and the various appellate claims a guilty-pleading defendant can assert, the majority concludes that guilty pleas are so simple, no counsel will ever be necessary for an indigent defendant who wants to appeal. Some plea-based cases may be fairly simple, and appeals from them may be fairly merit-less. To apply that presumption wholesale to every plea-based appeal, however, ignores the lessons of the cases our Court of Appeals hears daily.
For example, consider the “simplicity” of the cases discussed below. Although some include variations of the more common claims regarding sentence proportionality, others are considerably more complex, as evidenced in some cases by the Court of Appeals efforts in reaching its conclusions. In each case, defendant pleaded guilty or nolo contendere shortly before Proposal B went into effect, in what would now be a Proposal B case, and in each was represented by appointed counsel. Counsel raised the claims of error described, and garnered the relief described below. Under the Court’s decision in the instant case, from now on, a defendant with a similar claim will not be represented by counsel in attempting to raise that claim. Thus, as we proceed through these cases, I am left to wonder how many, if any, of these errors would have come to mind to an attorney *563reviewing his own efforts, or to an indigent defendant alone after trial court proceedings conclude and he is left with no appellate counsel whatsoever. If either of these were to fail, then in that case there would not be a “correct adjudication of guilt.”
First, in People v Hazzard, 206 Mich App 658; 522 NW2d 910 (1994), the juvenile defendant pleaded guilty to two counts of CSC I and was sentenced as an adult to concurrent prison terms of twenty-two to forty years. Id. at 659. Through appointed counsel, the defendant argued that the trial court failed to comply with MCR 6.931(E)(3), (4), and MCL 769.1(3), (5); MSA 28.1072(3), (5) by failing to make adequate findings concerning whether the juvenile defendant should have been sentenced as an adult. The Court of Appeals reversed defendant’s sentences and remanded for further proceedings before a different trial judge. Under the majority opinion, that juvenile defendant would only be represented by trial counsel, and would have to seek relief from the Court of Appeals on his own.
Consider also People v Antolovich, 207 Mich App 714; 525 NW2d 513 (1994). There, following a guilty plea to delivering less than fifty grams of cocaine, the circuit court sentenced defendant to four to twenty years imprisonment, in excess of the guidelines range, a $25,000 fine, and payment of $1,500 in costs. Id. at 715. Through appointed counsel, the defendant challenged the trial court’s authority to impose the sentence. The Court of Appeals vacated the sentences, holding that the court below was without statutory authority to impose costs, that the fine was constitutionally excessive, and that the prison term was not proportionate under People v Milbourn, 435 Mich 630; *564461 NW2d 1 (1990). That defendant would now have only trial counsel to represent him in his criminal case.
Similar are several unpublished decisions of the Court of Appeals. In People v Hill33 the defendant entered a plea bargain that included a provision that his sentence for marijuana possession would run concurrently with his sentence in another case for possession of marijuana with intent to deliver. The Court of Appeals held that the trial court did not have authority to impose concurrent sentences under MCL 333.7401(3); MSA 14.15(7401)(3), and that the trial court should have allowed the indigent defendant to affirm or withdraw his guilty plea before it resentenced him. Thus, the Court of Appeals remanded to allow the defendant that choice. Next, in People v Perryman,34 the circuit court initially sentenced the guilty-pleading indigent defendant to concurrent sentences. Without a hearing, the court then signed a judgment of sentence indicating that the sentences were to run consecutively. The Court of Appeals remanded for resentencing because of the lower court’s confusion about the statutory requirement for consecutive sentences, given that “it is not certain that the trial court would have imposed the same sentence had it been aware that MCL 333.7401(3); MSA 14.15(7401)(3) mandates consecutive sentences . . . .’’In People v Bullock35 following the defendant’s *565nolo contendere plea, the circuit court ordered him to pay $108,286.90 in restitution. He was ultimately jailed, in part for failing to pay the restitution. The Court of Appeals held that the lower court failed to consider the factors required by MCL 780.767(1); MSA 28.1287(767)(1) and MCL 780.766(13); MSA 28.1287(766)(13) before setting the restitution amount. After examining conflicting case law, the Court of Appeals determined that the lower court was required to hold an evidentiary hearing on the defendant’s ability to pay, so it vacated the restitution order and remanded. In a final example, the defendant in People v Krieger,36 who had a history of mental health problems, including bipolar disorder, acute psychosis, and delusions and hallucinations, pleaded nolo contendere to an uttering and publishing charge, after the court denied a motion for psychiatric evaluation. The Court of Appeals reversed and remanded for a psychiatric evaluation to determine the defendant’s competence to enter a plea. It noted the presence of a psychiatric report, prepared as a result of a charge pending against the defendant in another county and dated only nine days before the sentencing in question, which found defendant “in dire need of institutional psychiatric care.”
These cases are only a few examples of the types of claims and the types of indigent guilty-pleading defendants that are daily before our Court of Appeals. Nonetheless, the majority concludes with ease that the records in these cases, and others like them, would be so short, simple, and routine that the *566defendants in the cases discussed, and others like them, with no appellate counsel whatsoever, will have no trouble gaining access to our Court of Appeals.37
B. PROPOSAL B INDIGENT DEFENDANTS AND ROSS
In a further attempt to rehabilitate its constitutional departure, the majority suggests that the materials provided by trial counsel under MCR 6.005(H)(4) will somehow prevent an indigent defendant from having the meaningless ritual that Douglas held unconstitutional. I disagree, and offer a careful analysis of each step of this suggestion, an analysis that finds the suggestion unavailing in its attempt to bridge the gap between Douglas and Ross.
Initially, the relevant points from Ross:
The facts show that respondent, in connection with his Mecklenburg County conviction, received the benefit of counsel in examining the record of his trial and in preparing an appellate brief on his behalf for the state Court of Appeals. Thus, prior to his seeking discretionary review in the State Supreme Court, his claims had “once been presented by a lawyer and passed upon by an appellate court.” We do not believe that it can be said, therefore, that a defendant in respondent’s circumstances is denied meaningful access to the North Carolina Supreme Court simply because the State does not appoint counsel to aid him in seeking review in that court. At that stage, he will have, at the very least, a transcript or other record of trial proceedings, a brief on his behalf in the Court of Appeals setting forth his claims of error, and in many cases an opinion *567by the Court of Appeals disposing of his case. These materials, supplemented by whatever submission respondent may make pro se, would appear to provide the Supreme Court of North Carolina with an adequate basis for its decision to grant or deny review, [itoss, supra at 614-615 (internal citations omitted; emphasis added).]
The Court later referred to these materials in Pennsylvania v Finley, supra, with Chief Justice Rehnquist again offering the approach that he has consistently used in discussing Ross:
Nor was the equal protection guarantee of “meaningful access” violated in this case. By the time respondent presented her application for postconviction relief, she had been represented at trial and in the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania. In Ross, we concluded that the defendant’s access to the trial record and the appellate briefs and opinions provided sufficient tools for the pro se litigant to gain meaningful access to courts that possess a discretionary power of review. [Finley, supra at 557 (citations omitted).]
In discussing Ross, and suggesting that counsel need not be provided for a discretionary appeal, the Court predicated its conclusion not on the simple presence of counsel at some point below, but on several distinct factors. By viewing the emphasized portions of Ross quoted above, it becomes clear that three separate “tools,” to use the Finley Court’s terms, allowed the Court to conclude that counsel was not necessary on a second-tier discretionary appeal:
At that stage he will have, at the very least, [1] a transcript or other record of trial proceedings, [2] a brief on his behalf in the Court of Appeals setting forth his claims of error, and [3] in many cases an opinion by the Court of Appeals disposing of his case. These materials, supple-*568merited by whatever submission respondent may make pro • se, would appear to provide the Supreme Court of North Carolina with an adequate basis for its decision to grant or deny review, [itoss, supra at 615 (internal citations omitted; emphasis added).] ■
For confirmation, we can merely recall Finley:
In Ross, we concluded that the defendant’s access to [1] the trial record and [2] the appellate briefs and [3] opinions provided sufficient tools for the pro se litigant to gain meaningful access to courts that possess a discretionary power of review. [Finley, supra at 557 (citations omitted).]
The majority suggests that, if an indigent defendant proceeded pro se, he would have sufficient tools to ensure that his efforts to gain discretionary review on his first appeal would provide meaningful access rather than a meaningless ritual. Accordingly, consider what the instant indigent defendant will not have, and compare his position to the pro se defendant in Ross, the same comparison the Supreme Court has repeated time and again.
1. A TRANSCRIPT OR OTHER RECORD OF THE TRIAL PROCEEDINGS
In a scenario with trial counsel raising a motion under MCR 6.005(H)(4), it does not appear that, as things currently stand, a record would yet have been prepared. Indeed, generally, preparation of the record commences concurrently with the request for appellate counsel and the defendant’s assertion of his desire to appeal, something that trial counsel is without authorization in the court rules to do. Trial counsel would, expectedly, have notes of the proceedings. Given that our current scheme for preparing tran*569scripts could be altered to accommodate this situation, I will forgo any substantial discussion of whether counsel’s notes alone would amount to an adequate substitute for a record. The remaining factors are more determinative. Notably, however, Douglas and Ross both referred to appellate counsel searching the record for hidden errors and issues. As further discussed below, however, counsel’s notes, by definition, would not contain any “hidden” errors or issues. If trial counsel noticed errors, we would expect that these concerns would be raised promptly rather than on appeal. In fact, we would require them to be raised, and prohibit attempts to use them as an “appellate parachute.”
2. A BRIEF ON HIS BEHALF IN THE COURT OF APPEALS SETTING FORTH HIS CLAIMS OF ERROR
According to the majority, trial counsel will bring a motion to withdraw the plea under MCR 6.311. Part of this argument is that MCR 6.311(C) requires preservation of issues concerning guilty pleas by means of a motion to withdraw the plea. Thus, as a necessary antecedent to any such issues being raised on appeal, trial counsel will presumably have filed a motion below, identifying and arguing the issue.
Leaving aside this presumption’s correctness, for the purposes of this component of the Ross analysis, the motion must be compared to the presence of an existing appellate brief that offers a pro se defendant a springboard from which to launch his own efforts. First, generally, appellate briefs are considerably more in-depth and detailed than briefs to the trial court. The time demands of appellate practice, though *570strict, are nonetheless often much more inducive to comprehensive briefing than are trial court schedules.
More important, however, is that a great many issues need not be preserved by a MCR 6.311 motion in the trial court to be raised on appeal. Indeed, MCR 6.311(C) itself requires preservation of only certain issues:
Preservation of Issues. A defendant convicted on the basis of a plea may not raise on appeal any claim of noncompliance with the requirement of the rules in this sub-chapter, or any other claim that the plea was not an understanding, voluntary, or accurate one, unless the defendant has moved to withdraw the plea in the trial court, raising as a basis for withdrawal the claim sought to be raised on appeal.
Thus, only issues dealing with what might be termed the facial validity of the plea require such a motion for their preservation. Many other issues, including a great many of the claims that are not waived by a guilty plea, like jurisdictional defects, double jeopardy claims requiring no further factual record, due process claims, preserved entrapment claims, mental competency claims, claims involving the factual basis of the plea, and claims that the state had no right to proceed in the first instance, might also be raised in plea cases. Although some of these claims, like factual basis challenges, would seem to require preservation, others, like jurisdictional defects and double jeopardy claims, the latter being a particularly complex area of law to a layperson, clearly would not.
Additionally, neither the majority’s theory nor MCR 6.311 addresses many other potential claims that might arise in a guilty plea case. Rare indeed would *571be the instances when trial counsel would suggest that they themselves provided ineffective assistance during the plea proceedings. More frequently, however, sentencing issues arise, whether of the type less frequently granted relief, like claims based on Milbourn, supra,38 or of the type often granted relief, like illegal sentences, including consecutive sentences imposed without statutory authorization.
It may be suggested, however, that even in the absence of MCR 6.311’s requirement that such issues be raised, MCR 6.005(H)(4) mandates such claims being brought by trial counsel, but that is not the case. MCR 6.005(H)(4) provides:
Scope of Trial Lawyer’s Responsibilities. The responsibilities of the trial lawyer appointed to represent the defendant include
* * *
(4) unless an appellate lawyer has been appointed, filing of postconviction motions the lawyer deems appropriate, including motions for new trial, for a directed verdict of acquittal, to withdraw [the] plea, or for resentencing.
Thus, trial counsel may file such motions as “the lawyer deems appropriate.” What would be appropriate, however, is something of an open question. The staff comment to this rule offers some insight into the phrase’s genesis:
Subrule (H) expands the scope of an appointed trial lawyer’s responsibilities set forth in former 6.101(C)(2). The former rule made no reference to an appointed trial attorney’s ability to file “postconviction motions the lawyer *572deems appropriate.” Clearly, there are circumstances when it is more appropriate for the trial attorney to seek postconviction relief for his client than to await the appointment of appellate counsel. Under the scheme of the rules, however, a defendant should have only one appointed lawyer representing him at any time, and consequently, the appointment of appellate counsel should act as an end to the responsibilities of the trial attorney under the appointment order.
Until now, under this rule, trial counsel has had the authority to file motions until the appointment of appellate counsel. Under the majority’s decision, however, appellate counsel will not be forthcoming. Accordingly, construing the rules in such a fashion that trial counsel would become the only standard-bearer for postconviction motions would entail an extension of the defendant-trial counsel relationship. The traditional end of that relationship was the appointment of appellate counsel, usually following and pursuant to the defendant’s execution of the State Court Administrator’s Office form given to defendant at sentencing. However, the majority’s decision would extend this relationship for a time, matching the time for filing an application for leave to appeal, which is, under MCR 6.311(A), the time when a defendant may file a motion to withdraw a plea. Given the various scenarios possible under MCR 7.205(F) for filing a delayed application for leave to appeal, a defendant-trial counsel relationship could last up to, and in some cases beyond, twelve months following sentencing.
This is not, in and of itself, offered as a reason to reject the MCR 6.005(H)(4) hypothesis under Ross. Rather, this detour is necessary to fully appreciate the magnitude of the disparity between the situation as it currently exists in our trial courts, and the situation *573as it will be beginning today under the majority’s decision.
Likewise, before moving on, our minimum standards for appellate counsel for indigent defendants are instructive. In particular, standard nine states:
Counsel should assert claims of error which are supported by facts of record, which will benefit the defendant if successful, which possess arguable legal merit, and which should be recognizable by a practitioner familiar with criminal law and procedure who engages in diligent legal research. [Administrative Order No. 1981-7.]
Although we have held that failure to raise every claim of arguable legal merit does not amount to ineffective assistance, see People v Reed, 449 Mich 375; 535 NW2d 496 (1995), we have, nonetheless, expected counsel functioning in an appellate role to raise those claims that might arguably have merit. In place of this requirement, under the majority’s decision, we have MCR 6.005(H)(4)’s language giving the trial attorney responsibility for filing those motions that “the lawyer deems appropriate.” We could, were we to read or add language into the rule beyond its current text, suggest that such an evaluation of appropriateness might involve the same sort of considerations embodied in standard nine above, rather than the sort of considerations implied in the staff comment’s discussion. The staff comments suggest that appropriateness entails considerations like delaying filing a motion until the appointment of appellate counsel, and passage of the requisite time for counsel to get up to speed on the issues. Were we to change the rule as discussed, however, several issues would arise.
*574As an initial matter, we should expect that counsel’s notes will not have any errors that might be called “hidden.” Indeed, if counsel believed that an error had occurred, we expect and require a contemporaneous objection. Accordingly, the idea that trial counsel will be searching through notes for hidden errors that might evade the pro se indigent defendant is a myth. If any such errors occurred, they remained hidden because trial counsel was unaware of them, and thus did not find the incident noteworthy.
It may be that, if the indigent himself has chosen to file an application for leave to appeal, which is beyond the scope of trial counsel’s responsibilities, a transcript may be prepared. If we were to extend the client’s relationship with trial counsel well past sentencing, to the outer limits of the time for filing a delayed application for appeal, counsel might have a record to review. Again, though, counsel would be reviewing their own work, and, although something new might occur to them, it might as easily go unnoticed. The more the latter would occur, the greater the potential for an ineffective assistance claim, and yet the slimmer the chances of it being noticed by the pro se defendant or the appellate court.
Finally, the content of the “lawyerly presentation” deserves comment. As noted above, there is not much potential to dispute the suggestion that generally, briefs presented by counsel to the Court of Appeals are considerably more comprehensive than briefs that may, but often need not, accompany trial court motions. Moreover, given that these motions are offered to the trial court, they may well have a distinctly trial court direction. Rather than denigrating the trial court’s function, the underlying point of this suggestion is that many factual concerns may be *575appropriately addressed to the trial court. If such an offering forms the only basis for a claim to an appellate court, however, we would expect the appellate court to defer to the lower court’s factual findings. This becomes a particular concern with guidelines scoring issues, when factual decisions often underlie the scoring, and yet, under our new system, the Legislature has mandated the availability of appellate review. Experienced counsel might well primarily attack the findings of fact supporting a score before the trial court, and yet shift focus to any preserved legal challenge on appeal. An indigent defendant with only a trial court presentation in his repertoire, however, will be handicapped by having only one pitch to offer, one well outside the narrowed appellate strike zone.
Thus, the comparison between a defendant with the benefits of an MCR 6.005(H)(4) brief from trial counsel and the Ross pro se defendant, who had an appellate brief on his behalf, is unavailing. Although both might, in some sense, have a lawyer offering some of their claims, the usefulness and applicability of such efforts to appellate access, the key determination to compliance with Ross, is simply lacking. Even more lacking, however, is the next factor.
3. AN OPINION BY THE COURT OF APPEALS DISPOSING OF HIS CASE
The appellate court’s decision, though not present in every case, as Ross recognized, nonetheless offers a key tool toward subsequent appellate access. This Court knows this to be true, because a substantial failing of more than a few of the applications to this Court is a failure to address the conclusion of the *576Court of Appeals. Under MCR 6.005(H)(4), however, two basic components will be absent.
First, though less important, the press of trial court business means that postconviction motions may well have little, if any, opinion offered with that court’s decision. Indeed, we see some such motions denied simply by checking a box on an SCAO or local form, with no further explanation. The record may or may not contain some sort of discussion, but in general, even when written opinions are offered, they may not be particularly in depth.
More importantly, however, is what trial court opinions are not. Although such opinions are most likely not appellate opinions in terms of their content, they are certainly not appellate opinions in terms of their authorship. The very same court that is purported to have made the error is ruling on the motion. The motion may address an issue preserved by objection, and thus the court would have already ruled on the alleged error. In other instances the motion may raise a new issue. Every instance, though, will involve an allegation of error by the same court asked to decide whether there was error.
As a matter of first instance, courts may address claims of their own error. A trial court correcting its own errors when it finds merit in a party’s contention, however, can hardly be said to amount to an appellate decision. Rather, it is more likely a re-decision of the same point. Consider, for example, motions for reconsideration before this Court. When a party offers nothing new, but simply alleges that the prior decision was incorrect, even for new and expanded reasons, we tend to offer them short shrift. Much the same would occur below. In Proposal B cases, then, rather than a scenario comparable to the constitution*577ally acceptable situation in Ross, which involved appellate counsel presenting appellate arguments to an appellate court, Michigan will have trial counsel presenting trial-level arguments to the same trial court that is alleged to have made the error, when that court has already decided the issue to its satisfaction in the first instance.
4. MCR 6.005(H)(4) AND BOSS
As detailed above, the Ross Court relied on three particular antecedents when it denied counsel to a defendant seeking a discretionary appeal after a first appeal where counsel was present. In decisions after Ross, the Supreme Court and lower courts have compared the tools defendants have had to those present in Ross when deciding whether to appoint counsel. If the tools are not comparable to those present in Ross, then the cases have been deemed more comparable to Douglas, and counsel has been appointed.39 See, e.g., Mata, swpra.
The first of these tools was a transcript of the proceedings below. As discussed above, this tool will not be present under the MCR 6.005(H)(4) scenario.
Next, Ross relied on the presence of an appellate brief prepared by appellate counsel for the defendant. Indigent Proposal B defendants, who will have to rely *578on MCR 6.005(H)(4) under the majority’s decision, will have only a trial-level motion, perhaps with a memorandum of law, prepared by trial counsel, offering trial court arguments to the same trial court alleged to have erred. Though the trial court motion is something to point to under MCR 6.005(H)(4), the comparison to Ross is unavailing.
Finally, Ross relied on the presence of an appellate opinion. Ross involved an appellate court, presumably the objective higher level of review, reviewing the arguments, researching the issues, and making conclusions of law on the basis of an objective assessment by those sitting on the panel. Under Ross, before an indigent defendant would be left to seek discretionary appellate review on his own, his case would have been passed on by a higher court wholly removed from the initial decision and, for that matter, one given the benefit of an attorney’s presentation on his behalf. That court would have rendered a considered decision, offering to him a neutral assessment of the merits and viability of his claims of error. Under MCR 6.005(H)(4), an indigent defendant gets a trial-level decision, perhaps without any citation or explanation of any applicable authority, by the same judge in whom deficiency was alleged.
When analyzing claims for counsel, the Supreme Court has repeatedly turned to this analysis under Ross. Indigent Proposal B defendants will have nothing comparable to the tools the defendant had in Ross, leaving them to have only a meaningless ritual rather than a meaningful appeal. Further, as explained above, the “simplicity” of guilty plea cases does not mitigate the stark contrast between indigent Proposal B defendants and the defendant in Ross, as indigent Proposal B defendants can bring a variety of *579complex claims on appeal. The majority acknowledges that an indigent Proposal B defendant’s tools “are not equivalent” to those present in Ross, but that acknowledgment is akin to an acknowledgment that the Titanic had some difficulty staying afloat. Under the majority’s decision, the instant defendant, and every indigent Proposal B defendant, has nothing like the tools present in Ross. Instead, they have a meaningless ritual.
in
In closing, I cannot dispute that appellate justice, whether for indigents or otherwise, carries an attendant cost in dollars.40 This, along with a desire to eliminate a backlog of appellate cases in our Court of Appeals, led to the adoption of Proposal B.41 Further, for many it is easy to disregard indigent defendants’ appeals because “[w]e all know that the overwhelming percentage of in forma pauperis appeals are frivolous.” Douglas, supra at 358 (Clark, J., dissenting).
*580None of these considerations, however, provides the slightest justification to deny indigent guilty-pleading defendants their constitutional protections. Appellate counsel has consistently been provided as a basic constitutional protection for those who cannot afford to pay for the services of an attorney. As our Supreme Court stated:
The need for forceful advocacy does not come to an abrupt halt as the legal proceeding moves from the trial to appellate stage. Both stages of the prosecution, although perhaps involving unique legal skills, require careful advocacy to ensure that rights are not forgone and that substantial legal and factual arguments are not inadvertently passed over. [Penson, supra at 85.]
To prosecute the appeal, a criminal appellant must face an adversary proceeding that—like a trial—is governed by intricate rules that to a layperson would be hopelessly forbidding. An unrepresented appellant—like an unrepresented defendant at trial—is unable to protect the vital interests at stake. [Evitts, supra at 396.]
Further, with regard to indigent defendants, I again consult the wisdom of our nation’s final arbiter of constitutional protections:
Statistics compiled in the court below illustrate the undeniable fact that as many meritorious criminal cases come before that court through applications for leave to proceed in forma pauperis as on the paid docket, and that no a priori justification can be found for considering them, as a class, to be more frivolous than those in which costs have been paid. Even-handed administration of the criminal law demands that these cases be given no less consideration than others on the courts’ dockets. Particularly since litigants in forma pauperis may, in the trial court, have suffered disadvantages in the defense of their cases inherent in their impecunious condition, is appellate review of their cases any less searching than that accorded paid appeals *581inappropriate. Indigents’ appeals from criminal convictions cannot be used as a convenient valve for reducing the pressures of work on the courts. If there are those who insist on pursuing frivolous litigation, the courts are not powerless to dismiss or otherwise discourage it. But if frivolous litigation exists, we are not persuaded that it is concentrated in this narrow, yet vital, area of judicial duty. [Coppedge v United States, 369 US 438, 449-450; 82 S Ct 917; 8 L Ed 2d 21 (1962) (emphasis added).]
This Court’s decision leaves indigent defendants standing in a cloud of dust on the roadside on the way to appellate justice. Defendants who can pay for the services of an attorney will be represented at trial level, will have their cases reviewed by appellate attorneys, and will have lawyerlike presentations to our Court of Appeals. In other words, they will have meaningful appeals. Defendants who cannot pay for an attorney will have trial level representation, and will be left without any appellate representation whatsoever. The only thing more that they will have is the meaningless ritual in our Court of Appeals.
Kelly, J., concurred with Cavanagh, J.
Markman, J., took no part in the decision of this case.
We could as profitably begin our journey at many other points, one being Gideon v Wainwright, 372 US 335; 83 S Ct 792; 9 L Ed 2d 799 (1963). In that case, the Court held that the right of an indigent defendant to appointed counsel at the trial stage of a criminal proceeding was fundamental and binding upon the states by application of the Sixth and Fourteenth Amendments. Likely indeed, the right to counsel may be traced further into our history than that. See Cooley, Constitutional Limitations, p 334 (“The humanity of the law has generally provided that, when the prisoner is unable to employ counsel, the court may designate some one to defend [a person] . . . who has the double misfortune to be stricken by poverty and accused of crime”). Nonetheless, for the sake of relative brevity, we will begin with Griffin.
See, e.g., Bundy v Wilson, 815 F2d 125 (CA 1, 1987). In that case, the New Hampshire Supreme Court, likely motivated by concerns similar to those underlying Proposal b, sought to conserve judicial resources by enacting a system that provided for the court to review a notice of appeal and, on that basis alone, determine whether to grant leave to appeal. The opportunity for argument was not available, and transcripts were not provided to aid indigent defendants in preparing such notices. Deciding the case on due process grounds, the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit held the system constitutionally invalid. Id. at 135.
The majority has focused solely on the words “granted as a matter of right” to argue that the Court in Douglas limited its holding so that it is wholly inapplicable to our post-Proposal b appeal by leave appellate scheme. As further discussed below, however, when mentioning limits, the Court clearly spoke in terms of discretionary review beyond the first level of the appellate process. In doing so, the Court foreshadowed not only its subsequent decision in Ross, but also the way it would view Douglas in subsequent decisions.
Worth noting is that the procedure approved in People v Najar, 229 Mich App 393; 581 NW2d 302 (1998), is quite similar to the procedure apparently used by the California court in Douglas. Indeed, the California procedure compares favorably to the Najar procedure, given that under the California procedure, it was the appellate court that did the “going through” of the record in search of errors, although the Najar Court suggested that the trial court would survey the record in search of its own errors that might appear reversible. Under the system envisioned by the Najar panel, the California court’s finding that “no good whatever” could come from the appointment of counsel would likely be repeated with even greater frequency.
“We need not now decide whether California would have to provide counsel for an indigent seeking a discretionary hearing from the California Supreme Court after the District Court of Appeal had sustained his conviction . . . .” Douglas, supra at 356.
Compare the North Carolina statute with our court rule:
(B) Grounds. The application must show that
(1) the issue involves a substantial question as to the validity of a legislative act;
(2) the issue has significant public interest and the case is one by or against the state or one of its agencies or subdivisions or by or against an officer of the state or one of its agencies or subdivisions in the officer’s official capacity;
(3) the issue involves legal principles of mqjor significance to the state’s jurisprudence;
(4) in an appeal before decision by the Court of Appeals, delay in final abdication is likely to cause substantial harm;
(5) in an appeal from a decision of the Court of Appeals, the decision is clearly erroneous and will cause material injustice or the decision conflicts with a Supreme Court decision or another decision of the Court of Appeals; or
(6) in an appeal from the Attorney Discipline Board, the decision is erroneous and will cause material injustice. [MCR 7.302.]
Id. The “unconstitutional line . . . between rich and poor” was among the quotations referred to by Justice Rehnquist.
It must be noted, though, what the Ross Court did not say when evaluating the direction in which it would proceed from Douglas. It specifically did not find Douglas in itself to be any sort of line that would delineate the sole boundary that could not be crossed, and inversely, imply acceptance of any system that approached, but did not equal, the severe example in Douglas. “The question is not one of absolutes, but one of degrees.” Ross, supra at 612.
See note 6 and accompanying text.
Compare MCR 7.302(B)(5), note 6 supra, with NC Gen Stat 7A-31(c), quoted in Ross, supra at 613-6Í4.
Recall, again, the question is one of degrees, not absolutes. Nothing in Ross suggests that only comparisons as one-sided as that in Douglas suffice to show the existence of an “unconstitutional line.”
Id., quoting Rinaldi v Yeager, 384 US 305, 310; 86 S Ct 1497; 16 L Ed 2d 577 (1966). The majority suggests differences between trial and guilty-plea defendants as appropriate reasons for distinctions under the scheme it imposes. Such arguments miss the point of Ross. As the Ross Court noted, the distinctions within our system are not required to be “reasoned,” and the converse might even be acceptable, provided that the dictates of Douglas and Ross are not violated. Indeed, it is telling that in neither Douglas nor Ross did the Court trouble with the reasons for the distinctions, looking instead to the distinctions’ effect on the meaningfulness of indigent defendants’ appeals. Many distinctions may be drawn between trial and guilty-plea appeals, but when they are advocated as appropriate reasons to depart from the constitutional mandates in Douglas and Ross, they must fail.
13 In fact, in guilty-plea cases, the defendant likely would not have any sort of opinion “disposing of his case” on which to either focus or dispute. Perhaps certain sentencing guidelines challenges might be preserved in the record, but little else would be. Should an indigent defendant move to withdraw his plea or move for resentencing, and cite a purported error, he might, but would not necessarily, be favored with an opinion from the trial court disposing of his claim.
Under the majority decision, the situation before this Court will certainly change as well. Under its decision, the path to this Court would certainly change. The practice of our Court of Appeals, when denying applications for leave to appeal, is to do so by order, stating only that the application is “denied for lack of merit in the grounds presented.” Thus, unless an indigent defendant were successful below, he would never have a Court of Appeals opinion to present in applying for leave to appeal before this Court. Further, under the majority decision, neither an indigent defendant in Proposal B cases nor the record of his case would arrive before this Court with any brief of counsel or even an identification by counsel of the issues. All this Court would have to review would be the “barren record,” along with whatever efforts might have been made by appointed trial counsel. Those who expect the decision today to save judicial resources are likely to soon face a far different reality as courts and judges, at least those compelled to fulfill their legal duty, will find themselves forced to confront voluminous records that have not had meritless issues weeded out or areas upon which courts might focus identified. Arguably, in such a scenario, the acceptability of this Court’s practices under Ross could become quite questionable. The majority’s decision will affect not just the practice of guilty-plea defendants before the Court of Appeals, but the access such defendants have to all levels of our appellate system.
The opinion discussed in Ross was from the North Carolina Court of Appeals. It would likely be a detailed and scholarly endeavor, more so than might be offered by most trial courts. In the vast majority of Proposal B cases, however, not even the most meager of trial court opinions would be present. Rather, the “opinion” would be a transcript memorialization of the trial court’s oral ruling, which might or might not reveal any authority as its basis, and which might lack discussion of any authority that may be cited. A written opinion would offer a reviewing court considerable insight into the decision below, but appellate courts at any level are familiar with the great variation in trial court oral rulings, and the varying amounts of information they may provide to the appellate court, particularly when the trial court did not perceive the point decided to be of any significance. This is not meant as a criticism of any trial court’s oral rulings, but as a recognition that the press of trial court business and the inherent difficulty of a court recognizing its own error often combine to result in oral rulings that offer appellate courts little to assist in appellate review.
Ross, supra at 615. It is neither an insult to any defendant, nor a shock to any appellate judge, to suggest that the Ross Court’s bare mention of any pro se efforts suggests an implicit recognition that many pro se submissions, by virtue of the defendant’s lack of legal education and experience, are often of minimal value, and can be difficult to comprehend.
On the other hand, a prosecutor who is aware of trial court error, and yet desires a denial of appeal, might do well to offer nothing to our Court of Appeals. If the error is not readily apparent, the prosecutor can rely on the lack of any identification of the error by the indigent defendant to camouflage the error. Although this might be an effective means of advocacy, it hardly assists the Court of Appeals in deciding whether the application for leave has merit. As in any context, our adversarial system of justice works best when both adversaries are actually present. People v Ward, 459 Mich 602, 615, n 2; 594 NW2d 47 (1999) (Cavanagh, J„ dissenting). The system endorsed by the majority effectively prevents the indi*538gent defendant from ever being meaningfully present, and could encourage prosecutors to stay away as well, leaving the reviewing court with the “barren record” and no advocacy at all to assist in its determination.
These degrees, of course, are the distinctions required by Ross, not the factual distinction between Douglas and the instant case, which forms so much of the sand on which the majority opinion is built.
18 Section 12 of this chapter, as referred to in MCL 770.3(l)(e); MSA 28.1100(l)(e), being MCL 770.12; MSA 18.1109, governs appeals taken by the prosecution and is inapplicable to our discussion.
19 Appeals of right, referenced in MCR 7.205(D)(3), are governed by MCR 7.203(A) and MCR 7.204. The discussion that appears immediately below the text accompanying this note is equally applicable to these mies.
Likewise, MCR 7.212 governs briefs on appeal before the Court of Appeals. It does not require the advocate to address any requirements similar to those of either MCR 7.302(B) or the North Carolina Supreme Court, as found in Ross.
The majority argues that because we are dealing with guilty-plea Cases, the defendant has already pleaded guilty. Thus, it concludes that the court is not functioning to determine guilt. That argument, however, ignores the teachings of the Supreme Court. Douglas and Griffin focus on “a correct adjudication of guilt.” Entirely aside from the sentencing questions that might be raised, claims of failures to honor plea bargains, coercion in or involuntariness of a plea, or lack of mental capacity to knowingly enter a plea, for example, would all address directly the correctness of the “adjudication of guilt.” As evidenced by our adoption of MCR 6.302, we have recognized that a mere admission of guilt, even if accompanied by an absolute and all-knowing certainty, is but one component of a “correct adjudication” under our system.
Amicus curiae Michigan Assigned Appellate Counsel System informs us that ninety-two percent of all convictions in Michigan result from guilty pleas. Thus, this Court will see a significant number of completely pro se offerings, or even worse, no offerings at all, a certain indication that the door to this Court has been slammed in the face of indigent Proposal b defendants.
MacCollom was a plurality decision, with Justice Rehnquist’s lead opinion joined by Chief Justice Burger and Justices Stewart and Powell. MacCollom, supra at 319. Justice Blackmun concurred separately, and made the interesting point that counsel was appointed on this collateral challenge. Id. at 329. Justice Brennan, joined by Justice Marshall, dissented. Id. at 330. Justice Stevens, joined by Justices Brennan, Marshall, and White, also offered a dissenting opinion. Id. at 334.
Any suggestion that this equal protection analysis is incomplete because it does not visit entryway questions, like suspect classifications or levels of review, is mistaken. These considerations’ absences are not inadvertent. Rather, I note that these concerns were given no place in the Supreme Court’s analysis in Douglas, Ross, or the cases that followed them.
Like MacCollom, Murray was a plurality decision. Justices White, O’Connor, and Scalia joined Chief Justice Rehnquist’s lead opinion. Justice O’Connor also concurred separately, Murray, supra at 13, as well as joining Justice Kennedy’s separate concurrence. Id. at 14. Justice Stevens, joined by Justices Brennan, Marshall, and Blackmun, dissented. Id. at 18-20.
Similar is Smith v Robbins, supra, 120 S Ct 759, in which the Court understood Douglas to hold that “decision of first appeal ‘without benefit of counsel, ... no matter how meritorious [an indigent’s] case may turn out to be’ discriminates between rich and poor rather than between ‘possibly good and obviously bad cases,’ ” quoting Douglas, supra at 357. Also notable is the Court’s statement that an indigent defendant is not deprived of a fair opportunity to bring an appeal if the appeal is determined to be frivolous, because “fairness does not require either counsel or a full appeal once it is properly determined that an appeal is frivolous.” Robbins, supra, 120 S Ct 760. Under the system in place after the majority’s decision, however, counsel will be denied indigent defendants before their appeal is determined frivolous, without merit, or otherwise, because counsel will not be appointed at all for an indigent’s attempt to garner appellate review.
See, e.g., Pennsylvania v Finley, 481 US 551; 107 S Ct 1990; 95 L Ed 2d 539 (1987), also discussing appointed counsel for postconviction proceedings. The Court again had occasion to review its reasoning in Ross, and Chief Justice Rehnquist again offered the approach that he had consistently used to discuss Ross:
By the time respondent presented her application for postconviction relief, she had been represented at trial and in the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania. In Ross, we concluded that the defendant’s access to the trial record and the appellate briefs and opinions provided sufficient tools for the pro se litigant to gain meaningful access to courts that possess a discretionary power of review. [Id. at 557 (citations omitted).]
In Finley, the Court continued its longstanding practice of comparing the appellant’s position to the position of the defendant in Ross to determine whether counsel must be appointed.
The First Circuit Court of Appeals followed this track in Bundy v Wilson, n 2 supra, as well. There, the court grasped the fundamental concept involved here, that it is not the name of the appellate system, but its place in the appellate chain, that is dispositive:
In Ross, the Supreme Court ruled that due process and equal protection did not require the State of North Carolina to provide an indigent defendant with counsel in a discretionary appeal to the state supreme court. Vital to the Court’s reasoning was its recognition that North Carolina did provide counsel to criminal defendants who pursued their automatic right of appeal to the state’s intermediate appellate court. Thus, the crucial distinction advanced in Ross is not between discretionary appellate systems and automatic appellate systems. Rather, the key difference considered in both Evitts and Ross concerned the nature of constitutional protections in a single system which employed both a first appeal as of right to an intermediate court, and a subsequent discretionary appeal to the state supreme court. Indeed, the distinction between a first appeal of right and subsequent discretionary appeal within the same appellate system has been made by the Court in other cases. The Court, *556however, has not drawn a line between discretionary appellate systems and automatic appellate systems for the purpose of gauging the degree of due process protection owed a criminal appellant. [Bundy, supra at 130 (citations omitted).]
The Eastern District of Michigan displayed the same insight on the same issue recently in Tesmer v Granholm, unpublished opinion of the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan, issued March 31, 2000 (Docket No. 00-CV-10082). That court held that denying appellate counsel to indigent Proposal b defendants is a constitutional violation. The court stated:
[I]n holding that a State need not appoint appellate counsel for a discretionary appeal to the State’s highest court, the Supreme Court [in Ross] could not have been more clear that that distinction was based upon the fact that an attorney had been appointed at the intermediate level, had reviewed the record and had prepared the appellate arguments. Without that initial review, the indigent defendant’s appeal was a meaningless ritual. [Slip op at 38.]
30 Notably, the procedural rules governing the petition for leave to appeal before the West Virginia Court are essentially identical to the applicable provisions governing an application for leave to appeal to our Court of Appeals. Compare W Va R App P 3(c), cited in Billotti, supra at 116, with our own MCR 7.205 and MCR 7.212.
See also Billotti, supra at 116-117, stating that whether a procedure for appeal is by leave or by right may have little effect on the nature of the actual review, and suggesting that evaluation of the nature of that review might be more appropriate.
Additionally, authorities are conflicting about whether other claims are waived by a guilty plea. For example, Michigan cases are unclear about whether claims under the interstate agreement on detainers, MCL 780.601; MSA 4.147(1), are waived by a guilty plea. Compare People v Office, 126 Mich App 597; 337 NW2d 592 (1983) (not waived), with People v Wanty, 189 Mich App 291; 471 NW2d 922 (1991) (waived). The same is true for claims of abusive charging. Compare People v Stevens, 130 Mich App 1; 343 NW2d 219 (1983) (waived), with People v Vannoy, 106 Mich App 404; 308 NW2d 233 (1981) (not waived).
Unpublished opinion per curiam, issued June 13, 1994 (Docket No. 159022).
Unpublished opinion per curiam, issued August 18, 1995 (Docket No. 179495).
Unpublished opinion per curiam, issued January 5, 1996 (Docket No. 180464).
Unpublished opinion per curiam, issued March 29, 1996 (Docket No. 186926).
Notable are the observations on indigent defendants offered by amicus curiae Michigan Assigned Appellate Counsel System, that eighty percent of indigent defendants do not have a high school education, and half are functionally illiterate. “Giving an illiterate the run of the stacks is like giving an anorexic a free meal at a three-star restaurant.” DeMallory v Cullen, 855 F2d 442, 451 (CA 7, 1988) (Easterbrook, J., dissenting).
Even though these claims are sometimes granted relief as well, as illustrated by Antolovich, supra.
On the other hand, when defendants have had the tools present in Ross, the Court has concluded that the constitutional requirement has been fulfilled and counsel has not been appointed. See, e.g., Finley, supra. The majority refers to this as the Supreme Court’s “contracting” right-to-counsel jurisprudence. Ante at 520. However, the constitutional standard has remained constant; the Court has adhered to its decision in Ross. By mere happenstance, the Court has not been presented with cases in violation of Ross, because most states have provided indigent defendants with counsel rather than denying counsel in a reach for new constitutional lows. See, e.g., Billotti, supra.
I pause for the benefit of those who might be unfamiliar with the Michigan appellate system to point out the manner in which indigent defendants are represented on appeal. The State Appellate Defender Office represents defendants in approximately twenty-five percent of the total number of indigent appellate cases in the state. See MCL 780.716; MSA 28.1114(106). The remaining cases are assigned to private attorneys by means of a roster system administered by the Michigan Appellate Assigned Counsel System (MAACS). Although state defenders have salaried positions, those attorneys on the maacs roster are paid a fee per case that is determined by the county where the conviction originates, with such fees varying statewide.
See note, Limiting Michigan’s guilty and nolo contendere plea appeals, 73 U Det Mercy L R 431, 448-449 (1996), for a comprehensive discussion of the genesis of Proposal B, along with a knowing caution that, although the proposal itself did not address the right to counsel, there would be those who would argue that it somehow obliterated that right in guilty plea cases.