=== CASE 9737439 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:25:04.495138+00 ===

JUSTICE COOK, dissenting: Former Supreme Court Rule 220(c)(4), effective until January 1, 1996, specifically provided that defendants such as the defendant in this case did not have to disclose themselves as expert witnesses. Does Rule 213(g) change the “party exception” of former Rule 220(c)(4)? Rule 213(g) does not say that it does so. The majority concludes that Rule 213(g) changes the party exception because “the whole point of replacing Rule 220 with the amendments to Rule 213 and Rule 218 was to rid Illinois law of the myriad of exceptions under the old rule.” 304 Ill. App. 3d at 379. It is an unusual rule of construction that a new rule, which is silent on an issue, should be read one way because the old rule provided the other way. The majority reads Rule 213(g) not as it is written but as the majority would have written it. Rule 213(g) is not a comprehensive solution designed to replace Rule 220 and to answer every question that might arise regarding opinion witnesses. Instead, the supreme court simply deleted Rule 220, with the option to make future adjustments as the law develops. The more important rule is Rule 218, providing for case management conferences, which gives the circuit court discretion to discuss the disclosure of expert witnesses with the parties and to enter orders controlling the subsequent course of the action. 166 Ill. 2d R. 218. Rule 213(g) first defines “opinion witness” as “a person who will offer any opinion testimony.” 166 Ill. 2d R. 213(g). Rule 213(g) then provides that upon written interrogatory the party must give the opinion witness’ (1) subject matter, (2) conclusions and opinions, (3) bases therefor, (4) qualifications, and (5) reports. 166 Ill. 2d R. 213(g). It is clear that Rule 213(g) does away with the former distinction between retained and nonretained experts. It appears that Rule 213(g) does away with any distinction between lay opinions and expert opinions (“conclusions and opinions”). It is not clear that Rule 213(g) expresses a desire to treat a party the same as any other opinion witness. Rule 213(g) does not say that an opinion witness is “any” person who will offer opinion testimony. There are problems with applying the opinion witness rules to parties. When defendant calls plaintiff as an adverse witness at trial (735 ILCS 5/2 —1102 (West 1996)), plaintiff may now object that the questioning asks for opinion testimony (e.g., “how fast was your car "going?,” “were you intoxicated?”) and that defendant did not disclose what plaintiffs conclusions and opinions would be, or what plaintiff based them on. The same is true when plaintiff calls defendant as an adverse witness. There are special problems in malpractice cases. A defendant may be prevented from testifying in his own medical malpractice case unless he has voluntarily, without any specific questioning by plaintiff, told plaintiff everything plaintiff later decides might be useful. Under the majority’s rule, the doctor in the present case is prohibited from testifying on the central issues of this case. The doctor may not testify that he acted properly or that he was not negligent. Should we now strike the doctor’s answer to the complaint, in which he made those same denials? The majority has adopted an absolute rule for compliance with Rule 213(g), which admits of no exceptions and allows no discretion to the trial court. See Crull, 294 Ill. App. 3d at 539, 690 N.E.2d at 148 (“Trial courts should be more reluctant under Rule 213 than they were under former Rule 220 (1) to permit the parties to deviate from the strict disclosure requirements, or (2) not to impose severe sanctions when such deviations occur”). The majority’s zero-tolerance policy is unrealistic. The purpose of discovery sanctions is not to punish but, rather, to insure a fair discovery and a trial on the merits. Each case presents a unique factual situation that is to be considered in determining whether a sanction is to be imposed. Sobczak v. Flaska, 302 Ill. App. 3d 916, 926 (1998); see also Shimanovsky v. General Motors Corp., 181 Ill. 2d 112, 123, 692 N.E.2d 286, 291 (1998). Trial courts should be encouraged to think about these complicated matters, not penalized when they depart from what the majority sees as an absolute rule. There is a problem with enforcing strict compliance in this case. Plaintiff did not file Rule 213(g) interrogatories. Plaintiff would respond that he did not have to, that there was a case management conference at which the disclosure of opinion witnesses was discussed, and the answers were filed in response to the order entered at that case management conference. I agree with that argument, but the argument is inconsistent with the majority’s strict compliance approach. Plaintiff’s interrogatories may be excused, but so may be defendant’s answers, when that information is otherwise made available to plaintiff. The circuit court should have discretion in these cases how disclosure may be accomplished and what disclosure is sufficient. There are dangers with a rule that permits no deviation from what are held to be strict disclosure requirements and requires severe sanctions when such deviations occur. It is dangerous to always rule against the party making discovery. When the court takes such a one-sided position, some litigants will be more interested in imposing sanctions on their opponent than in obtaining disclosure from him. Plaintiff here knew in advance what defendant’s testimony would be, but waited until the last possible moment to bring the issue to the attention of the trial court. Why didn’t plaintiff raise this issue at the case management conference? Plaintiff knew at that time that defendant would be offering opinion testimony. The answer is that plaintiff did not want more information about defendant’s opinion testimony. Plaintiff wanted to keep defendant from giving any opinion testimony. A litigant will have no knowledge of the identity of, or the opinions of, an opposing retained expert witness, but a litigant will know who the opposing party is and can and should take the opposing party’s deposition. The information listed in Rule 213(g) is designed to allow the opponent to take a thorough deposition of an opinion witness. The deposition, where the opinion witness is subjected to cross-examination, is the great legal engine of truth. What sense does it make, when the opponent has acquired the information covered by Rule 213(g), and has been able to take the deposition of the opinion witness, to prevent the opinion witness from testifying because Rule 213(g) answers to interrogatories were not filed? Why, when we have subjected the opinion to deposition cross-examination, should we go backward and then require the listing of the opinion in an answer to a Rule 213(g) interrogatory? Rule 213(i) indicates that we do not have to go backward: “If a deposition of an opinion witness is taken, the witness’ testimony at trial will be limited to the opinion expressed therein, in addition to those opinions identified in answers to Rule 213(g) interrogatories. The opinions expressed in a deposition need not be later specifically identified in Rule 213(g) answers but, upon objection at trial, the burden is on the proponent of the witness to prove the opinions were provided in deposition or Rule 213(g) interrogatory.” 177 Ill. 2d R. 213(i). The majority states that, even if the testimony at trial was limited to the opinion expressed in the deposition, a violation of Rule 213(g) nevertheless occurred, and the testimony was improperly admitted. The majority indicates this is somehow true because of Rule 213(f), which requires an answer disclosing the witnesses who will testify at trial and the subject of their testimony. I assume Rule 213(f) was complied with for Dr. Katholi. It is unusual to take the deposition of an opinion witness who has not been identified in Rule 213(g) answers, but if such a deposition is taken, Rule 213(i) indicates there is no duty to amend the answers to state the opinions given. Plaintiff argues that such an interpretation of Rule 213(i) will “put the plaintiffs attorney in the impossible position of having to decide whether relevant questions to be asked during a discovery deposition should not be asked because they may allow the deponent to give opinions at trial even though he or she was not previously identified as an opinion witness.” Plaintiffs argument reflects a fundamental misunderstanding of the discovery process. The discovery process is designed to give a litigant the opportunity to discover whatever information may be relevant to his case. The discovery process is not designed to give litigants technical arguments by which they can keep evidence from being admitted at trial, when they were in fact afforded a fair opportunity to discover that evidence. There is more to the waiver argument in this case than whether plaintiffs motion is labeled a motion in limine or a motion in bar. During the argument on plaintiffs motion, the trial court asked plaintiffs attorney, “Which statute [(rule)] are we under?” and plaintiffs attorney responded, “I want to say 220 but I’m not sure.” The trial court then read Rule 220(c) to the parties, and the language that the opinion of a party could be the subject of disclosure by deposition only. Plaintiffs attorney did not object that some other analysis should be applied. The court asked whether the doctor’s deposition had been taken and whether he had testified to his opinions in his deposition. (The deposition had been taken under Rule 220, which required plaintiff to inquire at the deposition regarding defendant’s opinions.) Defendant’s attorney responded in the affirmative. The court inquired further: “And you’re telling me, Mr. Velde, that paragraphs 2 and 4, opinions regarding the cause of Mr. McMath’s death and the possible causes of chest pain on February 27th, have been inquired into in the deposition, isn’t that correct?” Defendant’s attorney again responded in the affirmative. Plaintiffs attorney then responded: “Your honor, I will — I think we’ll stipulate he was asked questions about those two issues.” The trial court immediately ruled that the doctor could testify to those issues. Plaintiff waived the issue on which the majority now reverses first by encouraging the trial court to rule under Rule 220, and then by stipulating that the opinions were provided in deposition, which would make them admissible under Rule 213(i) as well. The majority states, “we have no difficulty concluding that Katholi’s testimony at trial was substantially different than his deposition testimony.” 304 Ill. App. 3d at 381. That decision, however is for the trial court, not for us. (Plaintiff also never objected in the trial court that Katholi’s testimony at trial was substantially different from his deposition testimony.) Plaintiff waived this issue in the trial court, and in any event the trial court’s decision that the opinions were provided in deposition was not an abuse of discretion, unless you accept the majority’s argument that the trial court had no discretion. I would affirm the decision of the trial court.

=== CASE 2210433 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:52.784587+00 ===

711 N.E.2d 844 (1999)
Rick BUNCH and Cindy Bunch, Appellants-Plaintiffs,
v.
Kamal K. TIWARI, M.D., Appellee-Defendant.
No. 53A04-9901-CV-19.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
April 27, 1999.
*846 Robert D. Epstein, Epstein & Frisch, Indianapolis, Indiana, Attorney for Appellants.
Gary J. Clendening, Kendra G. Gjerdingen, Mallor Clendening Grodner & Bohrer, Bloomington, Indiana, Attorneys for Appellee.
*845 OPINION
KIRSCH, Judge
In this medical malpractice action, Rick Bunch and Cindy Bunch (collectively, "Bunch") appeal the trial court's order granting summary judgment in favor of Kamal K. Tiwari, M.D. ("Dr.Tiwari"). Bunch presents two issues which we restate as follows:
I. Whether the trial court erred in striking the affidavit of Bunch's medical expert submitted in opposition to summary judgment for failure to comply with the requirements of Indiana Trial Rule 56(E).
II. Whether there are genuine issues of material fact precluding summary judgment of the case.
We reverse and remand.
FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
The facts in the light most favorable to Bunch establish that on August 12, 1991, Rick presented to Bloomington Hospital for a pre-surgery consultation regarding an out-patient knee operation he was to have performed the following day. Accompanied by his wife, Cindy, and his mother, Gloria, Rick met with the nurse who explained the procedure. During the course of this meeting, Gloria inquired about how Rick was going to be anesthetized, and stated adamantly that she did not want her son to have a spinal anesthetic because of complications she had experienced with one in the past. The nurse assured the family that the anesthesiologist, Dr. Tiwari, would not use a spinal anesthesia on Rick and that Rick would simply be put to sleep. Rick then signed two consent forms, one entitled "General Anesthesia." Record at 79.
On the day of the surgery, August 13, 1991, Dr. Tiwari was running behind schedule in the operating room. Due to the delay, the nurse allowed Cindy and Gloria to wait with Rick in the surgical holding area, where Rick was lying on a gurney and dressed in a surgical gown. Thereafter, the nurse came into the holding area and told Rick that Dr. Tiwari was still running behind but that she would begin his IV. After affixing the IV, the nurse injected a shot of Demerol into the IV to help Rick relax. Some time later, the nurse came into the holding area again to advise Rick that because of the continuing delays, she would give him another shot of *847 Demerol and Dr. Tiwari would complete the administration of anesthesia in the operating room. Neither Rick, Cindy, nor Gloria saw Dr. Tiwari prior to surgery.[1]
Upon being wheeled into the operating room, a third shot of Demerol was put into Rick's IV, this time by Dr. Tiwari. It was not until Rick was pre-medicated and lying on the operating table that Dr. Tiwari told Rick he was going to administer a spinal anesthetic. In performing the injection, Dr. Tiwari poked Rick several times in the lower back, causing Rick's arms to flail and resulting in a severe burning pain down his back and into his right buttock and leg. In the recovery room following the procedure, Rick continued to complain of excruciating burning sensations shooting through his right buttock and leg. He was kept in Bloomington Hospital overnight for observation as a result of the pain. Despite extensive medical treatment since the date of the operation, Rick's complaints of pain have persisted.
Bunch filed a proposed complaint against Dr. Tiwari with the Indiana Department of Insurance alleging technical negligence in the administering of the spinal anesthetic. A subsequent amended complaint alleged that Dr. Tiwari had also failed to obtain informed consent from Bunch prior to administering the spinal anesthetic. The medical review panel unanimously opined that Dr. Tiwari's conduct with regard to the administration of the spinal anesthesia did not fall below the applicable standard of care. The panel also found, however, that there remained a material issue of fact not requiring expert opinion with regard to the issue of informed consent, but that the conduct complained of was not a factor in the resultant damages.
Thereafter, Bunch filed a medical malpractice action against Dr. Tiwari which mirrored the allegations of the proposed complaint. After answering the complaint, Dr. Tiwari moved for summary judgment relying on the unanimous opinion of the medical review panel. In response, Bunch submitted the affidavits of two medical experts, Dr. Sy Rabins and Dr. Michael Turner. At the summary judgment hearing, Dr. Tiwari made an oral motion to strike the affidavit of Dr. Rabins for failing to comply with the requirements of Indiana Trial Rule 56(E). The trial court struck the affidavit of Dr. Rabins and determined that the affidavit of Dr. Turner standing alone was insufficient to refute the medical review panel's opinion and demonstrate the existence of a material issue of fact. Dr. Tiwari's motion for summary judgment was granted. Bunch now appeals.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
I. Standard of Review
Our analysis proceeds from the premise that summary judgment is a lethal weapon and courts must be ever mindful of its aims and targets and beware of overkill in its use. Schrum v. Moskaluk, 655 N.E.2d 561, 564 (Ind.Ct.App.1995) (citing Place v. Sagamore Center, Inc., 604 N.E.2d 671, 673 (Ind.Ct.App.1992), trans. denied). Summary judgment is appropriate only if no genuine issues of material fact exist and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Ind. T.R. 56(C); Brown v. Banta, 682 N.E.2d 582, 584 (Ind.Ct.App. 1997). Rarely is a negligence action properly disposed of by summary judgment, particularly when the critical question for resolution is whether the defendant exercised the requisite degree of care under the circumstances. Summit Bank v. Panos, 570 N.E.2d 960, 964 (Ind.Ct.App.1991) (quoting Stumph v. Foster, 524 N.E.2d 812, 814 (Ind.Ct.App.1988)), trans. denied. This issue is generally a question for the trier of fact, and not answerable as a matter of law. Id.
In the instant case, the trial court entered specific findings of fact and conclusions of law thereon. Although such findings aid appellate review, they are not binding on this court. Reid v. Ragsdale, 702 N.E.2d *848 367, 369 (Ind.Ct.App.1998) (citing Althaus v. Evansville Courier Co., 615 N.E.2d 441, 444 (Ind.Ct.App.1993)). Instead, when reviewing an entry of summary judgment, we stand in the shoes of the trial court. Simms v. Schweikher, 651 N.E.2d 348, 349 (Ind.Ct. App.1995), trans. denied. We do not weigh the evidence but will consider the designated facts in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party. Id. (citing Reed v. Luzny, 627 N.E.2d 1362, 1363 (Ind.Ct.App.1994), trans. denied ). All doubts as to the existence of a factual issue must be resolved in the nonmovant's favor. Schrum v. Moskaluk, 655 N.E.2d 561, 564 (Ind.Ct.App.1995) (citing Thornhill v. Deka-Di Riding Stables, 643 N.E.2d 983, 986 (Ind.Ct.App.1994), trans. denied), trans. denied.
A trial court's grant of summary judgment is "clothed with a presumption of validity," and the appellant has the burden of demonstrating that the grant of summary judgment was erroneous. Brown, 682 N.E.2d at 584 (quoting Stevenson v. Hamilton Mut. Ins. Co., 672 N.E.2d 467, 471 (Ind. Ct.App.1996), trans. denied). However, we must carefully assess the trial court's decision to ensure the nonmovant was not improperly denied his or her day in court. Colonial Penn Ins. Co. v. Guzorek, 690 N.E.2d 664, 667 (Ind.1997).
II. Dr. Rabins' Affidavit
Bunch contends that the trial court erred in striking the affidavit of Dr. Rabins for failing to comply with the requirements of Indiana Trial Rule 56(E). The court's rationale for doing so, as articulated in its findings of facts and conclusions thereon,[2] was two-fold:
"Dr. Rabins stated in his Affidavit that he relied on a phone conversation with Mr. and Mrs. Bunch. Such a conversation is not admissible evidence, and thus Dr. Rabins' opinion, insofar as it relies on such conversation, must be disregarded. In addition, Dr. Rabins stated that he relied on "certain medical records" including but not limited to, "the medical records of Mr. Bunch at Bloomington Hospital, selected records of Mr. Bunch from Dr. Michael Turner of Indianapolis Neurosurgical and at Methodist Hospital, Indianapolis, Indiana, and depositions of Mr. Ricky Bunch and Dr. Kamal Tiwari." None of the records specifically listed as those relied on by Dr. Rabins are attached to the Affidavit as required by TR 56(E).... Accordingly, the Affidavit must be stricken for failure to comply with the requirements established by TR 56(E) for an affidavit submitted in opposition to summary judgment."
Record at 271-74 (emphases added). In addition to the court's findings, Dr. Tiwari further argues that Dr. Rabins' affidavit was properly stricken because it was not based on first-hand personal knowledge. We cannot agree with either proposition and hold that the trial court's ruling with regard to Dr. Rabins' affidavit was erroneous.
First, as it relates to Dr. Rabins' telephone interview of Rick and Cindy Bunch, Indiana Evidence Rule 703 states specifically that "[e]xperts may testify to opinions based on inadmissible evidence, provided that it is of the type reasonably relied upon by experts in the field." Moreover, this court has consistently held that an expert may utilize hearsay information in forming his opinion. Cox v. American Aggregates Corp., 580 N.E.2d 679, 685 (Ind.Ct.App.1991) (citing Rubin v. Johnson, 550 N.E.2d 324, 328 (Ind.Ct.App.1990), trans. denied), trans. denied. Clearly, a personal interview to ascertain additional facts not readily apparent in the medical records, particularly in light of the factual dispute regarding informed consent, was the type of information Dr. Rabins would have reasonably relied upon as an expert in a medical malpractice action, and should not have been disregarded.
Secondly, Indiana Trial Rule 56(E) reads, "Sworn or certified copies not previously self-authenticated of all papers or parts thereof referred to in an affidavit shall be attached thereto or served therewith." (Emphasis *849 added). Bunch submitted several exhibits as part of Plaintiff's Brief in Response to Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment, including the medical records from Bloomington Hospital (Exhibit D), the depositions of Rick and Dr. Tiwari (Exhibits E and F, respectively), and the affidavits of Dr. Rabins and Dr. Turner (Exhibits A and B, respectively). These items were specifically designated in Plaintiff's Designation of Evidence pursuant to Indiana Trial Rule 56(C). Given that the records upon which Dr. Rabins relied in rendering his expert opinion were served contemporaneously with Dr. Rabins' affidavit, we conclude that Bunch did comply with the requirements of Trial Rule 56(E). The trial court erred in determining otherwise.
We note that Dr. Rabins' affidavit states that he relied in part on the medical records of Dr. Turner at Indianapolis Neurosurgical and Methodist Hospital in rendering his opinion. These records, however, were not attached to the affidavit or served therewith as required by Trial Rule 56(E). Nor were Dr. Turner's records designated as evidence in accordance with Trial Rule 56(C). Under Trial Rule 56(C), neither the trial court nor the appellate court can look beyond whatever evidence has been designated. Miller v. Monsanto Co., 626 N.E.2d 538, 542 (Ind.Ct.App.1993). Moreover, where the affidavit does not meet the strict requirements of Trial Rule 56(E), the court may disregard it upon its own motion. Id. (citing Lee v. Schroeder, 529 N.E.2d 349, 352 (Ind.Ct.App.1988), trans. denied). Nevertheless, in reviewing Dr. Rabins' affidavit as a whole, we find that his opinions were supported entirely by the Bloomington Hospital records and that evidence which was specifically designated and submitted in compliance with the trial rules.
Thirdly, while Trial Rule 56(E) mandates that affidavits be made on personal knowledge, this does not mean that a physician who qualifies as an expert must obtain his knowledge based solely on first-hand experience. Summit Bank, 570 N.E.2d at 965. Our courts have never held that a scientific witness can only testify from facts learned by personal experience. Id. (citing Ortho Pharmaceutical Corp. v. Chapman, 180 Ind.App. 33, 388 N.E.2d 541 (1979)). "A witness who testifies as an expert need not base her opinion testimony on personal knowledge if the opinion is based on evidence of a type normally found reliable and customarily relied upon by others in the witness's profession or area of expertise." Id. (citing Kranda v. Houser-Norborg Medical Corp., 419 N.E.2d 1024 (Ind.Ct.App.1981)). Indeed, knowledge may be acquired through hands-on experience, formal education, specialized training, study of textbooks, performing experiments, and observation. Id. (citing 13 W. MILLER, INDIANA PRACTICE § 702.103 at 35-37 (1984)). Thus, contrary to Dr. Tiwari's contentions, it was not necessary for Dr. Rabins to possess first-hand knowledge of Bunch's treatment and condition for him to render an expert medical opinion in this case. As such, the trial court erred in striking the entirety of Dr. Rabins' affidavit for failing to comply with the requirements of Trial Rule 56.[3]
III. Genuine Issues of Material Fact
Bunch next contends that the trial court erred in granting Dr. Tiwari's motion for summary judgment because the evidence was sufficient to refute the medical review panel's opinion and create a genuine issue of material fact precluding such a determination. We agree to the extent that summary judgment should not have been *850 granted on Bunch's claim against Dr. Tiwari under the doctrine of informed consent.[4]
To establish a prima facie case of medical malpractice, a plaintiff must demonstrate: (1) the defendant's duty in relation to the plaintiff; (2) the defendant's failure to conform its conduct to the requisite standard of care required by the relationship forming the duty; and, (3) an injury to the plaintiff resulting from that failure. Oelling v. Rao, 593 N.E.2d 189, 190 (Ind.1992). This generally requires expert testimony showing that the physician's performance fell below the applicable standard of care and that his negligence was a proximate cause of the plaintiff's injuries. Etienne v. Caputi, 679 N.E.2d 922, 924 (Ind.Ct.App.1997) (citing Bethke v. Gammon, 590 N.E.2d 573, 574-75 (Ind.Ct. App.1991)). When a medical review panel renders an opinion in favor of the physician, the plaintiff must then come forward with expert medical testimony to rebut the panel's opinion in order to survive summary judgment. Brown, 682 N.E.2d at 584 (citing Chambers by Hamm v. Ludlow, 598 N.E.2d 1111, 1116 (Ind.Ct.App.1992)). "An affidavit which establishes an expert's credentials, states that the expert has reviewed the relevant medical records, and sets forth the expert's conclusion that the defendants violated the standard of care in their treatment which in turn caused the complained of injury, is sufficient to demonstrate the existence of a material fact, thus making summary judgment inappropriate." Randolph County Hosp. v. Livingston, 650 N.E.2d 1215, 1219 (Ind.Ct.App.1995) (citing Jordan v. Deery, 609 N.E.2d 1104, 1110 (Ind.1993)), trans. denied.
In an informed consent action such as the instant case, the critical issue is whether the patient was subjected to the inherent risks of the proposed treatment without being permitted to intelligently reject or accept that treatment. Revord v. Russell, 401 N.E.2d 763, 767 (Ind.Ct.App.1980). Under the doctrine of informed consent, expert opinion is generally necessary to establish the causal connection between the inadequate disclosure and the resulting damages. Id. (citing Ellis v. Smith, 528 N.E.2d 826 (Ind.Ct.App.1988)).
Here, the medical review panel issued a unanimous decision that there was a question of fact not requiring expert opinion on the issue of whether Rick had been subjected to the inherent risks of a spinal anesthetic without being permitted to intelligently reject or accept that procedure. The panel went on to conclude, however, that the conduct complained of, i.e., the failure to obtain informed consent, was not a factor in the resultant damages. Dr. Tiwari submitted only this opinion to support his summary judgment motion. In so doing, he placed before Bunch one single contention to be rebutted: that Dr. Tiwari was entitled to judgment as a matter of law because his conduct, negligent or not, did not proximately cause the damages suffered.
In Randolph County Hospital, we held:
"When the movant on summary judgment relies only upon the opinion of the medical review panel which found no breach of the standard of care but was silent as to the other elements of malpractice, the plaintiff non-movant is only obligated to present expert testimony on the standard of care element of malpractice. Accordingly, once the panel opinion was introduced, the burden of proof shifted to Livingston to respond by designating evidentiary matter *851 which demonstrated a genuine issue of fact regarding the standard of care issue. Because Defendants presented no evidence regarding any of the other elements of malpractice, Livingston was free to rest upon her pleadings regarding the other elements."
Id., 650 N.E.2d at 1218 (emphasis added). Likewise, when Dr. Tiwari relied upon the opinion of the medical review panel which found in his favor only on the element of proximate cause but which determined that factual issues remained as to the other elements of an informed consent claim, Bunch needed to respond by demonstrating the existence of a question of fact only as to proximate cause. Bunch satisfied this burden of proof by submitting the affidavit of Dr. Turner.
Dr. Turner states in his affidavit that he is a licensed and practicing physician in the State of Indiana, board certified in surgery of the nervous system and spine, and has been treating Rick since August 1992. The affidavit provides that Rick suffers from pain compatible with a nerve root injury which can occur with spinal puncture or an injection of spinal anesthetic. Dr. Turner further states that in his expert medical opinion:
"[I]f Mr. Bunch was pain-free in his right leg prior to the spinal anesthetic and came out of surgery with immediate pain in his right leg and a dysesthic type of pain, then this pain was likely related to and caused by the spinal puncture or injection of spinal anesthetic."
Record at 46-47. This evidence was sufficient to refute the medical review panel's opinion and create a genuine issue of material fact.[5]
Accordingly, the trial court erred in granting Dr. Tiwari's motion for summary judgment on Bunch's claim under the doctrine of informed consent. It is important to note that our decision stands irrespective of the sufficiency of Dr. Rabins' affidavit, which was not required to overcome the burden of summary judgment.[6] Dr. Turner's affidavit, standing alone or taken in conjunction with Dr. Rabins' affidavit, was more than adequate to demonstrate a genuine issue of material fact precluding a summary determination. The affidavit of Dr. Rabins merely lends credence to the existence of a factual issue and the inappropriateness of summary judgment in this case.
We reverse and remand.
GARRARD, J., and NAJAM, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  The designated evidence on this point is in dispute. Dr. Tiwari testified in his deposition that he saw Rick on more than one occasion in the surgical holding area prior to surgery, that he began the IV, and that he had a conversation with Rick during which he obtained a medical history and determined the type of anesthesia to be used. Dr. Tiwari further testified that the nurses in the holding area were aware Rick was to receive a spinal anesthetic and had prepared the tray of instruments accordingly.
[2]  While our holding today reverses the trial court's grant of summary judgment, we commend the trial court for the thoroughness of its determination in this case. Its Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law have aided tremendously our review.
[3]  While Dr. Rabins' entire affidavit should not have been stricken by the court, we do take issue with Paragraph No. 9 of the affidavit, which states that Dr. Tiwari's testimony is "definitely contrary to the Bunchs' [sic] testimony and creates a classical issue of fact to be determined by the jury." Record at 44. Mere assertions of conclusions of law or opinions in an affidavit are improper. See Dvorak v. Christ, 692 N.E.2d 920, 925 (Ind.Ct.App.1998). However, such statements do not mandate a total disregard of all contents of the affidavit; the trial court need only ignore the improper portions thereof. Kahf v. Charleston South Apartments, 461 N.E.2d 723, 737, n. 6 (Ind.Ct.App.1984) (citing Celina Mut. Ins. Co. v. Forister, 438 N.E.2d 1007 (Ind.Ct.App. 1982); French v. Hickman Moving & Storage, 400 N.E.2d 1384 (Ind.Ct.App.1980)), trans. denied.
[4]  In reviewing the designated materials, the appellate briefs, and particularly the affidavits of Dr. Rabins and Dr. Turner, we find that Bunch failed to come forward with any expert medical testimony to rebut the medical review panel's unanimous opinion that Dr. Tiwari's administering of the spinal anesthetic itself did not fall below the standard of care. See Chambers by Hamm v. Ludlow, 598 N.E.2d 1111, 1116 (Ind. Ct.App.1992). If medical expert opinion is not in conflict regarding whether the physician's conduct met the requisite standard of care, there are no genuine triable issues. Simms, 651 N.E.2d at 350 (citing Marquis v. Battersby, 443 N.E.2d 1202, 1203 (Ind.Ct.App.1982), trans. denied). Moreover, where there is a unanimous medical review panel determination favoring the defendant and no countervailing expert opinion, the defendant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. McGee v. Bonaventura, 605 N.E.2d 792, 794 (Ind.Ct.App.1993). As such, the trial court properly granted summary judgment on Bunch's claim of technical negligence in the administration of the spinal anesthesia, and we limit our discussion to the issue of informed consent.
[5]  Any lack of detail in an affidavit goes to the weight and credibility to be assigned to it, not to whether it is adequate to create a question for the trier of fact. Jordan, 609 N.E.2d at 1111 (Ind.1993).
[6]  Dr. Rabins' affidavit establishes the existence of a material issue of fact as to all the elements of a prima facie malpractice case brought under the doctrine of informed consent. It articulates the requisite standard of care, that Dr. Tiwari breached that standard of care, and that Dr. Tiwari's conduct caused the resultant damages suffered.

=== CASE 2210441 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:52.902297+00 ===

241 Cal.App.2d 616 (1966)
HENRY H. GUTTMAN et al., Plaintiffs and Appellants,
v.
HOWARD HOMES, INC., et al., Defendants and Respondents.
Civ. No. 28468.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Two.
Apr. 20, 1966.
Morris Lavine for Plaintiffs and Appellants.
Joseph A. Ball for Defendants and Respondents.
ROTH, P. J.
On August 17, 1954, appellants Henry H. Guttman and Katherine Guttman owned approximately 6 acres of land on the corner of Sunset Boulevard and Alpine Drive in the City of Beverly Hills. Appellants' home was on the northerly portion of the grounds. On the date mentioned appellants conveyed by grant deed the southerly portion of the property to the predecessor of respondent Howard Homes, Inc. and its two sole shareholders, Maximilian Roven and Abraham Spiegel.
The grant deed described the property as lots 2, 3, and 4 of Tract 14531 and contained the following restrictions:
"1) The lots herein described and conveyed shall be used for the erection and construction of no more than two (2) one-story residences and garages thereon. No part of residence is to be erected and constructed on all or any portion of Lot 2, [the northernmost lot of the purchased property] shall be nearer than thirty (30) feet from the northerly boundary of said Lot 2."
"2) No driveway shall be constructed, maintained or used along and/or parallel to any portion of the Northerly boundary of Lot 2, except in front of said residences, nor shall any driveway extend beyond the rear of each residence hereafter erected, constructed or placed on all or any of the lots herein described and conveyed."
"* * *"
"4) It is further covenanted and agreed that upon the breach of any of the foregoing conditions and restrictions prior to the 10th day of August, 1974, the title to said premises shall immediately, ipso facto, revert to and vest in the grantors, their heirs, assigns or successors in interest. ..."
Subsequent to the purchase of the property by respondents, the lots purchased were redesignated Lots 1 and 2 by the City of Beverly Hills, Lot 1 being the southernmost portion of the property, situated on the corner of Sunset and Alpine (running east and west on Sunset, running north and south on Alpine), and Lot 2 situated on Alpine between Lot 1 and the Guttman home.
Respondents engaged Mr. Neutra, an architect, to design two residences for the property. Such plans (Neutra plans) were made projecting a home for Spiegel on Lot 1 and another *618 residence for Roven on Lot 2. These Neutra plans were submitted to appellant Guttman. He refused to and did not approve. Respondents then sued in declaratory relief to determine whether the Neutra plans conformed to the restrictions in the deed. It was finally determined that with a few modifications the Neutra plans did conform. (Howard Homes, Inc. v. Guttman, 190 Cal.App.2d 526 [12 Cal.Rptr. 244].)
Before said decision became final, respondents abandoned the Neutra plans and had new and somewhat different plans drawn by an architect in Neutra's office named Fisher (Fisher plans).
Appellants timely warned respondents that they would proceed with the Fisher plans at their peril. Respondents commenced construction under the Fisher plans. Appellants, asserting that the restrictions were violated, brought this action to enforce the reversion.
The primary issues decisive of this appeal are whether the restrictions were violated. Respondents contend there is no violation, and further that the suit at bench is barred by res judicata or collateral estoppel by reason of the prior judgment. (Guttman, supra.)
At the conclusion of appellants' case in chief, respondents moved for judgment under Code of Civil Procedure, section 631.8 (added by Stats. 1961). The motion was granted, and the trial judge found for respondents.
[1] A judgment on a motion made pursuant to section 631.8 of the Code of Civil Procedure is not a motion for nonsuit. Our function in reviewing such a judgment is the same as though it were made after a plenary trial--that is, whether it is supported by any competent and substantial evidence. (Wooliscroft v. Starr, 225 Cal.App.2d 667, 669 [37 Cal.Rptr. 570].)
Appellants contend that the judgment was contrary to the evidence and that collateral estoppel and res judicata are inapplicable to the case at bench because of the change in plans.
We make no decision on the issues of res judicata and estoppel. Our review of the record and the exhibits convinces us that the judgment is amply supported by the evidence.
[2a] The evidence shows that the land upon which the homes were built slopes upwards as one travels northward from Sunset Boulevard to the Guttman home. The difference in height between the southernmost end of Lot 1 and the Guttman home is 45 feet. Most of the rise occurs in respect of Lot 2. Both the Fisher and Neutra plans required a grading cut in *619 Lot 2. The cut created two level terraces upon which the Roven home is built.
A portion of the Roven residence resting on the upper terrace of Lot 2 is built on one level, but extends over the lower terrace where the other portion is built and in this manner occupies two levels. Each portion of the structure is approximately 10 feet in height. The structure was designed in this fashion to compensate for the descent in the grade under the portion of the structure built on the upper terrace.
The residence contains approximately 15,000 square feet, 5,000 of which are contained in the lower level. The upper level is the living area, including living room, eating area, kitchen, bedrooms and so forth. The lower level is primarily for recreation and storage.
As mentioned, the conformity of the driveways of both homes to the deed restrictions is also in issue.
[3a] The driveways are irregularly shaped. Their main direction is north and south. They contain some parking and turn-around areas, and are, in some portions, parallel to the northern boundary of Lot 2. Neither driveway extends beyond the rear of the house.
In assessing the probative value of the evidence as it relates to the restrictions in question, we adopt the summation of the trial judge. At the conclusion of arguments on the motion for judgment the court said: "... City of Palos Verdes Estates v. Willett, 75 Cal.App.2d 394 at 405 [171 P.2d 26] says: " 'It is well settled that a reversion of title for breach of a condition subsequent will not be decreed except upon clear and satisfactory evidence of a violation of the condition.'
[2b] "I don't find any such evidence here. ... The first condition of the deed which is claimed to be violated is that the lots shall be used for the erection and construction of no more than two one-story residences and garages. If the question of one-story being the type of residences here was still open, which I don't think it is, I would without any hesitation find that the Roven and the other house are one-story houses."
"It is significant to me that these conditions in the deed would permit a literal compliance with them. If some person on the Roven lot had put his one-story house with the floor at ground level, original grade level, if you like, at the north side, then had had his house extended some 50 or 60 feet toward the south, supported at that end by bare telegraph poles, unenclosed, a plan that has been used in some hillside areas, we would have a literal compliance with this restriction. *620 I don't think anybody would think it was an esthetic treatment of this fine property. If such person should build such a house and then enclosed his support beams by some type of enclosure, he would still be in compliance. What has been done here seems to me to be in principle the same thing with a sensible modification ... for ... reasonable appearance requirements."
"The area above the lower level is clearly the residence. The area below in my view is nothing but an enclosure of what otherwise would be a cellar or useless blank space. Those are my views and will be my findings. ..."
"* * *"
[3b] "That leaves us the matter of the driveway restriction which has engaged my attention more carefully ... than the other. ..."
"This condition is not easy for me to understand nor is its purpose. The only sensible purpose that I can gather from it which would lead to its being put in the deed by the sellers of the property was, of course, to benefit their use of their remaining estate and I should think that would be a retention of scenic values, that is, they wouldn't want a thoroughfare right below their sweep of lawn. I can imagine that being the most reasonable explanation for this restriction. That would explain why the grantors, the Guttmans, didn't want the driveway going around the rear of the residence. They might have a parking area there and it would be unsightly. It would also explain why they would have no objection to a driveway parallel to the north boundary of the sold property in front of the residence because they specifically insist that the residence be within a limited number of feet to Alpine. But the and/or is confusing and the front of the residence leaves quite a lot of construction room."
"I have to find that there is no such thing in either of these properties as a driveway in the sense of a long driveway leading from the street ... to an objective. It seems more as if there are driveways from Alpine for enough room to get up to the level of the homes and then there is a large ... parking area on which you can drive to almost any place."
"The driveway on the lower property in no way violates any restriction I can find. The only place I could suggest a violation on the upper property was in that section which is about 30 feet east and west and parallels, not exactly, but fairly well parallels the property line separating the Roven property from the plaintiffs' property. Any violation of that *621 restriction there is highly questionable for two reasons: That particular boundary of that paved area isn't a driveway ... it doesn't drive anywhere. If one drove alongside of it, he would end up in ... a sort of front porch on the Roven property. Furthermore, the restriction specifically exonerates parallel driveways in front of the residences and all of that area is in front of the property except about 5 feet which is not a consequential departure."
"Then there is another driveway or it could be called a driveway by which one comes from, east on the south side of the Roven property. ... [A]gain it doesn't lead anywhere except to some plantings and it is entirely invisible from any part of the plaintiffs' property. So any holding of a violation of a driveway restriction would not be clear and satisfactory in any respect and certainly would be a slender reed on which to prop a judgment taking away a man's home and giving it to the seller."
Since the findings of the trial court find ample support in the evidence, we cannot disturb them.
The judgment is affirmed.
Herndon, J., and Fleming, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9737440 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:25:10.309801+00 ===

FLEMING, J.
Five members of the American Nazi Party, wearing party uniforms, steel helmets, and swastika armbands, picketed a meeting held to celebrate the fifteenth anniversary of the independence of Israel. Public disorder resulted, and all five were arrested, convicted, and sentenced on charges of conspiracy and assault. Three defendants have appealed.
The anniversary meeting was scheduled for 8:30 p.m. in the Shrine Auditorium. At 7:30 that evening defendant Holstein notified the police that he and four other members of the American Nazi Party intended to picket the meeting at 8 o’clock. When defendants arrived on the scene, the doors of the Shrine on Royal Avenue had not been opened, and a large crowd had gathered on the sidewalk outside the auditorium. The crowd extended along the sidewalk of Royal to Jefferson Boulevard, the street bounding the auditorium on the south. Two traffic officers were funneling pedestrians onto the corner of Royal and Jefferson, and two plainclothes officers assigned to interview the pickets were standing at the curb outside the entrances to the auditorium.
Defendants parked their automobile on Jefferson near Royal and walked to the corner in a loose line, carrying signs which read: “American Nazi Party”, “Zionism is Treason”, “85% of the Atom Spies were Racial Jews”, “Communism is Jewish”, “ ‘Some call it Marxism, I call it Judaism,’ quote Rabbi Steven S. Wise”, “Citizens Read Protocols of the Learned *364Elders of Zion”, “Sig Heil, UAB,”, “Keep America White.” At the corner defendants got into picket formation and marched north on Boyal for approximately 65 feet. They then reversed direction, returned to the corner, and reversed direction again. Numerous witnesses testified the defendants were pushing and shoving their way through the crowd, although defendants denied this and the plainclothes officers assigned to interview them watched without taking action. On defendants’ third pass through the crowd, fighting broke out at both ends of the picket line, and general disorder ensued. All five pickets were arrested and charged with the felony of conspiracy to assault and to riot. (Pen. Code, § 182, subd. 1.) Four of them were also charged with specific felonious assaults on individual police officers and civilians.
Krauss, the picket leader, was convicted of conspiracy and of two assaults on uniformed police officers by means likely to produce great bodily injury. (Pen. Code, § 245, subd. (b).) He was sentenced to state prison and has not appealed.
Holstein, second in the picket line, was convicted of conspiracy and of simple assault on William Mazzoni, a plainclothes officer. (Pen. Code, § 240.) Mazzoni was attempting to subdue another defendant when Holstein struck him in the jaw with his fist. Holstein was sentenced to a term in the county jail.
Huss, third man in line, was convicted of conspiracy, two assaults by means of force likely to produce great bodily injury (Pen. Code, §245), and simple assault on Mazzoni, the plainclothes officer (Pen. Code, §240). Huss struck Theda Moss with the pole supporting his sign and broke her wrist; he struck Stuart Klein repeatedly with his pole, inflicting a head wound which required several stitches. Officer Mazzoni was trying to stop Huss from strildng Klein when Huss 'turned and hit him. Huss was sentenced to state prison.
Beeves, the fourth picket, was convicted of conspiracy only (Pen. Code, §182, subd. 1). He was sentenced to state prison.
McLaughlin, the fifth picket, was convicted of conspiracy, assault by means of force likely to produce great bodily injury (Pen. Code, §245), and simple assault (Pen. Code, § 240). McLaughlin had struck Leon Hekier, a civilian, with his picket pole. At the time of his arrest McLaughlin also hit Thomas Gould, a plainclothes officer, in the mouth with his fist. McLaughlin was sentenced to state prison, and his appeal has been dismissed for failure to prosecute.
*365The conspiracy count, on which all defendants were convicted, charged a criminal agreement among them to go to the Shrine to commit the crimes of forcible assault, forcible assault on a police officer, assault, battery, and riot. Evidence relied upon by the prosecution to support the conspiracy charge included the use by the defendants of signs, slogans, and symbols known to and intended to provoke, incite, agitate, and inflame those in attendance at the celebration. Defendants argue that the court’s instructions on this aspect of the case misled the jury and infringed their right of free speech guaranteed by the First and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution.
Count I in its relevant aspects charged a conspiracy to riot. The instructions defined riot to include the “use of force or violence, disturbing the public peace, ...” (Italics added.) Disturbing the public peace was defined thus: “Disturbance of the peace and breach of the peace are synonymous. It includes all violations of the public peace or order, or decorum; in other words, it signifies the offense of disturbing the public peace or tranquility enjoyed by the citizens of a community; a disturbance of the public tranquility by any act or conduct inciting to violence or tending to provoke or incite others to break the peace-, a disturbance of public order by any act of violence or by any act likely to produce violence or which by, causing consternation and alarm, disturbs the paace and quiet of the community.” (Italics added.)
The court refused the defendants’ requested instruction that words of abuse or insult do not justify forcible assault and that one so assaulted may defend himself against the assault.
Defendants argue that the instructions defined disturbing the peace to include acts tending to provoke others to disturb the peace, and that consequently the jury was given the erroneous impression that it could consider defendants’ use of provocative slogans, symbols, and costumes as evidence of a conspiracy to riot. They contend the instructions suggested to the jury it could find defendants guilty of conspiracy to riot if defendants knew their signs would tend to arouse and inflame those at the Shrine—an error compounded by the court’s failure to instruct the jury that words of abuse do not justify forcible assault and that one so assaulted may defend himself.
Defendants rely on the case of Terminiello v. Chicago, 337 U.S. 1 [69 S.Ct. 894, 93 L.Ed. 1131]. Terminiello was convicted of disorderly conduct after speaking in an auditorium under *366the auspices of the Christian Veterans of America. Outside the auditorium an angry and turbulent crowd gathered to protest the meeting. The crowd hurled rocks through the windows, broke down doors, and threatened to get beyond police control while Terminiello vigorously condemned them. Terminiello’s speech, including his anti-Jewish epithets, provoked the audience to expressions of immediate anger, unrest, and alarm. The trial court instructed the jury it might find Terminiello guilty of inducing a breach of the peace if his behavior stirred the public to anger, invited dispute, brought about a condition of unrest, created a disturbance, or molested the inhabitants in the enjoyment of peace and quiet by arousing alarm.
Terminiello’s conviction was held to violate the constitutional guarantee of free speech. “The ordinance as construed by the trial court seriously invaded this province. It permitted conviction of petitioner if his speech stirred people to anger, invited public dispute, or brought about a condition of unrest. A conviction resting on any of those grounds may not stand. ’ ’ (337 U.S. at p. 5.)
The prosecution challenges the applicability of Terminiello and in its brief squarely poses the legal issue between the parties to this case thus: “There emerges from this position [of defendants] the following legal proposition: That these five pickets had a constitutional right to dress in Nazi uniforms with helmets and swastika armbands, to go to the Shrine Auditorium carrying placards saying, ‘Zionism is Treason’, [etc.]; to march into a dense crowd they knew to be mostly Jewish, attending a celebration of the 15th Anniversary of Israel, and that the pickets had a right to do this regardless of the fact that it would inflame the crowd to violence. We are unable to agree that this is the law. ’ ’
The prosecution goes on to argue that this activity of the defendants “was a highly insulting and aggressive act that does not permit [them] to claim that when the expectable violence occurred they were merely acting in self-defense. ’ ’
Nonetheless, we think the existence of a constitutional right to speak, demonstrate, and picket on behalf of causes known to be highly offensive to those picketed was settled in Terminiello, where the court upheld such a right in sweeping terms and ruled that under the First Amendment it cannot be made an offense “merely to invite dispute, or to bring about a condition of unrest. ’’ (387 U.S. at p. 6.)
On provoking others the Supreme Court in Terminiello had this to say: “ [A] function of free speech under our system of *367government is to invite dispute. It may indeed best serve its high purpose when it induces a condition of unrest, creates dissatisfaction with conditions as they are, or even stirs people to anger. Speech is often provocative and challenging. It may strike at prejudices and preconceptions and have profound unsettling effects as it presses for acceptance of an idea. That is why freedom of speech, though not absolute, Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire, pp. 571-572 [315 U.S. 568 (62 S.Ct. 766, 86 L.Ed. 1031)], is nevertheless protected against censorship or punishment, unless shown likely to produce a clear and present danger of serious substantive evil that rises far above public inconvenience, annoyance, or unrest. See Bridges v. California, 314 U.S. 252, 262 [62 S.Ct. 190, 86 L.Ed. 192, 159 A.L.R. 1346]; Craig v. Harney, 331 U.S. 367, 373 [67 S.Ct. 1249, 91 L.Ed. 1546]. There is no room under our Constitution for a more restrictive view. For the alternative would lead to standardization of ideas, either by legislatures, courts, or dominant political or community groups.” (337 U.S. at pp. 4-5.)
Implicit in this view is the idea that free speech is a positive good, a constructive and dynamic element in our society which by its astringent quality scours rusty ideas and tests familiar conceptions to see whether they still hold water. Recent cases in the Supreme Court dealing with free speech have generally involved agitation on the side of the angels—attempts to broaden civil rights and to secure equal treatment for different races. (Edwards v. South Carolina, 372 U.S. 229 [83 S.Ct. 680, 9 L.Ed.2d 697]; Cox v. Louisiana, 379 U.S. 536, 552 [85 S.Ct. 453, 13 L.Ed.2d 471].) Currently we tend to equate free speech with nobility of purpose, selfless idealism, humanitarian activity, and progress toward the betterment of man. The present case does not fit our accustomed pattern, for it takes an active imagination to discover any elevated or positive good in the provocative activities of the defendants—or indeed any real motive for their conduct other than mischief-making and quarrelsomeness. For this reason it is difficult to appreciate the connection between the elevated sentiments of the Supreme Court, traditionally associated with the laudable aspects of free speech, and defendants’ picketing at the Shrine.
We can perhaps acquire a more appropriate view of the relevancy of the First Amendment to this case if instead of thinking of free speech as a positive good—which it may or may not be in a given instance*—we look on speech as a tool *368that is neutral, good or bad according to its use, and consider what restraints on bad speech are justifiable and feasible. When we look at speech with this in mind we immediately face two formidable difficulties inherent in the problem of restricting bad speech. One difficulty is that of boundaries—how determine what advocacy is permissible dissent and what is pernicious mischief beyond the pale. Is it beyond the bounds of propriety to advocate that Zionism is treason ? To advocate black supremacy ? Victory for the Viet Cong ? Dictatorship of the proletariat ? Communism ? Anarchism ? Civil disobedience ? Filthy speech? Narcotics for teenagers? Sexual promiscuity for grammar students ? In an attempt to suppress subversive, pernicious, and antisocial doctrines inevitably we find ourselves enmeshed in the task of establishing the boundaries for orthodox thought and drawing the line between the thinkable and the unthinkable.
The second difficulty is that of censors. Who is -to make the determination? Courts? Juries? Legislators? Police? Prevailing public opinion? Who has the final say when censors disagree ? Here again the problems proliferate.
Because of the difficulties in defining orthodoxy and determining who shall define it, it has always seemed preferable in the normal operation of our democratic society to put up with a considerable amount of bad speech in public places from demagogues and psychopaths rather than undertake to regulate the content of speech and determine which slogans and doctrines will be allowed the freedom of the market place. Speech is free under the First Amendment, not so much because free speech is inherently good as because its suppression is inherently bad. In the American garden we let a hundred flowers bloom, knowing that among them may be skunkweed and thistle, dandelion and poison oak. For us excess of speech involves a lesser evil than does restriction on its exercise. In our Eden, Satan and the Archangel Gabriel may both be heard.
The Terminiello case has been consistent^ followed by the United States Supreme Court since its rendition in 1949. (Edwards v. South Carolina, 372 U.S. 229, 237-238 [83 S.Ct. 680, 9 L.Ed.2d 697]; Cox v. Louisiana, 379 U.S. 536, 551-552 [85 S.Ct. 453, 13 L.Ed.2d 471]; Kunz v. New York, 340 U.S. 290 [71 S.Ct. 312, 328, 95 L.Ed. 267, 280].) California does not recognize the doctrine that fighting words or insulting language justify an assault (People v. Mueller, 147 Cal.App. 2d 233, 240 [305 P.2d 178]; Vaughn v. Jonas, 31 Cal.2d 586 *369[191 P.2d 432]), nor has it attempted to legislate against their use. lienee the question does not arise whether a suitable and narrowly-drawn statute could authorize the police to arrest pickets who display insulting and offensive signs. (Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire, 315 U.S. 568 [62 S.Ct. 766, 86 L.Ed. 1031]; Beauharnais v. Illinois, 343 U.S. 250 [72 S.Ct. 725, 96 L.Ed. 919].)
We conclude that here, as in Terminiello, the instructions unconstitutionally invaded the domain of free speech by suggesting to the jury it could infer a conspiracy to riot from defendants’ display of provocative signs and slogans which might incite others to break the peace. The jury was not told that those picketed had no right to break the peace or resort to violence because of antipathy towards defendants’ signs, slogans, symbols, and costumes, but rather the jury was advised that acts of the defendants which tended to incite others to break the peace could be construed as evidence of their conspiracy to riot.
The prosecution argues that on the facts of this case the jury could have found the defendants guilty on legitimate grounds encompassed in the instructions and could have inferred the existence of a conspiracy to assault and riot, not by reason of the party slogans and symbols which were used, but by other evidence in the case, such as the use of steel helmets, the purchase of poles suitable for use as clubs, and the defendants ’ pushing and shoving in the crowd outside the auditorium. This same argument was made in Stromberg v. California, 283 U.S. 359 [51 S.Ct. 532, 75 L.Ed. 1117, 73 A.L.R. 1484], where the trial court instructed the jury it could find the defendant guilty if she did an act for any one of three purposes, of which one was constitutionally protected. The California District Court of Appeal sustained the conviction, holding that despite the fact that one of the purposes charged could not constitutionally be punished, the other two could. The United States Supreme Court reversed: “We are unable to agree with this disposition of the case. The verdict against the appellant was a general one. It did not specify the ground upon which it rested. As there were three purposes set forth in the statute, and the jury was instructed that their verdict might be given with respect to any one of them, independently considered, it is impossible to say under which clause of the statute the conviction was obtained. ... if any of the clauses in question is invalid under the Federal Constitution, the conviction cannot be upheld.” (Pp. 367-368.) The *370Supreme Court in Terminiello followed this rule, saying, “As construed and applied it at least contains parts that are unconstitutional. The verdict was a general one; and we do not know on this record but what it may rest on the invalid clauses.” 337 U.S. at p. 5; cf. Shuttlesworth v. Birmingham, 382 U.S. 87, 92 [86 S.Ct. 211, 15 L.Ed.2d 176].) The same principle applies to the case at bench, and the conviction for conspiracy must be reversed.
Although we reverse the convidtion for conspiracy, a charge premised on the defendants’ advance intentions to assault and to riot, we find no infirmity, constitutional or otherwise, in the convictions of the defendants for the assaults which they committed after they arrived on the scene and the disorder had started. There was substantial evidence to show that at that time these defendants indulged in an excess of violence for which there was no sufficient legal excuse. (People v. Young, 136 Cal.App. 699, 703 [29 P.2d 440]; People v. Miller, 72 Cal.App.2d 602, 606 [165 P.2d 30]; People v. Moody, 62 Cal.App.2d 18, 22-23 [143 P.2d 978]; McLean v. Colf, 179 Cal. 237 [176 P. 169].)
The right of free speech on behalf of unpopular causes does not carry with it a license to make the streets ideological battlegrounds, to indulge in demonstrations based on strong-arm techniques, or to deny others the use of the streets for normal movement and passage. Free speech is not an absolute right but one subject to specified limitations. (Konigsberg v. State Bar of California, 366 U.S. 36, 49 ff. [81 S.Ct. 997, 6 L.Ed.2d 105], and cases there cited.)  Use of the streets for picketing or demonstration involves not only questions of free speech but also questions of domestic tranquility. Picketing, though used to communicate ideas, is not speech, and therefore by itself not protected under the First Amendment. (Hughes v. Superior Court, 339 U.S. 460, 464-466 [70 S.Ct. 718, 94 L.Ed. 985]; Giboney v. Empire Storage & Ice Co., 336 U.S. 490 [69 S.Ct. 684, 93 L.Ed. 834]; Cox v. Louisiana, 379 U.S. 559, 578 [85 S.Ct. 466, 13 L.Ed.2d 487] [Black, J., concurring and dissenting].)  The time, manner, and place for the expression of ideas in the streets, whether by speaking, demonstrating, or picketing, are subject to regulation and control by the police in the process of maintaining public order. (Cox v. New Hampshire, 312 U.S. 569, 574 [61 S.Ct. 762, 85 L.Ed. 1049, 133 A.L.R. 1396]; Cox v. Louisiana, 379 U.S. 536, 554-555 [85 S.Ct. 453, 13 L.Ed.2d 471]; Cox v. Louisiana, 379 U.S. 559, 574 [85 S.Ct. 466, 13 L.Ed.2d 487].)  Assaults committed in the course of picketing or *371of public demonstrations may, as here, be promptly and severely punished under the provisions of the Penal Code. (United Auto. Workers v. Wisconsin Employment Relations Board, 351 U.S. 266 [76 S.Ct. 794, 100 L.Ed. 1162]; Steiner v. Long Beach Local No. 128, 19 Cal.2d 676, 682 [123 P.2d 20].)
Defendants contend a reversal of their conviction on the conspiracy count entitles them to a new trial on the assault counts because the error on the one count necessarily prejudiced the fairness of their trial on the others. We do not agree. Each assault count was fully supported by the testimony of third-party police officers and the victim. We do not think the erroneous instructions on conspiracy produced a miscarriage of justice on the assault counts or that a different result on retrial is reasonably probable. (Cal. Const., art. VI, §4½; People v. Watson, 46 Cal.2d 818, 836 [299 P.2d 243].)
The convictions for conspiracy under Count I are reversed. The convictions for assault under Counts IV, V, VI, and VII are affirmed.
Herndon, J., concurred.
Cf. Iago and Othello.

=== CASE 9737441 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:25:10.315305+00 ===

ROTH, P. J.,
Concurring and Dissenting.—I concur with the majority in an affirmance of the judgment as to Counts IV, V, VI and VII.
I dissent from the judgment reversing the conviction of defendants for conspiracy under Count I.
My colleagues reverse the judgment of conviction under Count I on a very narrow point.
Count I of the information did not charge conspiracy to breach the peace. It charged “Conspiracy to commit assault by means of force likely to produce great bodily injury, assault, battery, and riot . . .” It set forth 13 overt acts.
Nothing in Count I says anything about disturbing the peace per se.
The trial court in its instructions to the jury gave the code definition of riot as follows: “Any use of force or violence, disturbing the public peace, or any threat to use such force or violence, if accompanied by immediate power of execution by two or more persons acting together and without authority of law, is a riot.” (Pen. Code, § 404.) (Italics added.)
The court then followed with the instruction criticized by defendants and found fatally defective in this court by the majority re disturbance of the peace. This instruction merely. *372amplified the instruction on riot. It did not eliminate that portion of the riot instruction which required “force and violence’’ or “threats to use force and violence.” As pointed out hereafter, this instruction did not stand alone. The charge to the jury read as a whole could leave no doubt that physical force or the threat thereof was necessary to convict.
In addition, as pointed out by the majority, the court did refuse to give the defendants’ requested instruction number 11, to the effect that “. . . words of abuse or insult do not justify forceable assault and that one so assaulted may defend himself . . . .”
Criticizing the court’s instruction set out by the majority in respect of disturbance of the peace, defendants, quoting Terminiello, argue, “ 1 [The instruction] permitted conviction of petitioner if his speech stirred people to anger, invited public dispute, or brought about a condition of unrest. A conviction resting on any of these grounds may not stand. ’ ’ ’
In Terminiello, the only charge on which defendant was tried was disturbing the peace. No other instructions given cured the defective instruction.
Construing Terminiello, defendants argue: “In other words, in the case at bar, where emotions admittedly became aroused, it was especially important that the principles of free speech be made crystal clear and the jury have been advised thereof so as to make sure that the defendants, if they were to be convicted, have been convicted only for their illegal acts and hot because their speech aroused antagonism in others who resorted to violence..”
■■ Instruction number 11 which defendants requested, and which was refused by the court, is verbatim as follows:
.“No words of abuse, insult or reproach addressed to a person or persons or uttered concerning him or them, howsoever opprobrious the words may be, if unaccompanied by any threat or apparent threat of great bodily injury or any assault upon the person, will justify the person or persons in an assault by any means of force likely to produce great bodily injury, and a person so assaulted may defend himself against such assault according to the rules governing' self-defense upon which I (have) (will) instruct(ed) you.”
■ • .The majority opinion omits to mention, however, that the court did give at the People’s request, the following instruction (CALJIG 606):
• “No words of abuse, insult or reproach addressed to a person or uttered concerning him, howsoever grievous or opprobrious the words may be, [if unaccompanied by any *373threat of great bodily injury or any assault upon the person or any trespass against lands or goods,] will justify him in an assault with a deadly weapon [or] by any means of force likely to produce great bodily injury, and the provocation only of such words will not constitute a defense to a charge of having committed such an assault.”
Defendants concede that the court properly gave People’s instruction CALJIC 606, but they nevertheless contend that there is a prejudicial variance between the two. They argue that: “The failure to give defendants requested instruction number 11 and the giving of CALJIC 606, resulted in twisting the matter completely about. Rather than there being an instruction telling the jury what the crowd was not permitted to do against defendants if they, the crowd, took umbrage at defendants’ signs, the jury was told what defendants could not do if they, the defendants, took umbrage at what the crowd was saying. And the jury was told, of defendants’ discomfiture with the remarks of the crowd, that ‘the provocation only of such words will not constitute a defense to a charge of having committed such an assault. ’ The only persons before the Court charged with such an offense were the defendants.
“In other words, the giving of the Terminiello type of instruction (allowing conviction of defendants’ signs disturbed the tranquility of the crowd or caused it consternation or alarm) together with the refusal to instruct that the crowd had no right to assault defendants because of their disapproval of the contents of the signs, coupled with the giving of the instruction that defendants had no right to assault the members of the crowd because of defendants’ disapproval of what the crowd said, permitted a conviction of defendants for the exercise of their constitutional right to free speech because others engaged in violence.”
Defendants argue further in respect of the variance “. . . [I] t was absolutely essential, if the defendants were to be given a fair trial and if the right to the exercise of free speech were to have any meaning in it, that the jury be instructed they were not permitted to convict defendants because the crowd’s tranquility was disturbed by defendants’ signs or because the signs caused the crowd consternation or alarm. Not only were the jury not instructed that they could not convict defendants if they thus found, but they were, . . . affirmatively advised that they could convict if the signs did disturb the crowd’s tranquility or caused it consternation or alarm.”
*374The distinction defendants insist upon between requested instruction number 11 (refused) and OALJIC 606 (given), if standing alone maj'- have misled a jury, but when read with other instructions requested by defendants and given by the court, there is no doubt that the jury understood that defendants could not be convicted for peacefully carrying signs, however provocative. In Terminiello and the other eases quoted, there were no such additional instructions.
A reading of the complete charge shows that the jury was instructed on every theory of the defense and emphatically instructed on the point that defendants could not be convicted merely because they carried signs, however explosive and provocative.
The trial court, at defendants’ request, instructed in part as follows:
“Peaceful picketing is recognized as a proper exercise of freedom of speech protected by the Constitution of the State of California and of the United States.”
“The principle of freedom of speech, in and of itself, is not a defense to the commission of the crimes of assault, battery, riot, or a conspiracy to commit any of these crimes. ’ ’
“A picket may be peaceful even though he loiters, walks, stands, or sits upon a public highway, alley, sidewalk, or crosswalk, and thereby constitutes to some extent an obstruction to the free passage of persons or an annoyance to persons who do not approve of his presence. ’ ’
“The fact that to some extent compulsion, coercion, intimidation, or threats are employed in picketing does not detract from-its peaceful nature so long as they constitute only economic, moral, or social pressure and not the pressure of violence.”
- “Resistance sufficient to prevent the offense may be made by a party about to be injured to prevent an illegal attempt by force' to take or injure property in his lawful possession. ’ ’
In addition, the trial court at the request of the prosecution, gave instructions as follows:
“It is lawful for a person who is being assaulted, and who has reasonable ground for believing that bodily injury is about to be inflicted upon him, to stand his ground and defend himself from such attack, and in doing so he may use all force and means which he believes to be reasonably necessary and which would appear to a reasonable person, in the same or similar circumstances, to be necessary to prevent the injury which appears to be imminent.”
*375“A person who has been attacked and who is exercising his right of lawful self-defense is not required to retreat, and he not only may stand his ground and defend himself against the attack but may also pursue his assailant until' he has secured himself from danger if that course appears to him, and would appear to a reasonable person in the same situation, to be reasonably and apparently necessary; and this is his right even though he might more easily have gained safety by-withdrawing from the scene.”
In short, the court in my opinion, 'did not, as defendants contend and the majority state, suggest: “. . . to the jury it could infer a conspiracy to riot from defendants’ display of provocative signs and slogans which might incite others to break the peace. ...”
To the contrary, the jury was told, as- the majority insist it should have been ”... that those picketed had no right to break the peace or resort to violence because of antipathy toward defendants ’ signs, slogans, symbols, and costumes. ...” Nor, in my opinion, do the instructions, when read together as they must be, form any basis for the statement of the majority that ”... the jury was advised that the acts of the defendants which tended to incite others to break the peace could be construed as evidence of their conspiracy to riot.”
There can be no true liberty without free speech. This does not mean that when speech is accompanied, by numerous acts of physical provocation, of which there is abundant evidence which is only sketchily detailed by the majority, that free speech should be permitted to become the refuge of violent scoundrels by reason of a single instruction which is incorrect only when it stands alone.
Assuming, that the failure to give instruction number 11 or that by giving of the instruction on 'disturbance of the peace quoted by the majority, standing alone, is error, the cases are legion to the effect that instructions, even in felony cases, will be read as a whole. (People v. Honeycutt, 29 Cal.2d 52, 62 [172 P.2d 698]; People v. Monteverde, 111 Cal.App.2d 156, 168 [244 P.2d 447]; People v. Hunter, 146 Cal.App.2d 64, 67 [303 P.2d 356].)
Free speech is no more precious than life or the liberty of which it is a manifestation. In Honeycutt, supra, defendant was convicted of first degree murder and sentenced to death. The court, speaking of an erroneous instruction, said; “But here, considering all the instructions together, and in the light of the evidence, we cannot say that in this ease the jury *376were misled by the erroneous instructions of which defendant complains. Upon any rational view of the evidence and instructions the verdict cannot reasonably be .deemed to have been the result of a misconception of the law. Under such circumstances a reversal of the judgment is not required." (P. 62.)
Further, it is clear to me from the whole record that if the instruction on breach of the peace had been omitted and instruction number 11 had been given in lieu of or together with CALJIC 606, the result would have been the same. (People v. Watson, 46 Cal.2d 818, 836 [299 P.2d 243]; Fahey v. Connecticut, 375 U.S. 85, 86-87 [84 S.Ct. 229, 11 L.Ed.2d 171]; People v. Cockrell, 63 Cal.2d 659, 669 [47 Cal.Rptr. 788, 408 P.2d 116]; Pen. Code, § 1404.)
There being no prejudice, the judgment of conviction on Count I should be affirmed.
A petition for a rehearing was denied April 28, 1966. Both, P. J., was of the opinion that the petition should be granted. Respondent’s petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied June 1, 1966.

=== CASE 2210457 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:53.213651+00 ===

158 Wis.2d 508 (1990)
463 N.W.2d 370
IN RE the MARRIAGE OF: Robert Booth FOWLER, Petitioner-Respondent,
v.
Emily Albrink FOWLER, Appellant.[]
No. 89-0763.
Court of Appeals of Wisconsin.
Submitted on briefs January 12, 1990.
Decided October 4, 1990.
*513 For the appellant the cause was submitted on the briefs of Michael J. Collins of Collins, Beatty & Krekeler, S.C., of Madison.
For the petitioner-respondent the cause was submitted on the brief of Steven A. Bach and Cheryl Rosen Weston of Cullen, Weston, Pines & Bach of Madison.
Before Eich, C.J., Dykman and Sundby, JJ.
SUNDBY, J.
During her marriage to Robert Booth Fowler, Emily Fowler inherited stock and securities, including shares in AT&T. Her appeal from the divorce judgment raises questions not previously addressed as to whether growth in inherited stock by substitution and dividend reinvestment is included in the marital estate for division under sec. 767.255, Stats.
We conclude: (1) The circuit court erred when it included in the marital estate stock substituted for inherited AT&T stock. (2) The circuit court correctly included in the marital estate stock acquired by Emily through dividend reinvestment and stock purchase plans in effect with respect to inherited stock.[1] (3) The circuit *514 court correctly included in the marital estate stock purchased with commingled cash gifts.
In addition to her challenge to the property division, Emily claims that the circuit court abused its discretion in failing to consider the tax consequences to her of the property division; in failing to award her maintenance; in awarding to Booth[2] the income tax dependency exemption for the parties' minor child; and in failing to explain why it accepted Booth's valuation of his pension plan and rejected Emily's valuation.
We conclude that the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in any of the claimed respects. We therefore affirm the judgment in part and reverse in part and direct that the circuit court exclude from the marital estate the shares of stock acquired by Emily as a result of the AT&T divestiture.
BACKGROUND
Robert Booth Fowler was born May 16, 1940 and is a professor at the University of WisconsinMadison. His monthly gross earnings are $5,191.
Emily Fowler was born August 7, 1946 and is a professor at the University of Nebraska Law School. Her monthly gross earnings are $3,767.77. The parties were married on March 6, 1971 and a child, Benjamin, was born to them October 7, 1976.
Prior to the divorce hearing, Booth and Emily entered into a partial marital settlement agreement which settled many of the issues between them. The circuit court rendered its oral decision on the unsettled issues at the August 4, 1988 hearing and entered its *515 findings of fact, conclusions of law and judgment on February 28, 1989.
I.
PROPERTY DIVISION
Section 767.255, Stats., excludes from the marital estate subject to division any property acquired by either party prior to or during the marriage by gift, bequest, devise or inheritance, except upon a finding of hardship. During the marriage, Emily inherited sixty-five shares of AT&T stock, six and one-half shares of Sun stock and 250 shares of Liberty/Knickerbocker stock. Booth concedes that these shares are not part of the marital estate. The disputed stock was acquired in three ways: by substitution of stock in the so-called "Baby Bells" for AT& T stock as a result of the AT&T divestiture; by reinvestment of dividends in additional shares of stock of the corporation declaring the dividends; and by purchases with cash gifts from Emily's father.
(a)
Substitution of Stock
[1]
In Arneson v. Arneson, 120 Wis. 2d 236, 355 N.W.2d 16 (Ct. App. 1984), we held that bonds purchased with dividends from inherited stock were includable in the marital estate. We said:
[W]e view income generated by an asset as separate and distinct from the asset itself. We also view such income separate and distinct from the appreciation of the asset itself. We see nothing in the developing Wisconsin law excluding appreciation of gifted or inherited property from a marital estate as mandating *516 that property purchased with the income from such property also be excluded.
Id. at 244-45, 355 N.W.2d at 20.
[2]
The "Baby Bells" stock which Emily acquired in the AT&T divestiture was not income generated by the inherited AT&T stock. Nor did Emily purchase the stock. The "Baby Bells" stock was merely substituted for AT&T stock.[3] The substitution did not effect a transmutation of non-marital property to marital property. See Popp v. Popp, 146 Wis. 2d 778, 788, 432 N.W.2d 600, 603 (Ct. App. 1988) (Transmutation can occur when the character of non-marital property is changed). The character of Emily's inherited property did not change. It remained stock titled in her name. There is no evidence of Emily's actual or constructive donative intent. Such intent is requisite to transmutation. Id. at 789, 432 N.W.2d at 603. We therefore conclude that the circuit court erroneously included such stock in the marital estate.[4]
*517 (b)
Dividend Reinvestment
[3]
As to the additional shares of stock in AT&T and the "Baby Bells" acquired through dividend reinvestment and stock purchase plans, however, we conclude that Arneson controls. The dividends constituted income generated by the stock asset rather than appreciation in value of the asset itself. The fact that Emily chose to reinvest the stock dividends in other like stock rather than purchasing other property, as in Arneson, does not provide a difference sufficient to distinguish the situation here from that involved in Arneson. We therefore conclude that the circuit court properly included in the marital estate the stock acquired by Emily through the dividend reinvestment and stock purchase plans.
(c)
Purchase With Cash Gifts
From time to time, Emily's father gave her checks. Emily endorsed the checks and gave them to Booth who deposited them in the parties' joint checking account or in his savings account. Booth drew on their accounts to purchase stock in Emily's name. The circuit court concluded that by endorsing the checks and permitting her husband to deposit them in his savings account or in their joint checking account, Emily intended to make a gift of the checks to the family and they thereby lost their character as gifts to her. The circuit court further concluded that the gifts were so commingled with funds from other sources that they lost their identity.
*518 [4]
We consider first the deposit of Emily's gift proceeds into the parties' joint bank account. "The transfer of separately owned property into joint tenancy changes the character of the ownership interest in the entire property into marital property which is subject to division." Trattles v. Trattles, 126 Wis. 2d 219, 225-26, 376 N.W.2d 379, 383 (Ct. App. 1985). Therefore, the gifts to Emily which were placed in the parties' joint checking account lost their character as Emily's separate property. Consequently, inquiry into the identity issue is unnecessary. See id. at 227-28, 376 N.W.2d at 384.
As to the gifted property placed in Booth's savings account, Booth's uncontradicted testimony was that this account included some of his wages, additional money that he earned, money that came into the family and money earned by Emily. The circuit court concluded that therefore these gifts lost their identity through commingling. The circuit court's finding is not clearly erroneous and we must accept it. Sec. 805.17(2), Stats. We therefore conclude that the trial court correctly included in the marital estate the stock purchased with funds drawn from the parties' joint checking account or from Booth's savings account.
II.
TAX CONSEQUENCES
[5, 6]
The circuit court did not consider the tax consequences of its division of the marital estate. In dividing the marital property upon divorce, the circuit court is directed to consider the tax consequences to each party. Sec. 767.255(10), Stats; Ondrasek v. Ondrasek, 126 Wis. 2d 469, 480, 377 N.W.2d 190, 194 (Ct. App. 1985). However, *519 neither party presented the circuit court with evidence from which the court could determine the tax consequences of the property division. The trial court is not an advocate; it is not up to the court to provide the evidence. Rather, it is the court's responsibility to decide on the basis of the evidence. If the parties do not present the trial court with any evidence or other reliable data as to the tax consequences of the court's decision, the court does not abuse its discretion in failing to take those consequences into consideration. Brandt v. Brandt, 145 Wis. 2d 394, 420, 427 N.W.2d 126, 135-36 (Ct. App. 1988).
III.
MAINTENANCE
[7]
The determination of the amount and duration of maintenance is in the discretion of the circuit court, and we will not disturb the determination of the court unless it abuses its discretion. LaRocque v. LaRocque, 139 Wis. 2d 23, 27, 406 N.W.2d 736, 737 (1987).
[8-10]
At the time of the hearing, the parties had been married seventeen years. Between them they had achieved increased earnings. The principles of LaRocque, therefore apply to this marriage. See id. at 39, 406 N.W.2d at 742 (over long marriage, parties each contribute to stream of income as marital partners and should share the rewards). Sharing the rewards of the stream of income produced in a long marriage is encompassed in the fairness objective of maintenance. Id. The other objective of maintenance is support. Id. at 33, 406 N.W.2d at 740. The circuit court abuses its discretion if it does not give full play to these objectives or if it misapplies *520 or fails to apply the statutory factors of sec. 767.26, Stats., to its decision as to maintenance. Id.
Emily claims that the court gave no consideration to her uncontradicted testimony as to her diminished standard of living. She asserts that the circuit court erroneously found that she was able to complete her education only because of Booth's ability to earn income. Emily also claims that the court failed to consider the inequity of her foregone employment opportunities and the detriment that this worked on her professional career. She contends that the circuit court relied on the essentially sexist inference that a good wife follows her husband's career regardless of the damage to her own.
Emily also contends that the circuit court abused its discretion in the way in which it conducted the trial. Emily claims that the circuit court prevented her from presenting her evidence with respect to her professional career development and her substantial contributions to, and sacrifices for, the marriage. She asserts that the circuit judge's actions and comments had a "chilling effect" on the presentation of her case.
(a)
Support Objective
[11, 12]
The goal of the support objective of maintenance is to provide the recipient spouse with support at predivorce standards. LaRocque, 139 Wis. 2d at 35, 406 N.W.2d at 741. This goal may require that the recipient spouse be awarded maintenance beyond bare subsistence needs. Id.
The circuit court distinguished LaRocque and Bahr v. Bahr, 107 Wis. 2d 72, 85, 318 N.W.2d 391, 398 (1982) (It is reasonable to begin maintenance evaluation with *521 proposition that dependent partner may be entitled to fifty percent of the parties' total earnings) from this case for two reasons. First, Emily demonstrated sufficient earning ability to support herself. Second, Emily accepted reduced earnings by abandoning the practice of law to teach.
We conclude that the circuit court's maintenance award conforms to the LaRocque/Bahr standards. It was therefore unnecessary for the court to distinguish these two cases. In LaRocque, the court recognized that the goal of maintenance to provide support at pre-divorce standards may be unattainable because of the increased expenses of separate households. LaRocque, 139 Wis. 2d at 35, 406 N.W.2d at 741. The court said that both parties may have to bear the sacrifices that the cost of an additional household imposes. Id.
The LaRocque/Bahr standard is that a court must not reduce the recipient spouse to the subsistence level while the payor spouse preserves the pre-divorce standard of living. Id. That standard is met. Emily clearly demonstrated the ability to support herself at her predivorce standard of living. Her annual income while she was actively engaged in the practice of law was $34,867 in 1984, $46,709 in 1985 and $47,112 in 1986. It is true that her income dropped dramaticallyto $26,958.84 in 1987when she elected to discontinue the practice of law to teach. The circuit court correctly concluded, however, that Emily could not make a career choice which involved a substantial reduction in her earning capacity and simultaneously insist that her husband support her at the standard of living she enjoyed while she was employed in her previous employment.
[13]
In Bahr, the court said, "When the dependent party is capable of accepting reasonably available, gainful *522 employment, we do not believe the dependent party can avoid such employment and simply rely upon the supporting party to provide a standard of living for the dependent party comparable to that enjoyed during the marriage." Bahr, 107 Wis. 2d at 83, 318 N.W.2d at 397-98. Emily has not refused to accept gainful employment. She chose, however, to substantially reduce the income available to her. We do not believe that she can make a career choice which substantially reduces her income and rely on Booth to provide her with the same standard of living she enjoyed during the marriage. We do not hold that the recipient spouse automatically disqualifies himself or herself from an award of maintenance if he or she makes a career choice which results in reduced income. However, that choice is "a significant factor" which the trial court may consider in awarding maintenance. Bahr, 107 Wis. 2d at 83, 318 N.W.2d at 397. See also Roelling v. Roelling, 146 Wis. 2d 652, 431 N.W.2d 759 (Ct. App. 1988) (trial court may consider voluntary termination of well-paying job in determining whether there has been a substantial change in financial circumstances). The circuit court considered as a significant factor in determining maintenance, Emily's voluntary abandonment of employment which produced income commensurate with her earning capacity.
The circuit court also found that there would not be a post-divorce substantial disparity between Emily's and Booth's incomes. The court's finding that Emily would earn approximately $3,760 per month is not challenged. Nor is the court's finding that, after payment of child support, Booth would have a gross income of $4,363 per month.
[14]
We conclude that the circuit court properly considered the support objective of maintenance.
*523 (b)
Fairness Objective
[15, 16]
The fairness objective of maintenance requires that the trial court give weight to such statutory factors as the length of the marriage, the educational level of each party at the time of the marriage and at the time of the divorce, and the contribution by one party to the education, training or increased earning power of the other. LaRocque, 139 Wis. 2d at 37, 406 N.W.2d at 741. If one spouse has "subordinated his or her education or career to devote time and energy to the welfare, career or education of the other spouse or to managing the affairs of the marital partnership, maintenance may be used to compensate this spouse for these nonmonetary contributions to the marriage." Id., 406 N.W.2d at 741-42.
The circuit court recognized that this was a 17-year marriage. The court's finding that because of Booth's earning ability, Emily was able to complete her education, is not clearly erroneous. Emily obtained a masters degree in political science from the University of Wisconsin-Madison in 1970. At the time she married Booth in March, 1971, she was working toward a doctorate in political science. She received her Ph.D. in 1975. She then entered the University of Wisconsin Law School and graduated in 1978. From 1972 through 1978, Emily was employed as a half-time assistant to the associate dean in the undergraduate college. In the year when she was writing her dissertation, she worked full time as assistant dean. During these years, except for 1975, there was a substantial disparity between Booth's income and Emily's income. For example, in 1977 Booth's income was $22,437.67 while Emily's income was $1,705.61. In *524 1978, Booth's income was $22,021.33 while Emily's income was $1,579.60.
The record establishes that Emily did not subordinate her education or career to devote time and energy to Booth's welfare, career or education or to manage the affairs of the marital partnership. She does not leave the marriage educationally, economically or socially deprived.
Emily correctly notes that the circuit court exhibited some impatience with Emily's proof in two areas. First, that Booth refused to consider the possibility of obtaining employment in the areas of the country where Emily had job opportunities. Second, that even while Emily was working, she participated in the housework and child care.
Despite the circuit court's expressed skepticism as to Emily's evidence in these respects, a fair reading of the record reveals that the circuit court allowed Emily to present her evidence. She made her point that her career choices were limited because of Booth's failure to obtain employment in areas of the country where Emily had employment opportunities, and that she did contribute to the marriage and their child.
Emily claims that Booth exercised a geographic "veto" over her career choices. There is no evidence that he persuaded Emily to sell her Wisconsin law practice. When she had a job opportunity in North Carolina, Booth sought employment in North Carolina and, in fact, taught part-time at the University of North Carolina Charlotte. He was unable to find a full-time job at the university. He also investigated openings at Duke or the University of North CarolinaChapel Hill and interviewed at Davidson College. When Emily obtained her position at the University of Nebraska, Booth indicated a willingness to maintain a commuting relationship. *525 The circuit court's comment that it was unrealistic to expect that Booth would leave his position at the university and "[traipse] all over the country" so that Emily could become employed where she had opportunities must be considered in the context of the uncontradicted evidence that Booth had made numerous attempts to do just that. Emily's suggestion that the circuit court's "traipsing" comment was "sexist" is unfair.
Emily was not in a position similar to Mrs. LaRocque. Mrs. LaRocque had been a full-time homemaker for more than twenty years and had limited employment potential because of her lengthy absence from the job market. The record was replete with evidence of Mrs. LaRocque's contributions to Mr. LaRocque's education and increased earning power. LaRocque, 139 Wis. 2d at 38, 406 N.W.2d at 742. Booth, on the other hand, at the time of marriage, had completed his education and was employed as a professor of political science at the University of WisconsinMadison. Emily did not contribute to Booth's completion of his education, and there is no evidence that she contributed to his earning power.
[17]
Our review of the record fails to disclose that Emily was foreclosed from presenting evidence as to any unique contribution which she may have made to the marriage. We therefore reject her claim that the circuit court failed to allow her to present her case with respect to the fairness objective of maintenance. She presented her case but she did not persuade the circuit court. Nor does she persuade us.
*526 (c)
Conduct of Trial
We must address Emily's claim that the circuit judge's behavior and comments "were so egregious as to border on a violation of SCR 60.01(9)." This is a serious charge and we have examined the record to see if the allegations are supported by the record. We conclude that they are not.
[18]
Supreme Court Rule 60.01(9) provides in part: "A judge should so act during trials and hearings that his or her attitude, manner or tone toward counsel or witnesses will not prevent the proper presentation of the cause or the ascertainment of the truth." From our review of the record, we conclude that the charge against the trial judge is baseless. Counsel is reminded that while he must zealously assert the client's position, "[a] lawyer should demonstrate respect for the legal system and for those who serve it, including judges, other lawyers and public officials." SCR ch. 20, Preamble (West 1990). Counsel's characterization of the behavior and comments of the circuit judge as "egregious" and bordering on a violation of the Code of Judicial Ethics exceeds the bounds of zealous advocacy.
IV.
INCOME TAX DEPENDENCY EXEMPTION
[19, 20]
An award of child support is within the discretion of the circuit court and will not be overturned unless the court abuses its discretion. Wallen v. Wallen, 139 Wis. 2d 217, 223, 407 N.W.2d 293, 295 (Ct. App. 1987). A *527 provision in a divorce judgment awarding the income tax dependency exemption for a minor child is an aspect of child support. Peters (Oatman) v. Peters, 145 Wis. 2d 490, 493, 427 N.W.2d 149, 151 (Ct. App. 1988).
[21]
Emily contends that the circuit court abused its discretion in awarding the income tax dependency exemption to Booth because the court's determination was based on a mistake of fact. A trial court abuses its discretion when it makes a mistake with respect to the facts upon which its decision is based. Rommelfanger v. Rommelfanger, 114 Wis. 2d 175, 177, 337 N.W.2d 851, 852 (Ct. App. 1983).
The circuit court stated, "As to the question of who takes Benjamin as an income tax deduction, Dr. Fowler will be allowed to claim him as an income tax deduction. He's paying the majority of the bills. He's entitled to that benefit." At the hearing, Booth was asked the following question and gave the following answer:
Q: Do you acknowledge that all things considered, with the 40-plus weeks period that [Emily] has with Ben, that she is contributing up to 50% of his needs?
A: Yes.
However, the question asked of Booth dealt with the pre-divorce situation and did not include the court's award of child support. Taking into consideration Booth's child support obligation and Benjamin's placement with Booth seventy-seven days a year, the circuit court's finding that Booth will contribute more than fifty percent of the child's support is not clearly erroneous.
Emily also argues that the child support standards, Wis. Adm. Code ch. HSS 80, anticipate that the payee *528 parent will make a financial contribution to child support "similar" to that made by the payor parent. The standards do not, however, anticipate that the payee parent will make a dollar-for-dollar contribution to child support. The child support percentage of income standards are based on the percentage of income and disposable assets that parents use to raise their children. Wis. Adm. Code ch. HSS 80 (Preface). "[The standard] determines the percentage of a parent's income and potential income from assets that parents should contribute toward the support of children if the family does not remain together." Id. (emphasis added). According to Emily's financial disclosure form, seventeen percent of her gross income would equal $587 per month, substantially less than that which Booth is required to pay under the percentage standards.
[22]
We conclude that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in awarding the income tax dependency exemption to Booth.
V.
VALUATION OF BOOTH'S RETIREMENT FUND ACCOUNT
Emily argues that because the record does not show how the circuit court valued Booth's retirement fund account, the court's exercise of its discretion cannot be reviewed. Therefore, she argues, the valuation of Booth's account should be remanded to the trial court for further consideration.
The parties entered into a partial marital settlement agreement. Section VIII C. 2. of that agreement provides: "The property listed on Exhibit B shall remain the property of the party indicated, and shall have the *529 value set forth for purposes of valuing the total marital estate subject to division." (Emphasis added.) Item 13 of Exhibit B lists the value of Booth's Wisconsin retirement fund account as $80,851.
At the hearing, Emily introduced Exhibit 13 entitled "Proposed Distribution of Marital Estate." That exhibit lists Booth's retirement fund account at a value of $80,851. She was shown this exhibit by her counsel and was asked the following question and gave the following answer:
Q: I am going to show you finally what's been marked for identification purposes as Exhibit 13. That exhibit is entitled Proposed Distribution of Marital Estate. . .. That includes the valuations upon which you would agree and also sets forth the proposed distribution of the assets as worked out between yourself and counsel.
A: Yes. [Emphasis added.]
The circuit court found that: "The parties agree that the value of [Booth's] retirement account at the time of trial was $80,851.00."
[23]
Emily represents that the issue of pension evaluation arose subsequent to the trial and that both parties presented their valuations to the trial court. She states in her reply brief: "[The parties] agreed on the valuation, but not on how it was obtained or how it was calculated." Apparently it is Emily's position that even though the parties agreed as to the value of Booth's retirement fund account, it was necessary for the trial court to independently value that account and because it did not, it failed to exercise its discretion. Emily's counsel seems to regard the trial court as a safety net to save *530 him from his failure to present his case. We do not look favorably upon meritless assertions that a trial court has abused its discretion. We attempt to consider all contentions advanced by counsel and examine the record to find support for those contentions. We consider it the duty of counsel to make responsible arguments to this court. We reject Emily's contention with respect to the valuation of Booth's Wisconsin retirement fund account as irresponsible.
The court imposes respondent's costs on appellant's counsel as a sanction for the irresponsible arguments we have noted in our opinion.
By the Court.Judgment affirmed in part and reversed in part with directions to the trial court to exclude from the marital estate the stock acquired by Emily in the AT&T divestiture. No costs to appellant. Respondent's costs to be paid by appellant's counsel.
NOTES
[]  Petition to review denied.
[1]  We reserved this issue in Arneson v. Arneson, 120 Wis. 2d 236, 245 n.6, 355 N.W.2d 16, 20 (Ct. App. 1984).
[2]  In the testimony and the briefs, Robert's middle name is used.
[3]  See United States v. American Telephone & Telegraph Co., 552 F. Supp. 131 (D.D.C. 1982), aff'd, 460 U.S. 1001 (1983), for a description of the AT&T divestiture.
[4]  Lendman v. Lendman, 157 Wis. 2d 606, 460 N.W.2d 781 (Ct. App. 1990) is inapposite. In Lendman, we held that appreciation in value of inherited stock in a closely held corporation through corporate debt retirement was marital property. The appreciation in value resulted from the application of income which we said in Arneson was "separate and distinct" from the stock itself. Emily's stock in the "Baby Bells" was not acquired with income generated by her inherited AT&T stock.

=== CASE 9737442 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:25:15.769701+00 ===

GIERKE, Justice.
Lorin Wright appeals from a judgment of the district court denying his request for a change of custody. We reverse and remand for further proceedings.
Tammy and Lorin Wright were divorced in May 1987. The original divorce judgment was based upon a stipulated agreement giving Tammy primary physical custody of the parties’ two minor daughters, Elizabeth and Nicole. The parties subsequently litigated their custody rights, culminating in an appeal to this court in Wright v. Wright, 431 N.W.2d 301 (N.D.1988) [Wright /]. As a result of that litigation, Tammy retained physical control of Elizabeth and Nicole. Many of the facts underlying this custody dispute are set forth in Wright I and will not be repeated here except as necessary to resolve the issues raised on this appeal.
In January 1990, Lorin filed a motion for change of custody, requesting that primary physical custody of Elizabeth and Nicole be awarded to him. Following a hearing, the district court entered a judgment denying the request and Lorin filed this appeal.
In Wright I, supra, 431 N.W.2d at 303, Justice Levine succinctly set forth the appropriate standard for determining a request to modify an original custody award:
“There is a distinction between an original award of custody and a decision to modify custody. ... The original custo*655dy award revolves solely around the best interests of the children_ But, a request to modify the custody award requires the determination of not one, but two issues in chronological order: (a) whether there has been a significant change of circumstances since the original divorce decree and custody award; and if so (b) whether those changes are such that the best interests of the child would be served by a change in custo-dy_ Thus, the first step is to determine if a significant change of circumstances has occurred.” [Citations omitted.]
The burden of showing a change of circumstances which, in the best interests of the child, requires a change of custody is on the party seeking modification. Lapp v. Lapp, 336 N.W.2d 350 (N.D.1983). The term “changed circumstances” has been described as new facts which were unknown to the moving party at the time the decree was entered. Bergstrom v. Bergstrom, 296 N.W.2d 490, 493 (N.D.1980). On appeal, this court will not set aside the trial court’s determination unless it is clearly erroneous under Rule 52(a), N.D.R.Civ.P. Orke v. Olson, 411 N.W.2d 97 (N.D.1987).
Tammy gave birth to twin girls, Samantha and Jacqueline, in September 1988. During 1989 several reports of child abuse by Tammy toward Elizabeth and Nicole were investigated by social service representatives. The alleged abuse included improper physical discipline, inadequate clothing and feeding of the children, and incidents of leaving the children without appropriate supervision. Janette Krumm, a licensed social worker employed by the Williams County Social Services Board (the Board), investigated the allegations during August 1989 and concluded that there was probable cause for finding physical abuse. In September 1989, Tammy Swallers, a child protection worker employed by the Board, also found probable cause for finding neglect by Tammy in caring for Elizabeth and Nicole.
Tammy herself concedes that during 1989 she “experienced difficulties in her life” including a broken relationship with a boyfriend, depression, and drug usage which ultimately culminated in at least two suicide attempts. Dr. Marco Rancier, a licensed medical doctor practicing psychiatry in Williston, diagnosed Tammy as a substance abuser, including use of cocaine and “other hypnotic medications.”
Tammy agreed to receive inpatient treatment for chemical abuse in December 1989. At that time, Swallers filed a petition seeking to place Elizabeth, Nicole, and the twins in shelter care as deprived children. The parties involved, including Lorin, stipulated to temporarily place the twins in foster care and place physical custody of Elizabeth and Nicole with Lorin. The juvenile court, based upon the stipulation, temporarily placed legal custody of the children with the director of the Williams County Social Service Board and ordered that reasonable efforts be made to return the children to Tammy within 6 months.
In January 1990, Lorin filed the petition for a change of custody, requesting physical custody of Elizabeth and Nicole. Following a hearing on Lorin’s motion, the trial court prepared a written memorandum opinion but did not issue formal findings of fact. Regarding the issue of whether there had been a significant change of circumstances, the trial court made the following relevant statement:
“The only significant change of circumstances I find is the birth of the twins subsequent to the divorce. This is a consideration in favor of Tammy retaining physical custody to keep siblings together and not a changed circumstance that impels me to change the custody order now in existence.”
Having reviewed the entire record on this appeal, we believe that there is substantial evidence demonstrating several additional significant changes of circumstance since the original decree was entered, including serious drug abuse by Tammy, physical abuse and neglect of the girls, and attempted suicides.
The record clearly demonstrates that, subsequent to the original decree, Tammy allowed herself to become involved in abusing drugs, including cocaine. The evidence *656also clearly shows that concomitant with, and perhaps as a result of, the drug abuse Elizabeth and Nicole experienced incidents such as inappropriate physical discipline, improper care, and inadequate supervision. In addition, it is undisputed that Tammy attempted to commit suicide at least two times while Elizabeth and Nicole’s physical custody were entrusted to her. Notwithstanding these circumstances, the trial court found that the only significant change since the original decree was the birth of the twins. We conclude that such finding is clearly erroneous.
The trial court erroneously determined that Tammy’s suicide attempts, her drug abuse, and her inappropriate physical discipline, improper care, and inadequate supervision of Elizabeth and Nicole did not constitute a significant change of circumstances and, therefore, did not determine whether the changes require, in Elizabeth and Nicole’s best interests, a change of custody. Consequently, we reverse the judgment and remand for the trial court to make that determination.
Reversed and remanded.
VANDE WALLE, J., and VERNON R. PEDERSON, Surrogate Justice, concur.
VERNON R. PEDERSON, Surrogate Justice, sitting in place of ERICKSTAD, C.J., disqualified.

=== CASE 9737443 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:25:15.773696+00 ===

LEVINE, Justice,
specially concurring.
I agree that the trial court’s finding that the birth of the twins was the only significant change of circumstances is clearly erroneous. It is unnecessary, however, in support of that proposition, to engage in the extensive fact-finding foray of the majority. Indeed, if I were going to weigh facts, I would make different findings. However, no weighing is necessary because it is undisputed that Tammy Wright attempted suicide twice and it is also undisputed that the parties and Social Services stipulated to a temporary change of custody from Ms. Wright to Social Services. Either of these events constitutes a significant change in circumstances.
It appears that the trial court bought Ms. Wright’s lawyer’s argument that any change in circumstance was not significant because it was “essentially transitory” and “temporary” in nature, presumably because Ms. Wright had successfully undergone treatment and was likely to regain her children’s custody the day following the hearing, under the terms of the stipulation. That argument may be persuasive on the issue of whether the significant change in circumstances requires a change of custody but not, in my view, on the issue it addressed.
Some of the trial court’s expression in its memorandum opinion suggests to me that it did not believe a change in custody was warranted even if there were a material change in circumstances. However, the memorandum opinion is imprecise and ambiguous and, therefore, I join in the result that reverses and remands to the trial court for a clear expression of its findings on the issue of whether the changes in circumstances require a change in custody in order to promote the best interests of the children.
MESCHKE, J., concurs.

=== CASE 2210467 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:53.414265+00 ===

186 Mich. App. 292 (1990)
463 N.W.2d 261
SMOLEN
v.
DAHLMANN APARTMENTS, LTD
Docket No. 115439.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided November 19, 1990, at 9:03 A.M.
Gary M. Victor, for the plaintiffs.
Davis & Fajen, P.C. (by Peter A. Davis), for the defendants.
Before: CAVANAGH, P.J., and GRIFFIN and JANSEN, JJ.
JANSEN, J.
Plaintiffs appeal as of right the January 11, 1989, opinion and order awarding plaintiffs $2,000 in attorney fees under the Michigan Consumer *294 Protection Act (MCPA), MCL 445.901 et seq.; MSA 19.418(1) et seq. On appeal, plaintiffs allege that the trial court erred in the amount of the award, the method of calculation and factors to be considered, the imposition of interest on the award, and the availability of discovery of defendants' attorneys' time records. We hold that the trial court erred in failing to consider plaintiffs' attorney's computer printouts of his time records and in failing to apply the factors contained in Crawley v Schick, 48 Mich App 728; 211 NW2d 217 (1973). Thus, we reverse and remand for an evidentiary hearing.
First, plaintiffs allege that the trial court erred in refusing to consider plaintiffs' counsel's computer records indicating the amount of time spent on the case. We agree. The trial court ruled that the computer entries did not consist of original contemporaneous time records. However, our review of the record indicates that most of the information contained on the computer printout was placed directly into the computer sometime following the work performed for plaintiff. While it is true that some of the information in the computer was transferred to the computer from temporary notes indicating the amount of time spent on individual projects, we hold that this does not destroy the admissibility of the computer entries. In an analogous situation, our Supreme Court in Green v Woods, 325 Mich 649; 39 NW2d 317 (1949), held that a book of accounts, whose entries were made from slips of paper furnished by others, was admissible even though the original slips were not preserved. The Green Court noted that since the records were kept in the ordinary course of business, they were admissible. See also 30 Am Jur 2d, Evidence, § 942, p 65. In the present case, the entries into the computer were made *295 in the ordinary course of plaintiffs' counsel's business. Further, plaintiffs' attorney's failure to retain the various time record slips does not make the computer printout a mere compilation since the computer printout is the first permanent record of the time data. Thus, we hold that the trial court erred in refusing to consider the computer printout list as evidence of the amount of time plaintiffs' attorney spent on the present case.
In so holding, we do not express an opinion on the validity of the charges contained on the computer sheet. We only find that the trial court erred in failing to consider them. The trial court retains the discretion to assess reasonable attorney fees, not actual attorney fees. Ecclestone v Ogne, 177 Mich App 74, 77; 441 NW2d 7 (1989).
Plaintiffs also allege that the trial court applied the wrong standard in assessing reasonable attorney fees. While the trial court based its award on a typical, hypothetical case, plaintiffs argue that the court must base its decision on the application of the factors contained in Crawley, supra. We agree. The MCPA allows a person who suffers a loss as a result of a violation of the act to bring an action to recover reasonable attorney fees. MCL 445.911(2); MSA 19.418(11)(2), Mikos v Chrysler Corp, 158 Mich App 781, 783; 404 NW2d 783 (1987). The Crawley Court set forth the following factors to be considered in determining what constitutes reasonable attorney fees:
There is no precise formula for computing the reasonableness of an attorney's fee. However, among the facts to be taken into consideration in determining the reasonableness of a fee include, but are not limited to, the following: (1) the professional standing and experience of the attorney; (2) the skill, time and labor involved; (3) the amount in question and the results achieved; (4) the difficulty *296 of the case; (5) the expenses incurred; and (6) the nature and length of the professional relationship with the client. See generally 3 Michigan Law & Practice, Attorneys and Counselors, § 44, p 275 and Disciplinary Rule 2-106(B) of the Code of Professional Responsibility and Ethics. [Crawley, supra at 737.]
While the trial court should consider the guidelines of Crawley, it is not limited to those factors in making its decision. Wood v DAIIE, 413 Mich 573, 588; 321 NW2d 653 (1982). The trial court may choose to adjust an attorney's fees in light of the results of the legal proceedings. Id. at 588-589. The award will be upheld unless it appears upon appellate review that the trial court's findings on the "reasonableness" issue was an abuse of discretion.
We hold that the trial court erred in failing to apply the Crawley factors in determining attorney fees. The trial court's award of $2,000 in attorney fees based on a typical action to recover wrongfully withheld security deposits brought under the MCPA was inadequate. In so holding, we do not express an opinion on the appropriateness of plaintiffs' request for over $50,000 in attorney fees.
Plaintiffs argue on appeal that in remanding this case to the trial court we should set forth specific additional items which should be considered in determining attorney fees. We decline to do so. We decline to follow plaintiffs' suggestion that the trial court must use a determination of a reasonable fee, computed as the number of hours reasonably expended on the litigation multiplied by a reasonable hourly rate, as a starting point in determining reasonable attorney fees. In essence, plaintiffs suggest that plaintiffs' attorney is entitled to be compensated at the market rate of $100 per hour of trial work and $125 per hour of *297 appellate work multiplied by the time expended. We reject the application of any rigid formula, whether based on a contingent fee arrangement or an hourly formula, that fails to take into account the totality of the special circumstances applicable to the case at hand. Hartman v Associated Truck Lines, 178 Mich App 426, 431; 444 NW2d 159 (1989). Further, we decline to hold that the product of multiplying reasonable hours by a reasonable hourly rate is presumed to provide a reasonable fee. However, this does not preclude the trial court from considering a reasonable hourly rate. To this extent, we draw the trial court's attention to the 1988 Economics of Law Practice Survey, 67 Mich B J, No 11B (1988). Likewise, we decline to hold that plaintiffs are entitled to an upward adjustment based on the contingency of payment and delay in payment and to reflect exceptional success. The Crawley factors allow for consideration of the results achieved in the lawsuit. Although we hold that these are factors which can be considered in computing a reasonable attorney fee, we decline to hold that plaintiffs are entitled to adjustments on the basis of these factors. We leave this determination to the trial court and its discretion.
Plaintiffs also argue that their attorney is entitled to a fee for services rendered on appeal. We agree. We hold that the underlying purpose behind the MCPA's award of attorney fees is to afford an indigent client the opportunity to seek protection and obtain a judgment where otherwise precluded because of monetary constraints. In interpreting a statute, we give effect to the legislative intent and to the plain and unambiguous meaning of the statute. Joy Management Co v Detroit, 176 Mich App 722, 730-731; 440 NW2d 654 (1989), lv den 433 Mich 860 (1989). Subsection 11(2) does not place *298 any restriction on the recovery of attorney fees and does not limit attorney fees to those rendered at the trial court level. In the underlying lawsuit on the MCPA claim, the trial court originally granted defendants' motion for summary disposition, which was later reversed by this Court and remanded for further proceedings. 127 Mich App 108; 338 NW2d 892 (1983). We hold that the MCPA's award of reasonable attorney fees applies to appellate proceedings. We recognize that another panel of this Court in Temborius v Slatkin, 157 Mich App 587, 604-605; 403 NW2d 821 (1986), held that there is no explicit authority requiring an award of actual attorney fees for services on appeal in an MCPA action. To the extent that our holding conflicts with the holding in Temborius, we choose not to follow the Temborius panel. See cases cited in 35 ALR4th, §§ 12-13, pp 51-56. Thus, on remand; the trial court is to consider services rendered on appeal.
Plaintiffs also allege that the trial court erred in not allowing plaintiffs to discover information concerning defendants' attorneys' time spent on the litigation. We disagree. The trial court's decision to grant or deny a discovery motion will be reversed on appeal only if there has been an abuse of discretion. Eyde v Eyde, 172 Mich App 49, 54; 431 NW2d 459 (1988), lv den 432 Mich 857 (1989). Since the reasonableness of charges for legal services performed by one attorney is not measured by what other attorneys would charge, Fletcher v Fractional No 5 School Dist Bd of Ed, 323 Mich 343, 349; 35 NW2d 177 (1948), we hold that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in refusing to permit the discovery of defendants' attorneys' time records and hourly rates.
Finally, plaintiffs argue that the interest on the *299 attorney fee portion of an award under the MCPA should accrue from the date of the filing of the complaint or at least from the date of the original order granting attorney fees. We disagree. This Court in Harvey v Gerber, 153 Mich App 528; 396 NW2d 470 (1986), lv den 428 Mich 881 (1987), held that prejudgment interest pursuant to MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013 could not be assessed on attorney fees awarded under the MCPA. We agree.
Reversed as to the amount of attorney fees awarded and remanded for an evidentiary hearing and findings of fact regarding reasonable attorney fees. We do not retain jurisdiction.

=== CASE 2210469 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:53.471103+00 ===

186 Mich. App. 333 (1990)
463 N.W.2d 268
NOYD
v.
CLAXTON, MORGAN, FLOCKHART & VanLIERE
NOYD
v.
NBD BUSINESS FINANCE, INC
Docket Nos. 118878, 118879.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided November 20, 1990, at 9:00 A.M.
Sommers, Schwartz, Silver & Schwartz, P.C. (by David L. Nelson and Patrick Burkett), for plaintiffs.
Plunkett & Cooney, P.C. (by Lawrence R. Donaldson and Christine D. Oldani), for Claxton, Morgan, Flockhart & VanLiere and Gregory Claxton and Donald Morgan.
Honigman, Miller, Schwartz & Cohn (by Peter M. Alter and Mark A. Stern), for NBD Business Finance, Inc.
Before: DANHOF, C.J., and SULLIVAN and NEFF, JJ.
PER CURIAM.
This is a consolidated appeal as of right from a Kent Circuit Court order granting summary disposition to defendant NBD Business Finance, Inc., on plaintiffs' claim that NBD violated the Michigan Uniform Securities Act (MUSA), MCL 451.501 et seq.; MSA 19.776(101) et seq. Plaintiffs also appeal the circuit court's grant of partial summary disposition for defendants Claxton, Morgan, Flockhart & VanLiere, Certified Public Accountants (Claxton, Morgan), and individual defendants Gregory Claxton and Donald Morgan, on plaintiffs' MUSA claim against those defendants. In *335 addition, plaintiffs appeal the circuit court's denial of their motion for leave to file a second amended complaint, which would have added a fraud claim against defendant Claxton, Morgan. We affirm.
In January of 1985, defendant NBD loaned Kent-Holland Industries, Incorporated (KHI), operating funds and took back a security interest in KHI's accounts receivable, assets and inventory. KHI had been formed sometime prior to 1985 as a result of a merger of two companies during Chapter XI reorganization proceedings in federal bankruptcy court. By May of 1985, KHI no longer complied with NBD's borrowing formula and NBD apparently refused to lend KHI any more money. In June of 1985, plaintiffs and NBD entered into the first of three "loan participation agreements" whereby plaintiffs loaned money to KHI through NBD. The agreement was set up after negotiations between NBD, Claxton, Morgan, which was KHI's accounting firm, and KHI's attorneys.
Under the agreements, plaintiffs received payments of 5.5 percent above the prime interest rate on any outstanding loans to KHI. Plaintiffs were to be repaid the loan principal only after NBD was paid in full for NBD's outstanding loans to KHI. If NBD realized upon the security interest it held in KHI, plaintiffs would also be able to realize the collateral under NBD's security interest, but, again, only after NBD's loan was satisfied. Thus, plaintiffs, by virtue of the agreements, had an interest that was junior to NBD's, but superior to KHI's unsecured creditors. The agreement expressly stated that plaintiffs were aware that KHI was not within NBD's borrowing formula.
Following the first agreement, plaintiffs Lois Noyd and Robert Wagner became directors of KHI. In November of 1985, Noyd became a forty-nine percent shareholder in KHI. Between June of 1985 *336 and March of 1986, plaintiff Noyd loaned KHI a total of $160,000, and plaintiffs Robert and Louise Wagner loaned KHI a total of $165,000, pursuant to the three loan participation agreements.
In June of 1986, after KHI was unable to work out a compromise with the Internal Revenue Service and its other creditors, KHI filed for bankruptcy under Chapter VII of the federal bankruptcy laws. Plaintiffs were unable to recoup any of the money which they had loaned to KHI through the loan participation agreements. Plaintiffs then filed the instant actions, claiming that their interests in the loan participation agreements were securities under the MUSA. Plaintiffs claimed that defendants NBD and Claxton, Morgan violated the MUSA by failing to register the agreements as securities and by using misleading or untrue statements of material fact in violation of § 410 of the act, MCL 451.810; MSA 19.776(410). Plaintiffs' complaint raised additional claims of negligence against Claxton, Morgan and KHI's law firm. The lower court granted summary disposition to NBD and partial summary disposition to Claxton, Morgan and Gregory Claxton and Donald Morgan on plaintiffs' securities violation claims. Later, the court denied plaintiffs' motion to amend their complaint to add a fraud claim against Claxton, Morgan.
We will first address plaintiffs' claims that the loan participation agreements were securities under the MUSA and that the trial court erred by granting summary disposition to defendants NBD and Claxton, Morgan. We conclude that the agreements were not securities and that the circuit court properly granted summary disposition.
Defendants brought their motions for summary disposition under both MCR 2.116(C)(8) and (C)(10). The lower court orders do not specify the subrule *337 under which it was granting the motions. Since the primary disagreement was whether the agreements were securities as a matter of law, we conclude that the orders were issued under MCR 2.116(C)(8) and we will analyze this issue accordingly.
A motion under MCR 2.116(C)(8) tests the legal sufficiency of a claim by the pleadings alone. Formall, Inc v Community National Bank, 166 Mich App 772, 777; 421 NW2d 289 (1988). All factual allegations in support of the claim are accepted as true, as well as any reasonable inferences or conclusions which can be drawn from the facts. Kauffman v Shefman, 169 Mich App 829, 833; 426 NW2d 819 (1988). The motion should be granted only where the claim is so clearly unenforceable as a matter of law that no factual development could possibly justify a right of recovery. Scameheorn v Bucks, 167 Mich App 302, 306; 421 NW2d 918 (1988), lv den 430 Mich 886 (1988).
Section 301 of the MUSA, MCL 451.701; MSA 19.776(301), makes it unlawful to offer or sell any security in this state unless it is registered under the act or is exempted under § 402, MCL 451.802; MSA 19.776(402). The term "security" is defined in MCL 451.801(1); MSA 19.776(401)(1):
"Security" means any note; stock; treasury stock; bond; debenture; evidence of indebtedness; certificate of interest or participation in any profit-sharing agreement; collateral-trust certificate; preorganization certificate or subscription; transferable share; investment contract; voting-trust certificate; certificate of deposit for a security; certificate of interest or participation in an oil, gas, or mining title or lease or in payments out of production under such a title or lease; or, in general, any interest or instrument commonly known as a "security", or any certificate of interest *338 or participation in, temporary or interim certificate for, receipt for, guarantee of, or warrant or right to subscribe to or purchase, any of the foregoing. "Security" includes any contractual or quasi contractual arrangement pursuant to which: (1) a person furnishes capital, other than services, to an issuer; (2) a portion of that capital is subjected to the risks of the issuer's enterprise; (3) the furnishing of that capital is induced by the representations of an issuer, promoter, or their affiliates which give rise to a reasonable understanding that a valuable tangible benefit will accrue to the person furnishing the capital as a result of the operation of the enterprise; (4) the person furnishing the capital does not intend to be actively involved in the management of the enterprise in a meaningful way; and (5) a promoter or its affiliates anticipate, at the time the capital is furnished, that financial gain may be realized as a result thereof. (Emphasis supplied).
The statutory restriction on the offer or sale of securities is designed to protect the public against fraud and deception in the issuance, sale, exchange or disposition of securities. People v Dempster, 396 Mich 700, 704; 242 NW2d 381 (1976). In interpreting our security statutes, we look beyond the form of the transaction to its substance, paying close attention to the economic realities of the situation. Ansorge v Kellogg, 172 Mich App 63; 431 NW2d 402 (1988), lv den 431 Mich 912 (1988). The basic economic reality of a security transaction under the MUSA is the subjection of the investor's money to the risks of an enterprise over which the investor has no managerial control. People v Breckenridge, 81 Mich App 6, 15; 263 NW2d 922 (1978), lv den 402 Mich 915 (1978). The Breckenridge Court noted that the Uniform Securities Act is "intended to protect investors, not persons engaged in commercial loan transactions...." Id., p 16.
*339 These general principles are consistent with the statutory five-part test contained in § 401 of the MUSA for determining whether a contractual arrangement is a security transaction. Applying that test, we are unable to conclude that the loan participation agreements were securities.
Under part (2) of the test it could be argued, in a broad sense, that the capital furnished by plaintiffs to KHI was "subjected to the risk" of KHI's enterprise, because there was the possibility that KHI would fail and that KHI's collateral would not cover the loan amount. See Rzepka v Michael, 171 Mich App 748, 758; 431 NW2d 441 (1988). However, that is a risk present in all commercial loan transactions. This interpretation would subject all commercial loans to the registration requirements of the statute, which would be absurd. Id. We believe that since, under the agreement, plaintiffs were to be paid back the full amount, plus interest, of the capital which they loaned to KHI, their capital was not "subjected to the risk" of KHI's enterprise within the meaning of the statute. For similar reasons, the transactions also fail to comport with part (3) of the statutory test. Plaintiffs stood to receive no tangible benefit under the agreement from the improved operations of KHI  their return was fixed at principal plus interest. Finally, under part (4), we believe that by acting as directors of KHI during two of the three relevant transactions, plaintiffs were "actively involved in the management" of KHI "in a meaningful way." Therefore, the transactions at issue were not securities transactions under the MUSA.
The economic reality of this situation was that, in form as well as substance, plaintiffs engaged in a commercial loan transaction in which NBD acted as a conduit for the transference of plaintiffs' money to KHI. Plaintiffs enjoyed the benefit of *340 NBD's security interest in KHI's assets, which would not have been the case had plaintiffs loaned the money directly to KHI. That KHI's assets were not ultimately sufficient to cover plaintiffs' loans does not alter the character of the transaction. That the loan participation agreements may have been offered to other persons also does not change the character of the transactions. The definitions of "security" supplied in § 401 focus on the nature of the transaction, not on the situation under which the transaction was initiated. As a matter of law, the agreements were not securities and the lower court therefore properly granted summary disposition on plaintiffs' claims relating to violations of state securities laws.
In plaintiffs' second and final issue, they argue that the trial court abused its discretion by denying their motion for leave to file a second amended complaint, which would have added a fraud claim against Claxton, Morgan. We disagree.
Under MCR 2.118(A)(2), leave to amend pleadings should be freely given when justice so requires. Leave to amend should be denied only for particularized reasons, such as undue delay, bad faith or dilatory motive on the movant's part, repeated failure to cure deficiencies by amendments previously allowed, undue prejudice to the opposing party, or where amendment would be futile. Ben P Fyke & Sons v Gunter Co, 390 Mich 649, 656; 213 NW2d 134 (1973); Terhaar v Hoekwater, 182 Mich App 747, 750; 452 NW2d 905 (1990). The court must specify its reasons for denying the motion; a failure to do so requires reversal, unless amendment would be futile. Terhaar, p 751; Cummings v Detroit, 151 Mich App 347, 352; 390 NW2d 666 (1986), lv den 426 Mich 851 (1986). We will not reverse a lower court's denial of a motion to amend absent an abuse of discretion. Tolbert v *341 U S Truck Co, 179 Mich App 471, 473; 446 NW2d 484 (1989), lv den 433 Mich 920 (1989).
In this case, the trial court expressly addressed the Fyke reasons on the record. The court noted that the memorandum which formed the basis of plaintiffs' fraud assertion had been discovered four or five months earlier, but plaintiffs did not at that time seek to amend their complaint. The court stated that defendant would be somewhat prejudiced by the amendment because discovery was completed and mediation and trial dates were approaching. The court expressed doubts that a fraud claim was viable considering the relationships of the parties to each other and to KHI. The court also noted that plaintiffs would not be prejudiced by the denial because there was still time for plaintiffs to refile their claim. After reviewing the record, including plaintiffs' proposed amended complaint, we find that the trial court did not err in denying plaintiffs' motion to amend. The reasons supplied by the court were not overwhelming, but they were supported in the record and were sufficient to uphold the court's decision.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 2210475 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:53.569169+00 ===

463 N.W.2d 506 (1990)
STATE of Minnesota, Respondent,
v.
Gary Lee ROBY, Appellant.
No. C8-89-2123.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
November 30, 1990.
*507 Lawrence W. Pry, Asst. State Public Defender, St. Paul, for appellant.
Hubert H. Humphrey III, Atty. Gen., Tom Foley, Ramsey County Atty., Darrel C. Hill, Asst. Ramsey County Atty., St. Paul, for respondent.
Heard, considered, and decided by the court en banc.
SIMONETT, Justice.
Defendant-appellant Gary Lee Roby appeals his convictions for murder, both premeditated first degree murder and felony murder during an aggravated robbery. Among other assigned errors, defendant claims that certain evidence should have been suppressed, that certain out-of-court statements were erroneously admitted under the coconspirator hearsay exemption, and that the out-of-court statements were admitted in violation of the confrontation clause. We affirm.
On May 22, 1989, in an upper level duplex apartment in St. Paul, a young woman, Marlizza McIntyre, was shot and killed. Present in the apartment at the time were the defendant, Gary Roby, and his two brothers, James and John; also present were Lillian Dunn, Kenneth Fisher, Katie Bell, LaSheryl Yearby, and Sheila Larson.
The victim was killed by a revolver shot to the back of her head while she was being held face down on the kitchen floor and being robbed of her jewelry. Two shots were fired; the first bullet lodged in the floor, the second entered the victim's head. Gary Roby's defense was that Lillian Dunn, not he, shot the victim and that Dunn alone determined to rob and kill McIntyre. There was eyewitness testimony, however, that defendant was straddling the victim's body, shot the victim in the head, and took a necklace from the victim's neck and cash from inside her bra. Neither defendant nor Lillian Dunn testified at the trial. Other facts will be given as the issues are discussed.
The Payton suppression issue
When arrested, defendant was found to have the murder victim's necklace. After his arrest and after being given a Miranda warning, defendant made several statements to police officers. These statements came into evidence at the trial through the testimony of the officers. In these statements defendant gave conflicting stories, including, however, admitting he had his hand on the gun when the first shot was *508 fired, that he had sold Lillian Dunn the revolver used in the killing, and that he believed Dunn would rob the victim to pay for the revolver.
Acting on information from Kenneth Fisher who said he saw defendant Roby shoot McIntyre, the police, without a warrant, arrested defendant at the duplex where he lived. Defendant now claims his arrest involved a nonconsensual, nonexigent entry into his home, and, therefore, the victim's necklace and defendant's out-of-court statements to the police must be suppressed. Payton v. New York, 445 U.S. 573, 100 S.Ct. 1371, 63 L.Ed.2d 639 (1980). The state argues we should construe our state constitution to follow New York v. Harris, ___ U.S. ___, 110 S.Ct. 1640, 109 L.Ed.2d 13 (1990), which recently held that the Fourth Amendment does not require suppression of statements made by a suspect after receiving a Miranda warning subsequent to an unlawful, warrantless, domiciliary arrest.
We need not decide if we would follow Harris. It is enough here that the Payton issue was never raised in the court below and, consequently, was waived. At the omnibus hearing there was no claim of a warrantless, domiciliary arrest in violation of Payton. While defense counsel spoke of "no exigent circumstances" and the lack of a warrant, this was only within the context of her contention that probable cause for arrest was lacking. Only now on appeal does defendant raise the Payton issue.[1] We do not "decide issues which are not first addressed by the trial court and are raised for the first time on appeal even if the issues involve constitutional questions regarding criminal procedure." State v. Sorenson, 441 N.W.2d 455, 457 (Minn. 1989).
Coconspirator hearsay exemption
At trial, over defense objections, witnesses LaSheryl Yearby and Alicia Jordon testified that 1 or 2 weeks before the murder Lillian Dunn said that she needed to obtain bullets for a gun because someone was bothering her and something needed to be done right away. In addition, Alicia Jordon testified that just before the homicide and shortly after Lillian Dunn had met privately with defendant Gary Roby at the bottom of the stairway at the duplex, Lillian Dunn said to Jordon and Katie Bell, "Did Gary do it yet? I can't do it."
The trial court admitted Lillian Dunn's out-of-court statements under the coconspirator exemption to the hearsay rule, which says a statement is not hearsay if offered against a party and is "a statement by a coconspirator of a party during the course and in furtherance of a conspiracy." Minn.R.Evid. 801(d)(2)(E) (1989).
The trial court found that the state, as the proponent of the hearsay statements, had established a prima facie case of conspiracy between Lillian Dunn and defendant Gary Roby to rob and kill the victim McIntyre, and that this prima facie case was made with evidence independent of the hearsay statements themselves. Thus Lillian Dunn's out-of-court statements were admissible against her coconspirator, defendant Gary Roby. This was the proper test for admissibility under the coconspirator exemption at the time this case was tried. State v. Thompson, 273 Minn. 1, 16, 139 N.W.2d 490, 503, cert. denied sub nom. Thompson v. Minnesota, 385 U.S. 817, 87 S.Ct. 39, 17 L.Ed.2d 56 (1966); State v. Daniels, 380 N.W.2d 777, 784 (1986); State v. Black, 291 N.W.2d 208 (Minn.1980); Minn.R.Evid. 801(d)(2)(E) (1989) and advisory committee comments thereto.[2]
*509 The trial court's findings are amply sustained by independent evidence. It was shown that defendant admitted giving Lillian Dunn the eventual murder weapon about a week before the shooting, that defendant met with Dunn on the duplex stairs just prior to the shooting, and that defendant had admitted he understood Dunn would rob the victim McIntyre. In further corroboration, witnesses testified to seeing Dunn help defendant hold the victim down on the floor while the victim was being robbed and shot. Defendant also admitted he helped strip the victim of her jewelry. The trial court further found that a reasonable basis existed for concluding that the statements furthered the conspiracy to rob and (or) kill McIntyre, citing the testimony of the interrogating officers and witness Fisher, and testimony from the grand jury proceedings. The trial court's rulings were supported by adequate evidence and were within its sound discretion. State v. Flores, 418 N.W.2d 150, 158 (Minn. 1988).
The confrontation clause issue
Even if Lillian Dunn's out-of-court statements are admissible under the coconspirator exemption, defendant Roby contends admissibility of the statements violates his constitutional right to confront witnesses against him. U.S. Const. amend. VI; Minn. Const. art. 1, § 6. We disagree.
We apply a two-step analysis to determine if a hearsay exception violates the confrontation clause: (1) Is admissibility of the out-of-court statement necessary? and (2) Does the statement bear significant indicia of reliability? State v. Hansen, 312 N.W.2d 96, 102 (Minn.1981); State v. Daniels, 380 N.W.2d 777 (Minn.1986). The first step is admittedly met here because Lillian Dunn asserted her Fifth Amendment right not to testify. It is the second step, the requirement of reliability, that is in dispute.
In Daniels, we said that the reliability of hearsay statements can be inferred if they come in under a hearsay exception that is "firmly rooted." 380 N.W.2d at 785, citing Ohio v. Roberts, 448 U.S. 56, 66, 100 S.Ct. 2531, 2539, 65 L.Ed.2d 597 (1980). Recently, in Bourjaily v. United States, 483 U.S. 171, 107 S.Ct. 2775, 97 L.Ed.2d 144 (1987), the United States Supreme Court held that the coconspirator exemption qualified as a "firmly rooted" hearsay exception for purposes of the federal confrontation clause. Under Bourjaily, therefore, no further inquiry into the reliability of the statements is needed to satisfy the federal confrontation clause once the hearsay statements fulfill, as they do here, the requirements of the coconspirator exemption. Id. at 183, 107 S.Ct. at 2782-2783.
The state urges us to adopt the Bourjaily approach to determine whether Dunn's statements are reliable for purposes of the confrontation clause of our state constitution. We see no need to reach this question because we find the statements to be reliable without depending on the legitimacy of the coconspirator exemption itself to provide an inference of reliability.
Factors relevant to determining reliability include: (1) whether the context of the statements and the persons to whom they were made suggest that they were reliable; (2) whether the declarant had a motive for lying or problems with memory; and (3) whether the declarant had personal knowledge of the identity and role of the participants in the crime. United States v. Massa, 740 F.2d 629, 639 (8th Cir.1984), cert. denied, 471 U.S. 1115, 105 S.Ct. 2357, 86 L.Ed.2d 258 (1985).
Factors one and three are easily satisfied in this case. The first out-of-court statements were made about a week before the homicide, at the residence where the homicide occurred, and were heard by two individuals, Yearby and Jordon. The second statement was made at the same residence minutes before the homicide and was heard by Jordon and Bell. The statements also appear to have been made on firsthand knowledge. As to factor two, we are persuaded, particularly in view of the corroborating testimony of Kenneth Fisher, that Lillian Dunn's statements to Jordon and Bell moments before the shooting were not exculpatory in nature.
*510 In short, we find the evidence establishes Dunn's out-of-court statements to possess the requisite reliability for confrontation clause purposes under our state constitution without reliance on any possible inference of reliability which might obtain to statements falling under the coconspirator exemption. Even if admission of the statements were thought to be constitutional error, any such error in this case would be harmless beyond a reasonable doubt; the remaining evidence here is overwhelmingly persuasive of defendant's guilt. Daniels, 380 N.W.2d at 787, citing State v. Shotley, 305 Minn. 384, 387, 233 N.W.2d 755, 758 (1975).
Other issues
In a pro se brief defendant Roby claims that he was denied effective assistance of counsel; that the prosecution knowingly used false and perjured testimony; and that the police officers violated his due process rights by destroying their handwritten interview notes after using them to prepare their official reports on the interviews.
We find no merit to any of these claims. The issue of destruction of police notes, we observe, is really not before us; the issue was not raised below and was waived. For that matter, there is no showing that defendant's case was in any way prejudiced by the destruction of the notes. See, generally, California v. Trombetta, 467 U.S. 479, 488-89, 104 S.Ct. 2528, 2533-34, 81 L.Ed.2d 413 (1984). See also State v. Renier, 373 N.W.2d 282, 287 (Minn.1985).
Affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  Oddly enough, the record is unclear where defendant was when he was arrested, i.e., whether he was inside or outside the duplex, and the parties spend some time arguing who should have produced this evidence. If defendant had chosen to raise the Payton issue in the omnibus hearing or at the trial, undoubtedly the record would then have been clarified.
[2]  Since defendant's trial, Minn.R.Evid. 801(d)(2)(E) has been amended, effective January 1, 1990, to follow in part Bourjaily v. United States, 483 U.S. 171, 107 S.Ct. 2775, 97 L.Ed.2d 144 (1987). Our rule now requires a preponderance of the evidence to show a conspiracy and, further, allows consideration of the hearsay statement, but precludes the declarant's statement by itself from establishing the conspiracy.

=== CASE 2210478 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:53.61574+00 ===

463 N.W.2d 2 (1990)
FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION, As Receiver of The Hayesville Savings Bank, Appellee,
v.
Larry L. HARTWIG and Jill J. Hartwig, et al., Appellants.
No. 89-1453.
Supreme Court of Iowa.
November 21, 1990.
*3 John Jellineck of Brown Law Office, Fairfield, for appellants.
G. Mark Rice and Michael R. Nelson of Adams, Howe & Zoss, P.C., Des Moines, for appellee.
Considered by HARRIS, P.J., and LARSON, SCHULTZ, CARTER, and NEUMAN, JJ.
NEUMAN, Justice.
The parties to this farm foreclosure action each claim the right to payments made by the government through the Conservation Reserve Program (CRP). See generally 16 U.S.C. §§ 3831-36 (1988). The district court decided that the payments constitute rent payable to the receiver within the meaning of the "rents and profits" clause of the mortgages and deed of trust executed by the parties. The mortgagors have appealed and we now affirm.
Plaintiff Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) is the successor in interest to the Hayesville Savings Bank. Defendants Larry and Jill Hartwig gave the bank two mortgages and a deed of trust on farmland owned by them to secure indebtedness of approximately $400,000. The mortgages and deed of trust each provide that, in the event of default, a receiver shall be appointed to take possession of the property and collect the "rents and profits accruing therefrom."
Following default by the Hartwigs in 1987, the bank sought judgment on the notes and foreclosure of the mortgages and deed of trust. Partial summary judgment was entered in favor of the bank, and the property was eventually purchased at sheriff's sale by the FDIC. A substantial deficiency remained after sale.
Before foreclosure, and later while the property was in receivership, the Hartwigs enrolled a total of 326.7 acres of the mortgaged farmland in the Conservation Reserve Program. This conservation program, administered by the Secretary of Agriculture, is designed to "assist owners and operators of highly erodible cropland in conserving and improving the soil and water resources of their farms or ranches." 16 U.S.C. § 3831(a). To be eligible, a farmer must agree to take erodible acreage out of commercial production for ten years and implement approved conservation practices necessary to establish permanent vegetative cover including grasses, legumes, trees, and shrubs. 16 U.S.C. § 3832; 7 C.F.R. § 704.10(a), .12(a) (1990). In return, the government contractually agrees to pay the farmer annual "rental payment[s] *4... to compensate such participant for placing eligible cropland in the CRP." 7 C.F.R. § 704.2(a)(2); see also 16 U.S.C. § 3834.
In July 1989, the receiver sought direction from the district court concerning distribution of two CRP payments due in October 1989. Because the Hartwigswith the consent of the receiverhad taken the acreage out of production, there were no other "rents or profits" being generated for the 1989 crop year. Noting that the enabling legislation made repeated reference to CRP "rental payments," the district court ruled that the FDIC was entitled to the proceeds less sums expended by the Hartwigs to prepare the land for participation in the program. It is from this ruling that the Hartwigs have appealed.
The parties agree that the sole question presented for review is whether CRP payments constitute "rent" within the meaning of the "rents and profits" clause of a mortgage. If so, the payments inure to the benefit of the receiver; if not, they rightfully belong to the mortgagors. The parties also concede that this court has historically defined the term "rents and profits" very broadly:
The phrase "rents, issues and profits" as distinguished from the land itself refers to the products of the land, the annual rentals, the income derived therefrom, whether in money or in products. It has been said that "to cultivate and have the use of the lands is to receive the rents and profits." Where one by lease agrees to pay a certain sum for the right to cultivate and use the land, the sum so stipulated is rent, and represents the landlord's share in the issues and profits of the land, and where the lease provides for a share of the crop, the share of the crop represents the landlord's portion of the issues and profits derived from the use and cultivation of the land. Part of it may be paid in cash and part of it in crops or products. The word "profits" as used in the phrase "rents, issues and profits" is synonymous with "rents."
Equitable Life Ins. Co. of Iowa v. Brown, 220 Iowa 585, 590, 262 N.W. 124, 127 (1935) (citations omitted).
The Hartwigs attempt to get around this broad definition of rent by characterizing the CRP contract as a personal obligation running between the government and the producer independent of cultivation of the mortgaged land. We note that several bankruptcy courts used this rationale to hold that payments coming from an earlier government program known as PIK (Payment in Kind) are not rent. See Matter of Butz, 86 B.R. 595, 598 (S.D.Iowa 1988); In re Liebe, 41 B.R. 965, 970 (N.D.Iowa 1984); see also In re Waters, 90 B.R. 946, 969 (N.D.Iowa 1988) (distinguishing PIK from CRP on this ground); In re Ratliff, 79 B.R. 930, 932 (D.Colo.1987) (same). Under the PIK program, the government compensated qualified farmers for agreeing not to produce grain crops by giving them certificates redeemable for commodities in an amount calculated to represent the established yield on the acreage enrolled in the program. Characterizing these entitlements as "qualitatively different" from crops grown from the soil which are "intimately connected to the real estate," the court in Liebe, for example, held that PIK payments "should not be classified as rents or profits of the land." Liebe, 41 B.R. at 970.
The bankruptcy courts for the northern and southern districts of Iowa are split on the question of whether this same rationale should apply to CRP payments. In Matter of Butz, 86 B.R. at 598, the court for the southern district concluded that CRP contractslike PIK contractsare sufficiently "attenuated" from the land to disqualify them from classification as "rents and profits." Id. Reaching an opposite conclusion, the court for the northern district focused on the long-term nature of the contract, the required compliance with agricultural conservation practices, and the fact that the CRP legislation repeatedly refers to the compensation as "rental payments." In re Waters, 90 B.R. at 969-70.
On balance, we find the reasoning of Waters more persuasive. Unlike the one-year contracts for "PIK bushels earned," see Liebe, 41 B.R. at 970, the CRP contracts obligate the program participants (as *5 well as their successors and assigns) to engage in specified planting and soil conservation practices for ten years. Given this fact, we think the CRP contracts "run with the land," rather than exist independent from it. See Waters, 90 B.R. at 970. Likewise, because the contract requires diversion of the property to a specific use, other courts have concluded that the obligation created thereby is in the nature of a lease. In re Harvie, 84 B.R. 197, 199 (D.Colo.1988); In re Clark, 82 B.R. 131, 132-33 (D.Colo.1987); In re Ratliff, 79 B.R. at 932. But see In re Koerkenmeier, 107 B.R. 195, 197 (W.D.Mo.1989) (CRP contract not lease under Missouri law because it does not convey real property).
The characterization of CRP payments as rent is also supported by the repeated description of CRP compensation as "rental payments" in the legislation. See, e.g., 16 U.S.C. § 3832(a)(5)(A) (providing for forfeiture of "rental payments" upon violation of contract); 16 U.S.C. § 3834(a) and (b) (obligating Secretary of Agriculture to "annual rental payments" upon specified terms and conditions); 16 U.S.C. § 3834(f) (cataloging limitations on "rental payments"); see also Black's Law Dictionary 1166 (5th ed. 1979) (defining rent as "[c]onsideration paid for use or occupation of property").
Enrollment in the CRP clearly limits a farmer's use of land; compensation is provided by the government for that loss of use. Though the government does not assume physical control of the property, it effectively controls it by contract. In exchange, the farmer benefitsnot through profit generated by commercial productionbut through payments received for cultivation of approved vegetative cover designed to control erosion. In the words of the district court, "the CRP payments for non-use of the land are derived from use of the land." We conclude that the payment flowing from the CRP contract was properly characterized as rent by the district court. We affirm.
AFFIRMED.

=== CASE 2210484 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:53.738493+00 ===

241 Cal.App.2d 738 (1966)
PROGRESSIVE TRANSPORTATION COMPANY, Cross-complainant and Appellant,
v.
SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA GAS COMPANY et al., Cross-defendants and Respondents.
Civ. No. 29099.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Two.
Apr. 28, 1966.
Harold Q. Longenecker for Cross-complainant and Appellant. *739
Moss, Lyon & Dunn, Gerold C. Dunn and Henry F. Walker for Cross- defendants and Respondents.
ROTH, P. J.
Virginia Gray, Mollie Bentley and Virginia Pratt, the wife and daughters respectively of Charles Gray, decedent, filed suit against appellant Progressive Transportation Company (Progressive) for the wrongful death of decedent.
The complaint alleges: "... on or about November 7, 1961 ... [Progressive] so carelessly and negligently operated, maintained and controlled a certain crane, then and there under the direction of Martin Keefer, an agent of [Progressive] that the same did cause the collapse and destruction of certain sections of a gas tank holder upon which [decedent] was standing."
"That as a result of said collapse, [decedent] fell approximately 90 feet to the concrete."
"That as a result of said collapse, [decedent] was killed."
Progressive answered asserting no negligence on its part and denying generally and specifically all pertinent allegations. The answer set forth the following defenses: that decedent was contributorily negligent; that Martin Keefer, Progressive's employee was at the time of the accident, the special employee of Mesnick & Dean (Mesnick), the employer of decedent, and that Mesnick's negligence caused decedent's death; and that pursuant to Witt v. Jackson, 57 Cal.2d 57 [17 Cal.Rptr. 369, 366 P.2d 641], any recovery by respondents against Progressive should be offset pro tanto by the amount already paid to respondents by Mesnick under the Workmen's Compensation Law.
Concurrently with its answer, Progressive cross-complained in separate causes of action against the Southern California Gas Company (Gas Co.) and Mesnick, respectively,  [fn. 1] and *740 against both in a third cause of action sounding in declaratory relief.
The cross-complaint incorporated the answer and in substance alleged that the Gas Co. owned the gas tank holder and the property upon which it was situated and that Gas Co. knew the conditions on the job site were such as to create unreasonable risk of bodily harm and negligently failed to take any precautions to provide those working on or about the job site with a safe place to work. Further, that Gas Co. had contracted with Mesnick to do the work of demolition and that Mesnick rented a crane and an operator, one Keefer, from Progressive, for use in dismantling and demolishing the gas tank holder. It was alleged further that Mesnick with full control and supervision of the job, the crane it had rented from Progressive and Keefer, the operator on the crane, proceeded to demolish and dismantle the gas tank holder. Allegations followed to the effect that both Mesnick and Gas Co. negligently caused the death of decedent by failing to take proper precaution for the employees of Mesnick.
The primary thrust of the cross-complaint is for indemnity against both cross-defendants.
In Cahill Brothers, Inc. v. Clementina Co., 208 Cal.App.2d 367, at pp. 375-376 [25 Cal.Rptr. 301], Justice Molinari thoroughly reviewed and analyzed the law of implied indemnity as follows:
"The right to implied indemnity, while relatively recent in the law of California, is now well established [citations]. The distilled essence of these cases is that where each of two persons is made responsible by law to an injured party the one to whom the right of indemnity inures is entitled to shift the entire liability for the loss to the other party. Accordingly, a right of implied indemnification may arise as a result of contract or equitable considerations [citations]. It appears, at first blush, that the rationale of the cases which have considered the right of implied indemnity rests upon a difference between the primary and secondary liability of two persons *741 each of whom is made responsible by the law to an injured party. (Alisal Sanitary Dist. v. Kennedy, supra, 180 Cal.App.2d 69, 75 [4 Cal.Rptr. 379]; Pierce v. Turner, supra, 205 Cal.App.2d 264, 268 [23 Cal.Rptr. 115]; American Can Co. v. City & County of San Francisco, supra, 202 Cal.App.2d 520, 525 [21 Cal.Rptr. 33]; Builders Supply Co. v. McCabe, 366 Pa. 322, 325-326 [77 A.2d 368].) A closer scrutiny discloses, however, that where the right of implied indemnity rests upon a contractual relationship between the person seeking and the one resisting indemnity it is not necessary or appropriate to apply the theories of primary or secondary liability [citations]."
In the recent case of Goldman v. Ecco-Phoenix Electric Corp., 62 Cal.2d 40, the court says at page 44 [41 Cal.Rptr. 73, 396 P.2d 377]:
"In the area of implied indemnity one who 'personally participates in an affirmative act of negligence, or is physically connected with an act or omission by knowledge or acquiescence in it on his part, or fails to perform some duty in connection with the omission which he may have undertaken by virtue of his agreement' cannot obtain indemnification."
Gas Co.'s demurrer to the cross-complaint was sustained without leave to amend. Mesnick's demurrer was sustained and Progressive declined to amend. Judgments of dismissal were thereupon entered in favor of Gas Co. and Mesnick. Progressive appeals from each judgment.
[1] Progressive's action against the Gas Co. is not based on any contractual relationship. Progressive alleges in essence that it rented equipment to Mesnick which in turn had a contract with the Gas Co. to demolish the gas holder. Progressive's right of indemnity, if any, would necessarily rest on equitable considerations. The pleadings disclose no such equitable considerations. (See American Can Co. v. City & County of San Francisco, supra, at pp. 525-526.)
The original complaint is based solely on the negligence of Progressive's employee, Martin Keefer, in the operation of the crane. There is nothing to suggest that any negligence of the Gas Co. is imputed to Progressive. If Progressive's denial of negligence be true, or if Keefer was, as Progressive alleges, the special employee of Mesnick, then no liability would be incurred by Progressive and no indemnity would be necessary. If, however, Progressive is liable, it is because it is responsible for the negligence of Keefer. Gas Co. is at most a joint tortfeasor. *742 In either case, no cause of action for indemnity is stated against Gas Co.
Progressive relies on Horn & Barker, Inc. v. Macco Corp., 228 Cal.App.2d 96, 102 [39 Cal.Rptr. 320], and Vegetable Oil Products Co., Inc. v. Superior Court, 213 Cal.App.2d 252, 256 [28 Cal.Rptr. 555]. Those cases  [fn. 2] allow indemnity because of a breach of contractual duty. There is no such relationship with Gas Co. in the case at bench.
Herrero v. Atkinson, 227 Cal.App.2d 69 [38 Cal.Rptr. 490], cited by appellant, allowed a cross-complaint for equitable indemnity where cross-complainant's liability as the defendant in the main action was predicated solely on the rule of Ash v. Mortensen, 24 Cal.2d 654, 657 [150 P.2d 876]. Ash makes a defendant originally and primarily responsible for injuries to a plaintiff liable for the exacerbation of the injuries by the negligence of a physician to whom the plaintiff went for treatment. Ash states a unique rule of causation more analogous to imputed negligence than joint feasance. Under the facts of the Herrero case it was properly made the subject of implied indemnity. The case at bench, however, presents no facts or equitable consideration requiring the application of the Herrero decision to Gas Co.
The demurrer with respect to Gas Co. was properly sustained.
[2] Progressive's claims for implied indemnity against Mesnick arise from a contractual relationship for the use of the crane and its operator, Keefer. Indemnity in such cases is governed by Labor Code, section 3864. That section provides: "If an action as provided in this chapter  [fn. 3] prosecuted by the employee ... against the third person results in judgment against such third person, or settlement by such third person, the employer shall have no liability to reimburse or hold such third person harmless on such judgment or settlement in absence of a written agreement so to do executed prior to the injury." *743
[3] There is no agreement pleaded as required by section 3864.
Since September 18, 1959, the effective date of the section, the right of indemnity has been barred in the absence of a written agreement. (American Can Co. v. City & County of San Francisco, supra, 202 Cal.App.2d at p. 524.)
We need not decide whether Progressive can join Mesnick and Dean for the purpose of establishing its concurrent negligence and reducing any judgment awarded by the amount of workmen's compensation paid. (City of Sacramento v. Superior Court, 205 Cal.App.2d 398, 405 [23 Cal.Rptr. 43]; cf. Tate v. Superior Court, 213 Cal.App.2d 238, 247-248 [28 Cal.Rptr. 548].) By eliminating all direct allegations on this issue in its amended cross-complaint, by eliminating Mesnick and Dean's insurance carrier as a cross-defendant, and by concessions made in its brief on this appeal, Progressive has clearly indicated its desire to restrict its cause of action on the cross-complaint to implied indemnity.
Since we have concluded that no such cause of action has been or can be stated, the demurrer of Mesnick and Dean was properly sustained.
The order of dismissal is affirmed as to Southern California Gas Company, Rodney Dean, Jr., and Irving Mesnick, individually and as partners doing business as Mesnick & Dean Rigging and Salvage Company, and the Home Indemnity Company.
Herndon, J., and Fleming, J., concurred.
The original cross-complaint became the first amended cross-complaint and we deal here only with the first amended cross-complaint. The first amended cross-complaint named one Roy Latiolait, an employee of Gas Co. as a defendant; it omitted Home Indemnity Company, Mesnick's Workmen's Compensation insurance carrier, which had been named in the original cross- complaint as a defendant. Although the amended cross-complaint states nothing as against the Home Indemnity Company, it was a party to the order of dismissal. No appeal was taken from the judgment of dismissal against Latiolait. Neither Mesnick & Dean, a corporation, nor Latiolait are before this court.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. Mesnick and Dean as sued in the cross- complaint, comprised John Doe Mesnick and John Doe Dean individually and as partners doing business as Mesnick & Dean and Mesnick and Dean, a California corporation. The allegation is "... decedent, ... was a ... employee of [Mesnicks], individually and as partners doing business under the name of Mesnick and Dean, Mesnick and Dean, a corporation, ... and was acting in the course and scope of his ... employment." The order of dismissal from which the appeal was taken grants the dismissal under provisions of section 581, subdivision 3, of the Code of Civil Procedure "... as to ... Southern California Gas Company, ... Rodney Dean, Jr., and Irving Mesnick, individually and as partners doing business as 'Mesnick & Dean Rigging and Salvage Company', ...."
[fn. 2]  2. See also San Francisco Unified School Dist. v. California Bldg. etc. Co., 162 Cal.App.2d 434 [328 P.2d 785]; Montgomery Ward & Co. v. KPIX Westinghouse Broadcasting Co., 198 Cal.App.2d 759 [18 Cal.Rptr. 341]; Cahill Brothers, Inc. v. Clementina Co., 208 Cal.App.2d 367 [25 Cal.Rptr. 301].
[fn. 3]  3. Chapter 5 of division 4, part 1 of the Labor Code. Section 3852 of chapter 5, states in part: "The claim of an employee for [workmen's] compensation does not affect his claim or right of action for all damages proximately resulting from such injury or death against any person other than the employer." (Footnote added.)

=== CASE 9737444 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:25:23.303747+00 ===

Gribbs, P.J.
Defendant appeals as of right following entry of the parties’ judgment of divorce by the Oakland Circuit Court. We reverse in part and affirm in part.
In dividing marital assets, a court should seek a *153fair and equitable distribution. Hatcher v Hatcher, 129 Mich App 753; 343 NW2d 498 (1983). This Court is required to accept the trial court’s factual findings unless those findings are clearly erroneous. Beason v Beason, 435 Mich 791, 803; 460 NW2d 207 (1990). "Thus, if the trial court’s account of the evidence is plausible in light of the record viewed in its entirety, the Court of Appeals may not reverse.” Id.
The trial court has great discretion in the adjustment of property rights upon divorce. The objective in arriving at a property settlement is to reach a fair and equitable division in light of all the circumstances. Bone v Bone, 148 Mich App 834, 838; 385 NW2d 706 (1986). There are no set mathematical formulas governing a division of property. The division does not have to be equal, but it must not be inequitable. Id. With these principles in mind, we find that the trial court incorrectly denied defendant an interest in the $7,900 capital improvements on the property owned by plaintiff.
The trial court in this case denied defendant’s claim on two grounds: because the improvements were made prior to plaintiffs becoming part owner of the property and because defendant did not present expert testimony on the value of the improvements. We believe both of these reasons were incorrect. Although plaintiff did not actually obtain title to the property until after completion of the improvements, both parties admitted that, at the time the improvements were made, they knew that plaintiff and her sister would eventually be given title to the property. Moreover, since the parties stipulated that the value of the improvements was $7,900, the trial court should have accepted the parties’ stipulation. In re Jarrell, 172 Mich App 122, 123-124; 431 NW2d 426 (1988).
*154It is true, as plaintiff argues, that defendant lived on the property rent-free during the marriage. However, plaintiff, who did not yet own the property, also lived there rent-free. We do not believe it is equitable for plaintiff to gain the full benefit of the improvements made during the marriage to property that was ultimately deeded to plaintiff and her sister. Accordingly, we reverse the trial court’s ruling on this issue and award defendant one-half the stipulated value of the improvements, $3,950.
Defendant also challenges the trial court’s failure to award defendant any interest in plaintiff’s law degree, earned during the marriage. The trial court ruled that defendant was not entitled to any interest in plaintiff’s degree because no expert testimony had been presented concerning the degree’s value. Furthermore, the trial court noted that equitable considerations did not entitle either party to alimony since the marriage lasted less than five years and since both parties had advanced degrees and both earned substantial incomes. It appears from the unrebutted evidence that defendant paid at least seventy percent of the parties’ living expenses while plaintiff was in law school and that, at the time of the divorce, plaintiff’s annual salary exceeded defendant’s by approximately $14,000.
An advanced degree has been held to be a marital asset, to be distributed as property. Woodworth v Woodworth, 126 Mich App 258; 337 NW2d 332 (1983), lv den 419 Mich 856 (1984). Subsequent decisions have held that an advanced degree is not necessarily a marital asset, but should be considered as a factor in awarding alimony. Daniels v Daniels, 165 Mich App 726, 731; 418 NW2d 924 (1988); Wilkins v Wilkins, 149 Mich App 779, 789-790; 386 NW2d 677 (1986); Olah v Olah, 135 Mich *155App 404; 354 NW2d 359 (1984). Fairness dictates that the spouse who did not earn an advanced degree be compensated whenever the advanced degree is the end product of a concerted family effort involving mutual sacrifice and effort by both spouses. Woodworth, supra at 261. Accord: Thomas v Thomas (After Remand), 164 Mich App 618, 623; 417 NW2d 563 (1987); Lewis v Lewis, 181 Mich App 1; 448 NW2d 735 (1989).
We are convinced that the trial court erred. It is uncontroverted that defendant provided most of the parties’ support while plaintiff was in law school, and we believe he is entitled to a share of the earnings made possible by her degree. Defendant contends on appeal that he is entitled to $7,000, one-half of the amount plaintiff’s salary exceeded his in 1988. However, the record reveals that he only requested $5,000 below and we believe that amount is equitable.
As to the division of the parties’ personal property, we have reviewed the record and conclude that the trial court’s view of the evidence is plausible. Accordingly, reversal is not permitted. Beason, supra at 805. The record does not support defendant’s claim that the parties agreed to a lower value for the ibm computer or agreed that the plaintiff would pay defendant a $5,632 differential. Defendant did not dispute plaintiff’s $4,500 valuation of the ibm computer at trial and cannot now complain merely because the trial court awarded the computer to him.
Lastly, the trial court did not abuse its discretion in not allowing defendant to submit proofs inconsistent with facts contained in the pretrial order, as he never moved to set aside that order and stated at trial that he did not dispute any facts therein.
We direct the trial court to amend the judgment *156of divorce to reflect the award to defendant of one-half the stipulated value of the capital improvements, i.e. $3,950, and the award of $5,000 alimony. One-third of the total $8,950 award shall be payable twenty-eight days from release of this opinion. The remainder shall be payable over the next two years with interest computed following Thomas v Thomas (On Remand), 176 Mich App 90; 439 NW2d 270 (1989).
Affirmed in part, reversed in part, and remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. We do not retain jurisdiction.
Shepherd, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9737445 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:25:23.307503+00 ===

Michael J. Kelly, J.
(concurring in part and dissenting in part). I concur with the majority except as to the award of alimony for an equitable interest in plaintiff’s law degree.
This is a close question; and, the amount being minimal, I. would have had no problem affirming such an award if the trial court had awarded alimony to defendant for his efforts in support of plaintiff’s earning her professional degree. However, I do not find error on this record because it is too close to call.
Even assuming some value to the law degree, we have no evidentiary support or testimony which compares that degree to the advanced degree obtained by the defendant husband during the relatively coextensive period. By his own admission, defendant contributed no direct financial support for the degree which was financed by the plaintiff through student loans and summer employment. Also we have no evidence pertaining to the parties’ respective nonmonetary contributions to the family well-being. I am not convinced I would have *157reached a different result. Perrin v Perrin, 169 Mich App 18; 425 NW2d 494 (1988). Also, the trial court’s account of the evidence in this regard is plausible and we should therefore be guided by Beason v Beason, 435 Mich 791; 460 NW2d 207 (1990).
I concur in the award to defendant of one-half the value of the real estate improvements, $3,950, but dissent as to the alimony award.

=== CASE 9737446 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:25:26.162111+00 ===

*725POPOVICH, Chief Justice.
This case rises from an action for damages for injuries suffered by plaintiffs Lawrence and Bonita Schweich after Lawrence Schweich fell while attempting to mount a D6H Caterpillar tractor. Seeking compensatory and loss of consortium damages, Schweichs commenced a products liability action in Scott County District Court against the sellers, defendant/appellant Ziegler, Inc. (Ziegler) and defendant Gibbs-Cook, Inc. (Gibbs-Cook), and the manufacturer, defendant Caterpillar, Inc. (Caterpillar). The trial court found Ziegler was negligent and breached express and implied warranties. On appeal are issues regarding (a) the demand for a jury trial, (b) sufficiency of the evidence, (c) “newly discovered” evidence of the injured plaintiffs physical abilities, (d) constitutionality of Minn.Stat. § 549.23 (1988), and (e) the allocation of the tort recovery award between the injured plaintiff and the subrogated employer. We affirm in part and reverse in part, remanding for the allocation under Minn.Stat. § 176.061, subd. 6 (1990).
I.
At approximately 6:15 a.m. on May 29, 1987, Lawrence Schweich was seriously injured when he fell while ascending a new Caterpillar D6H tractor. The fall was caused when the rear bolt of the grab handle used by Schweich came loose, causing Schweich to fall backwards to the ground. Lawrence Schweich was employed by Lawrence Schweich Home Builders, Inc. (LSHB), a corporation engaged in the excavation and home construction business. Schweich recalls ascending the D6H tractor, but remembers nothing of his fall or its cause.
The D6H tractor was manufactured by Caterpillar at its Davenport plant in 1987. The D6H is a bulldozer-type machine operating on movable tracks. The cab of the D6H is accessible from either side through two doors. The D6H has grab handles attached to a fender located above the machine’s tracks. The grab handle, which is roughly one foot wide, is secured to the fender by two bolts and washers. The offending grab handle was located on the right side of the D6H.
Before it was sold to LSHB, the D6H was shipped by Caterpillar to Las Vegas for exhibition. Caterpillar employees prepared the D6H for display, using and viewing the right grab handle. The D6H returned following the exhibition in April of 1987 to Gibbs-Cook in Des Moines. Between April 10 and May 27, 1987, Gibbs-Cook installed different tracks, a bulldozer attachment, heavy-duty batteries, and performed touch-up painting. On May 27, 1987, Gibbs-Cook delivered the D6H to Ziegler in Bloomington, Minnesota for sale to LSHB.
Several Ziegler employees inspected and examined the D6H upon arrival on May 27, 1987. None of the employees observed a loose right fender grab handle. The day foreman, Steve Geiser, ordered touch-up painting to be done on the trunnion areas, an area roughly equivalent to the hubcap area on a car. A final inspection of the D6H was performed between 4:00 and 5:30 p.m. on May 27th. This inspection required use of the right grab handle at least four times, and Ziegler employee Tim Cebulla testified the grab handle was tight when he performed the final inspection. There was no evidence of anyone having contact with the D6H after the final inspection until the following afternoon when LSHB employee Jamie Hennen picked up the D6H. Furthermore, there is no evidence of anyone having contact with the right grab handle after the final inspection until the handle came loose in Schweich’s hands. Expert testimony revealed the rear grab handle bolt had, at one time, been properly torqued. Dr. Stuart Ross, a metallurgist, testified the grab handle had been repainted while the bolts were loose, and it was his opinion that the bolt loosened during transportation. Ross also testified the repainting could have occurred either before or after the accident.
Around 3:30 p.m. on May 28, 1987, Jamie Hennen, an employee of LSHB, picked up *726the D6H from the Ziegler dealership and delivered it to LSHB in Prior Lake, Minnesota. When he arrived at LSHB, Jamie Hennen unloaded the D6H and drove it approximately 25 feet. Subsequently, Jamie’s cousin, Victor Hennen, moved the D6H approximately 75 feet to the fuel tanks. Both men examined the tractor, checking fluid levels and untaping the exhaust stack. Although they both mounted and operated the D6H tractor at least twice, neither Jamie or Victor Hennen did so by way of the right side of the tractor. The D6H remained parked in the yard at LSHB until the next morning, May 29, 1987, when Lawrence Sehweich directed the loading of the D6H onto a low-boy trailer. Victor Hennen operated the D6H as Lawrence Sehweich directed the placement of the tractor from the ground. Lawrence Sehweich then approached, ascending the right side of the D6H as it sat on the trailer. As Sehweich grasped the right fender grab handle, the rear bolt of the handle came free, causing Lawrence Sehweich to fall backwards. Victor Hen-nen witnessed Lawrence Sehweich approach the right side of the tractor and heard Sehweich shout as he fell backwards. Emergency personnel arriving on the scene observed the grab handle dangling from one bolt. The other grab handle bolt was found resting on the tractor tread.
Lawrence Sehweich was hospitalized for eight days following his fall. Dr. John Berg, Schweich’s regular physician, did not notice any memory or concentration difficulties in fourteen post-accident visits until December of 1987, when Sehweich complained of memory and concentration problems. Experts diagnosed Lawrence Sehweich as suffering from an organic brain injury, a torn right rotator cuff, and deep vein thrombophlebitis resulting from the fall. Testimony regarding Schweich’s condition revealed he suffered from a litany of injuries and medical problems, including serious carbon monoxide poisoning nine months before the fall. Describing Lawrence Sehweich as “an encyclopedia of medical problems,” defendants’ experts disputed claims of brain injury, contending Sehweich was not permanently disabled, that his problems were psychological and caused by carbon monoxide poisoning, not by the fall. Lawrence Sehweich had been listed as partially or totally disabled a number of times on insurance forms.
In February of 1988, Lawrence and Bonita Sehweich sued Caterpillar, Gibbs-Cook and Ziegler alleging strict liability and negligence in design, manufacture, maintenance, and inspection as well as breach of implied and express warranties. The Schweichs claimed Lawrence Sehweich suffered an organic brain injury from the fall and is permanently disabled. In October of 1988, Schweichs filed a note of issue demanding a court trial. The Scott County Court Administrator mailed a trial notice, designating a court trial, and pre-trial questionnaires to each of the parties in December of 1988. Caterpillar, Gibbs-Cook and Ziegler returned their pre-trial questionnaires marked with the “Jury Trial” designation. None, however, filed a note of issue. Just prior to trial, Minnesota Assigned Risk Plan (MARP) intervened, asserting a subrogation interest for workers’ compensation benefits paid to Lawrence Sehweich on behalf of LSHB.
When the case was called for trial on June 20,1989, Ziegler, Gibbs-Cook and Caterpillar demanded a jury trial. Counsel for the Schweichs had anticipated this demand, arriving that morning with a memorandum of law on the issue. The trial court ruled the demand for a jury trial was untimely under Minn.Stat. § 487.23, subd. 3 (1990), and proceeded to try the case. After a lengthy trial with considerable evidence concerning the cause of the accident and the extent of injuries suffered, the trial court found the grab handle loosened during repainting performed by Ziegler and that Ziegler alone was negligent. The trial court awarded Lawrence Sehweich damages of $2,945,056.30 for past and future suffering, lost income, and medical expenses. Bonita Sehweich was awarded damages of $680,200.00 for lost consortium.
In its motion for new trial, Ziegler offered videotaped post-trial surveillance of Lawrence Sehweich as “newly discovered *727evidence.” The videotapes show Lawrence Schweich walking, purchasing a car, visiting an auction, attending the Courage Center, and driving his pickup truck. The Schweichs also brought a post-trial motion, seeking a declaration that Minn.Stat. § 549.23 (1988), the statutory cap on loss of consortium damages, violates the “certain remedy” guaranteed by the Minnesota Constitution. Rejecting the videotapes as merely impeaching and cumulative, the trial court declared the damages cap violative of Minn.Const. art. 1, § 8, and entered judgment against Ziegler. The trial court dismissed Schweichs' actions against Gibbs-Cook and Caterpillar, taxing costs and disbursements jointly against Schweichs and MARP.
Ziegler filed a notice of appeal with the court of appeals in November of 1989. Schweich also filed a notice of review, seeking the review of other issues. After accepting certification, this court dismissed Schweichs’ notice of review in February of 1990. An immediate appeal followed, and in March of 1990 certification of Schweichs’ appeal was granted and the appeals were consolidated.
II.
The right to a jury trial is preserved not only in our state constitution, but also under the Rules of Civil Procedure. Minn. Const, art. 1, § 4; Minn.R.Civ.P. 38.01. Ziegler argues the trial court committed reversible error by denying Ziegler’s request for a jury trial. Applying section 487.23, subd. 3 1, the trial court ruled Ziegler effectively waived a jury trial by failing to file a jury note of. issue within 10 days of receiving Schweichs’ note of issue. Although section 487.23, subd. 3, was never formally adopted or published as the rule in the First Judicial District, the trial court ruled this statutory rule of county court practice applied to district court actions in the First Judicial District. The statute, however, does not apply.
Before reorganization, both the county and district courts were permitted by statute to adopt rules governing practice in their respective courts. See Minn. Stat. §§ 480.055, 484.33, 487.23, subd. 2 (1990). The powers, duties, and jurisdiction of the county courts were transferred, by statute, to the district courts upon reorganization of the trial courts. Minn.Stat. § 487.191 (1990). This included the authority to adopt rules governing practice. See Minn.Stat. §§ 480.055, 484.33. The trial court reasoned that conferring the county court powers on the district court preserved, with equal effect and utility, the county court rules set forth in chapter 487. Section 487.191, however, granted the district court nothing more than what it already possessed; namely, the power to adopt rules of practice. The conferring statute states, in relevant part:
[TJhere shall be one general trial court of the judicial district to be known as the district court, * * *.
Upon the effective date of a judicial district reorganization, the district court * * * shall also exercise the powers, duties, and jurisdiction conferred upon courts by this chapter and chapters 260, 484, 491, 492, 493, and 525.
Minn.Stat. § 487.191 (1990). The establishment of “one general trial court” leaves nothing upon which the county court rule of section 487.23 could operate. To construe these statutes as suggested by the trial court leads to the anomalous result of a unified district court applying statutory rules of a nonexistent court. While statutes governing court rules have been rec*728ognized as a matter of comity, see Pirsig & Tietjen, Court Procedure and the Separation of Powers in Minnesota, 15 Wm. Mitchell L.Rev. 141, 182 (1989), the trial court cannot elevate a county court rule over the district court’s own applicable rule. Apart from a specific calendar policy, the First Judicial District has no written rule governing the waiver of a jury trial. See First Judicial District Special Rules. The trial court even acknowledged this on the record. We will not reverse a correct decision simply because it is founded on incorrect reasons. Kahn v. State, 289 N.W.2d 737, 745 (Minn.1980). Although the county court rule in section 487.23, subd. 3 does not apply, a jury trial was not warranted because one was not properly demanded.
Unlike the federal practice of limiting the time for demanding a jury trial, Minnesota has no specific deadline for demanding a jury trial. See Fed.R.Civ.P. 38(b), (d) (jury trial waived unless demand is made within 10 days after last pleading directed to issue triable by jury). The lack of a deadline does not diminish a party’s responsibility for making demand for a jury trial if one is desired. Morton Brick & Tile Co. v. Sodergren, 130 Minn. 252, 255, 153 N.W. 527, 528 (1915). The failure to timely demand a jury has always constituted a waiver of the right to a jury trial. See Parsons Electric Co. v. Village of Watertown, 283 Minn. 505, 509-10, 169 N.W.2d 20, 22-23 (1969) (demand not raised until post-trial motions); Pearson v. Bertelson, 249 Minn. 218, 223, 82 N.W.2d 66, 70 (1957) (demand not raised until second time on appeal); Karlstad State Bank v. Fritsche, 374 N.W.2d 177, 183 (Minn.App. 1985) (demand for jury trial during closing argument was too late); March v. West Mall Partnership, 367 N.W.2d 565, 567 (Minn.App.1985) (party never demanded jury trial at trial level); see also 2 D. Herr & R. Haydock, Minnesota Practice, § 38.10 at 75 (2d ed. 1985 & Supp.1990). The failure to demand a jury trial is an unequivocal act from which the waiver is a necessary inference. See Hasey v. McMullen, 109 Minn. 332, 337, 123 N.W. 1078, 1079 (1909); Poppitz v. German Insurance Co., 85 Minn. 118, 120, 88 N.W. 438, 439 (1901). In only one instance has this court held a demand made the day of trial to be a seasonable demand for jury trial. See Williams v. Howes, 137 Minn. 462, 463, 162 N.W. 1049 (1917). In Williams, the pro se plaintiff persistently voiced demand for jury trial since commencing the suit. Id. at 463-64, 162 N.W. at 1049. No waiver is established when a party’s demands are contradictory, see Weber Electric Co. v. Tuminelly, Inc., 296 Minn. 488, 489, 206 N.W.2d 656, 657 (1973) (party filed notes of issue demanding court and jury trial), or when venue is designated erroneously in the note of issue. See Peterson v. Steinmaus, 393 N.W.2d 693, 694 (Minn.App.1986).
The circumstances of the present case confirm that Ziegler waived the right to a jury trial by failing to properly demand one. Schweichs’ note of issue as well as the trial notice explicitly indicated the matter was set for court trial. In the face of these notices, Ziegler went no further to secure a jury trial than to simply mark the “jury trial” designation on the pretrial questionnaire. According to counsel, the matter of a jury trial was never mentioned again until the morning of trial. Unlike the plaintiff in Williams, Ziegler did not persistently demand a jury from the outset of the case. Ziegler argues, however, it reasonably believed the assertion of a jury trial on the pretrial questionnaire constituted a demand for a jury trial because the questionnaire must be completed by the parties and because Ziegler served the questionnaire on opposing counsel. This argument is meritless. Ziegler cites no authority for construing the pretrial questionnaire as the substantial equivalent of a demand for jury trial or a note of issue.2 *729The pretrial questionnaire is obviously part of the case management system in the First Judicial District. It gives the trial court an overview of the entire case by requesting information on venue, the factual and legal issues involved, applicable statues, exhibits, witnesses, whether the trial is by court or jury, and an estimated length of trial. Once completed, the questionnaire must be returned to the trial court and need not be served on opposing counsel. To construe the pretrial questionnaire as a formal demand for jury trial would enlarge the questionnaire beyond its intended purpose. It does not give formal notice to opposing counsel or, more importantly, to the trial court that a jury trial is sought. See Minn.R.Civ.P. 38.03 (party desiring to have action placed on the calendar shall prepare a note of issue). Even if the questionnaire was a demand for a jury, Ziegler can hardly expect a jury trial when it never tendered the requisite jury fee. This alone amounts to a waiver of the right to a jury trial. Rollins v. Nolting, 53 Minn. 232, 234, 54 N.W. 1118, 1119 (1893). Under these circumstances, Ziegler waived the right to jury trial by failing to demand one and failing to pay the requisite jury fee.
III.
Both Ziegler and the Schweichs challenge the sufficiency of the evidence regarding the trial court’s findings on negligence, breach of warranty and strict liability. The scope of review in a case tried by the court without a jury is limited to determining whether the court’s findings are clearly erroneous and whether it erred in its conclusions of law. Reserve Mining Co. v. State, 310 N.W.2d 487, 490 (Minn.1981). The question of negligence is for the trier of fact to determine and its verdict should not be disturbed unless there is no evidence which reasonably supports the verdict or it is manifestly contrary to the evidence. See Smith v. Carriere, 316 N.W.2d 574, 575 (Minn.1982) (jury trial).
A. Findings Regarding Ziegler’s Negligence.
Ziegler argues the evidence does not support the trial court’s finding of a negligent inspection. Specifically, Ziegler claims it had no duty to inspect the D6H and the findings demonstrate the trial court demanded Ziegler disprove its liability through the application of the res ipsa loquitur doctrine. The trial court denied it applied that doctrine. It said the evidence points to the “inescapable conclusion” that Ziegler was responsible for the loosened grab handle and failed to make a proper inspection before the D6H left Ziegler’s possession.
The basic elements for negligence claim are (1) duty; (2) breach of that duty; (3) that the breach of duty be the proximate cause of plaintiff’s injury; and (4) that plaintiff did in fact suffer injury. Hudson v. Snyder Body, Inc., 326 N.W.2d 149, 157 (Minn.1982). Where the evidence is such that a trier of fact can do no more than guess or conjecture as to which of several acts was in fact the efficient cause, the plaintiff has failed to prove that the defendant’s breach caused the injury. See Nelson v. Wilkins Dodge, Inc., 256 N.W.2d 472, 475-76 (Minn.1977).
The trial court found Ziegler negligent in failing to perform an adequate inspection before the D6H left its possession. Based on the evidence, the trial court reasoned: (a) the grab handle was tight when the D6H arrived before touch up painting was ordered, (b) the grab handle was tight on final inspection before repainting and no one inspected or tampered with the grab handle until the accident and, therefore, (c) any loosening of the grab handle bolts must have occurred during the post-inspection painting. Although this reasoning infers the existence of causal facts for which there is no direct evidence, the evidence shows the grab handle was tight when the D6H arrived at Ziegler but was loose shortly after leaving Ziegler. “ ‘Circumstantial evidence which justifies an inference in support of the verdict upon the issue of negligence is adequate to sustain the verdict, even though it may justify other conflicting inferences, if the supporting inference reasonably outweighs and preponderates over the other conflicting inferences *730and theories.’ ” Smith v. Kahler Corp., Inc., 297 Minn. 272, 276, 211 N.W.2d 146, 150 (1973) (quoting Knuth v. Murphy, 237 Minn. 225, 230, 54 N.W.2d 771, 775 (1952)). The circumstantial evidence must be more than simply consistent with the plaintiffs theory of causation; reasonable minds must be able to conclude from the circumstances that the theory adopted outweighs and preponderates over opposing theories. Smock v. Mankato Elks Club, 203 Minn. 265, 266, 280 N.W. 851, 852 (1938). The circumstantial evidence here supports inferring Ziegler’s liability for creating the defect; an inference outweighing and preponderating over other theories of causation.
The evidence shows Ziegler employees had the last contact with the right grab handle before the accident. Steve Geiser, shop foreman, testified he ordered touch up painting of the trunnion areas. The evidence does not indicate when Geiser ordered repainting, when painting was completed or who did the actual work. The grab handle, however, did evidence repainting that must have occurred when the bolts were loose. The inability to determine when the additional paint was applied to the grab handle does not diminish the probative value of the repainting. The trial court found the grab handle was tight, not only when the D6H arrived at Ziegler’s premises on May 27th, but also when it was inspected later that day. No additional inspection was performed after the touch-up painting was completed. The evidence did not support finding the grab handle bolt loosened during shipping. Furthermore, as the trial court found, it is highly unlikely a single grab handle bolt would be the target of vandalism. In light of this evidence and the trial court’s superior capacity to adjudge the credibility of the witnesses, the evidence is sufficient to sustain the trial court’s findings of negligence by Ziegler.
B. Findings Regarding Gibbs-Cook and Caterpillar.
Schweichs claim the evidence supports finding Gibbs-Cook and Caterpillar liable for negligence, breach of warranty, and strict liability. In the absence of a motion for a new trial against Gibbs-Cook or Caterpillar, appellate review is limited to examining whether the evidence supports the findings of fact and whether those findings support the conclusions of law. Gruenhagen v. Larson, 310 Minn. 454, 458, 246 N.W.2d 565, 569 (1976).
The evidence supports the trial court’s finding that neither Gibbs-Cook nor Caterpillar was negligent. The evidence shows and the trial court found the grab handle was tight and secure when the D6H tractor left the possession of both Caterpillar and Gibbs-Cook. Nine individuals, many of whom were trained mechanics who worked on the D6H tractor before it reached Ziegler, testified that they never observed or noticed a loose bolt or grab handle while the D6H was in possession of either Caterpillar or Gibbs-Cook. The Schweichs also claim Caterpillar’s warning in the D6H owner’s manual was inadequate. While the trial court found that the instruction manual could have been written better, this was inconsequential given Lawrence Schweich’s noted familiarity with the instructions contained in the manual.
The trial court properly rejected Schweichs’ argument of an agency relationship between Caterpillar, Gibbs-Cook and Ziegler. The trial court found Caterpillar had no right to control the manner of performance of Gibbs-Cook or Ziegler, and did not otherwise hold out Gibbs-Cook or Ziegler as its agents, notwithstanding use of the Caterpillar name for promotional purposes and supply of forms to its dealers to record modifications and repairs. Nothing in the record indicates Caterpillar enjoyed any right to control the operations or performance of Gibbs-Cook or Ziegler. See Guhlke v. Roberts Truck Lines, 268 Minn. 141, 143, 128 N.W.2d 324, 326 (1964).
Schweichs also maintain the evidence supports finding that both Caterpillar and Gibbs-Cook breached warranties and are strictly liable. To prevail on a warranty claim the plaintiff must prove the existence of a warranty, a breach, and a causal link between the breach and the alleged harm. See Peterson v. Bendix Home Systems, Inc., 318 N.W.2d 50, 52-53 *731(1982). Although all three defendants were found to have made express and implied warranties, only Ziegler breached its warranty. Because the trial court found the grab handle was tight when it left Caterpillar and Gibbs-Cook, and Schweich does not dispute this finding, there is neither a breach of warranty or a causal connection.
Similarly, Schweichs’ claims of strict liability also fail. Schweichs contend Gibbs-Cook is strictly liable under Minn. Stat. § 544.41, subd. 3 (1990) because Gibbs-Cook replaced the machine’s tracks, adding a ripper attachment, and installed other minor equipment on the D6H. Regardless of whether these modifications amounted to an exercise of significant control over the manufacture of the D6H under Minn.Stat. § 544.41, subd. 3 (1990), there was no defective condition in the D6H when it reached or left Gibbs-Cook's possession. Furthermore, the trial court found these modifications did not create the defect causing injury. See Stewart v. Ford Motor Co., 553 F.2d 130, 137 (D.C.Cir.1977).
Likewise, the evidence supports the trial court’s findings that Caterpillar’s use of a bolted grab handle design was safer than the alternatives suggested by the Schweichs. Thomas Crane, a consulting engineer experienced in fastener joint design, and William J. Lux, a mechanical engineer, each testified the grab handle bolt attachment used by Caterpillar was preferable to welding or self-taping screws because the location of the grab handle would subject it to possible damage. A welded joint would not provide serviceability or give visible indication of impending failure. Caterpillar is duty bound to use reasonable care in designing the D6H to protect users from unreasonable risk of harm while using it in a foreseeable manner. See Holm v. Sponco Mfg., Inc., 324 N.W.2d 207, 212-13 (Minn.1982). The evidence adduced shows the bolt method attachment was a reasonable choice in designing the D6H machine.
IV.
Ziegler urges a new trial should be granted based on newly discovered evidence of Lawrence Schweich’s physical abilities. It claims the covert surveillance videotapes are conclusive proof, revealing Lawrence Schweich to be a markedly different and able person with injuries much less extreme than found by the trial court. Whether to grant a new trial for newly discovered evidence is a decision committed to the trial court’s discretion. Hertz v. Hertz, 304 Minn. 144, 146, 229 N.W.2d 42, 44 (1975). Newly discovered evidence which is cumulative, impeaching or contradictory does not warrant a new trial. See, e.g., Swanson v. Williams, 303 Minn. 433, 435-36, 228 N.W.2d 860, 862 (1975); see also Minder v. Peterson, 254 Minn. 82, 91-92, 93 N.W.2d 699, 706-07 (1958) (post-trial affidavit stating truck driver admitted to affiant that brakes were defective held merely cumulative, contradictory, and impeaching).
Ziegler’s case-in-chief presented the testimony of neurologists, psychologists, and orthopedic surgeons, suggesting that Lawrence Schweich was not so severely injured, that his abilities were far greater than he testified, and that his infirmities were attributable to carbon monoxide poisoning, not the fall. The videotapes, Ziegler urges, “demonstrably prove[] that Schweich is capable of walking, talking, driving, and socializing with strangers for long periods of time.” Ziegler relies on Cofran v. Swanman, 225 Minn. 40, 29 N.W.2d 448 (1947), claiming that facts proven by demonstration, as in the videotape, control over contrary witness testimony. This case is inapposite, and the argument misconceives the case heard by the trial court.
In Cofran, the weight of physical evidence regarding the cause of the accident not only contradicted witness testimony, but it eliminated any possibility of the accident occurring as the witnesses had testified. 225 Minn, at 47, 29 N.W.2d at 452. The physical evidence offered by Ziegler does not pertain to how the accident happened, rather it seeks to directly impugn *732witness testimony supporting the verdict. Ziegler’s post-trial videotapes, for the most part, accord with this testimony and Ziegler’s overall trial theory that Lawrence Schweich’s injuries were more psychological than physical, and that he would improve after the trial ended. Moreover, the videotapes show nothing contrary to the trial testimony of Lawrence Schweich or the expert witnesses.
At issue here was not merely whether Lawrence Schweich could walk, talk or drive a motor vehicle. Schweichs offered testimony from a battery of experts that Lawrence Schweich is permanently disabled by an organic brain injury suffered in the fall. Experts also testified that Lawrence Schweich would mask his inabilities, making diagnosis and treatment difficult. Lawrence Schweich testified he was afraid to drive for fear of getting lost. He also testified that “climbing isn’t bad now” and he uses his right leg first when he does climb on machinery. The videotapes show Schweich performing various activities: walking dogs, inspecting equipment alone at an auction, purchasing a car, performing minor work on the car, walking 4/ioths mile, driving alone, and speaking with various people. Ziegler emphasizes the videotapes show Schweich’s ability to interact with others as well as perform various activities. That he was able to do these activities does not, however, mean the activities were performed without pain or fear. The videotapes show Lawrence Schweich was taciturn at the auction, spending most of his time alone, speaking hesitantly with Ziegler’s investigators, climbing, left leg first, into the rear of his pickup truck. Ziegler’s own affiants described Lawrence Schweich as being “distant” and “nervous.”
Newly discovered evidence does not warrant a new trial unless the evidence is of the quality and caliber that it would likely produce a different result at trial. Viske v. Flaby, 316 N.W.2d 276, 284 (Minn. 1982). Ziegler claims the present case is similar to Disch v. Helary, Inc., 382 N.W.2d 916 (Minn.App.1986), where the court of appeals found the “newly discovered” evidence was not only impeaching, but implicated a conspiracy to commit perjury. Ziegler argues a new trial is warranted here because “the trial court’s decision was based largely on the acceptance of Schweich as a credible witness” and there was “a concerted effort to misrepresent or overstate the facts.” This case does not present circumstances similar to those in Disch, where there was every indication the witnesses, under threat of termination of employment, perjured themselves. Not only do the witnesses here lack a collective, exploitable element, but witnesses beyond the Schweich family described tests, treatment, and the prognosis for Lawrence Schweich corroborating Schweich’s own testimony of his limited capacities. The medical evidence, both physical and psychiatric, was thoroughly developed and presented to the trial court. Ziegler’s “newly discovered” evidence falls under the rubric of cumulative, impeaching and contradictory evidence that would not likely produce a different result at trial. See Great American Indemnity Co. v. Brown, 307 F.2d 306, 309 (5th Cir.1962) (post-trial movie of plaintiff performing work did not establish basis for new trial); Reggio v. Louisiana Gas Service Co., 333 So.2d 394, 395 (La.App.) (post-trial photographs relating to extent of disability did not warrant new trial), cert. denied 330 So.2d 320 (La.1976).
V.
The trial court declared section 549.23 denied due process under Minn. Const, art. 1, § 8, the “certain remedy” clause, to persons with loss of consortium claims exceeding the statutory damage cap.3 Enacted as part of the Tort Reform *733Act of 1986, section 549.23 limits the recovery of intangible losses to $400,000. See Act of March 25, 1986, ch. 455, § 88, 1986 Minn.Laws 840, 883-84. The constitutionality of this statute is presumed. See Hickman v. Group Health Plan, Inc., 396 N.W.2d 10, 13 (Minn.1986). The party challenging a statute on constitutional grounds must show a constitutional violation beyond a reasonable doubt. Snyder v. City of Minneapolis, 441 N.W.2d 781, 788 (Minn.1989).
Article 1, section 8 of the Minnesota Constitution proclaims:
Every person is entitled to a certain remedy in the laws for all injuries or wrongs which he may receive to his person, property or character, and to obtain justice freely and without purchase, completely and without denial, promptly and without delay, conformable to the laws.
Minn. Const. art. 1, § 8. Although early interpretations viewed this clause as a fundamental right of the citizenry, see, e.g., Davis v. Pierse, 7 Minn. 13, 17-18 (Gil. 1, 5) (1862); Agin v. Heyward, 6 Minn. 110, 115 (Gil. 53, 59) (1861), this court has held the clause allows abrogation of common-law rights when replaced by a reasonable substitute, see Breimhorst v. Beckman, 227 Minn. 409, 435-36, 35 N.W.2d 719, 735-36 (1949), or when the legislature pursues a permissible legislative objective. Haney v. International Harvester Co., 294 Minn. 375, 385, 201 N.W.2d 140, 146 (1972).4
In support of declaring the statute unconstitutional, the trial court remarked that the damages cap did not pursue the legislative objective of reducing insurance rates. The trial court noted that (1) the damages cap denies significantly aggrieved claimants equal protection under the law, (2) the damages cap applies to all civil actions, thereby negating the stated purpose of reducing insurance rates, (3) the damage cap applies on a per plaintiff, not per defendant, basis and is thereby inconsistent with the purpose of reducing insurance rates, and (4) the damage cap is unreasonably and arbitrarily low. These points appear to question the wisdom of section 549.23 more than its constitutionality. Ziegler asserts the damages cap is constitutional because it is rationally related to achieving the legitimate governmental purpose of reducing unpredictable damage awards and insurance costs — purposes similar to those advanced by limits on state tort liability and discounting of future damages. Schweichs argue case law does not establish that damage limitations against non-governmental entities advance a “permissible legislative objective.” Schweichs’ argument urges a “certain remedy in the laws for all injuries” means a remedy to the fullest extent found by the trier of fact.
Remedies are not vested rights, and section eight neither guarantees nor commands the continuation of a specific remedy. State ex rel. Kane v. Stassen, 208 Minn. 523, 527, 294 N.W. 647, 649 (1940) (remedy of mandamus not guaranteed to enforce rights under Veteran’s Preference Act). In approaching challenges under section eight, we have not required that the legislature satisfy the legislative goals it pursues. Rather, our analysis centers on whether a permissible legislative goal is pursued when a common-law right is abrogated. See Snyder, 441 N.W.2d at 789. This court’s analysis in Snyder, a case challenging the constitutionality of municipal tort liability caps, did not inquire whether capping municipal tort liability actually pursued or achieved the underlying legislative objective of ensuring governmental fiscal solvency. See also Schmidt v. Modem Metals Foundry, Inc., 424 N.W.2d 538, 541-42 (Minn.1988) (noting amendments to the workers’ compensation statutes authorizing new disability schedules appeared to be in furtherance of legitimate legislative objectives). Similarly, in Tri-State Insurance Co. v. Bouma, 306 *734N.W.2d 564 (Minn.1981), we examined whether section eight was violated by a statute barring recovery of mistakenly overpaid workers’ compensation benefits. This court concluded the statute embodied a permissible legislative objective of promoting general welfare by not mandating reimbursement of mistaken overpayment. Id. at 566. Again, we did not delve into whether general welfare was actually promoted by the legislative objective behind the statute. In many respects this analysis is reminiscent of the minimal judicial scrutiny of an equal protection or substantive due process review. Compare Snyder, 441 N.W.2d at 789, with Imlay v. City of Lake Crystal, 453 N.W.2d 326, 329-32 (Minn.1990). The focus in an equal protection challenge is on the lawmakers’ reasonable belief, not on “whether all the statute’s purposes are fully satisfied in every conceivable scenario.” Imlay, 453 N.W.2d at 332. Likewise, the focus in a section eight challenge is on the legitimate purpose pursued by the legislature, not whether the statute meets that purpose in every constellation of fact. To extend our examination further would ignore the flexibility section eight enjoys.
[W]hat constitutes “an adequate remedy” or “a certain remedy” is not determined by any inflexible rule found in the constitution, but is subject to variation and modification, as the state of society changes. Hence a wide latitude must, of necessity, be given to the legislature in determining both the form and the measure of the remedy for a wrong.
Allen v. Pioneer-Press Co., 40 Minn. 117, 123, 41 N.W. 936, 938 (1889). In Allen, we also examined a section eight challenge to a limitation of damages, upholding a statute eliminating general damages recovery in libel actions when a retraction was printed. 40 Minn, at 124-25, 41 N.W. at 939.
In passing the Tort Reform Act of 1986, the legislature attempted to regulate the insurance industry and civil actions to provide predictability in damages awards while reducing insurance rates. See Act of March 25, 1986, ch. 455, 1986 Minn. Laws 840; Note, Introduction to Minnesota’s Tort Reform Act, 13 Wm. Mitchell L.Rev. 277, 281 nn. 19 & 20, 284, 285-86 nn. 45 & 50, 291-301; see also The Need for Legislative Reform of the Tort System: A Report on the Liability Crisis from Affected Organizations, 10 Hamline L.Rev. 345, 385 (1987) (urging legislation establishing fixed or proportional limits on noneconomic damages). Limiting recovery for loss of consortium damages was only part of the legislature’s response to the perceived crisis in the insurance industry. See Note, Minnesota’s Tort Reform Act, 13 Wm. Mitchell L.Rev. at 277-86. It is suggested the legislature capped damages for those injuries with which it sympathized least. Id. at 300-01; Minn.Stat. § 549.23 (excluding limitation for pain, suffering and disfigurement). Considering the derivative nature of a loss of consortium claim and the underwriting challenges it presents, cf. Huffer v. Kozitza, 375 N.W.2d 480, 482 (Minn. 1985); Togstad v. Vesely, Otto, Miller & Keefe, 291 N.W.2d 686, 695 (Minn.1980), the damages cap on this injury appears to represent the legislature’s attempt to lower rates for tort liability insurance. See Johnson v. Farmers Union Central Exchange, Inc., 414 N.W.2d 425, 430-31 (Minn.App. 1987), pet. for rev. denied (Minn. Nov. 24, 1987). This court’s past treatment of section eight challenges and limitations on municipal tort recovery indicates that a legitimate legislative purpose was pursued by enacting this statute. Lowering insurance rates and providing predictable damage awards are legitimate legislative objectives supporting the limitation embodied in section 549.23. The trial court erred in declaring section 549.23 violative of section eight of the Minnesota Constitution. The judgment should be reduced to the statutory maximum of $400,000.00.
VI.
Intervenor MARP filed a notice of review challenging the taxation of costs and disbursements against it. MARP claims taxation of costs and disbursements against MARP was improper because it was an intervenor, not a party, who did not fail to sustain any claim. The act of intervention, however, is more than a form of *735pleading. Through intervention, the intervening third-party becomes a party in the pending suit by interposing a claim of interest in an adversary proceeding, the results of which may be favorable or unfavorable depending on the outcome. City of Minneapolis v. Minneapolis Transit Co., 270 Minn. 133, 137-38, 133 N.W.2d 364, 368 (1965); Faricy v. St. Paul Investment & Savings Society, 110 Minn. 311, 313, 125 N.W. 676, 677 (1910).
According to its complaint in intervention, MARP sought to protect its subro-gation interest for workers’ compensation benefits paid to Lawrence Schweich. See Norman v. Refsland, 383 N.W.2d 673, 676-78 (Minn.1986). It sought “judgment against the Defendants and Third-Party Defendants in the amount of Workers’ Compensation benefits paid or payable to Plaintiff and * * * for its costs and disbursements incurred herein.” Judgment was entered in favor of MARP against Ziegler. MARP moved for and was granted disbursement of the judgment pursuant to Minn.Stat. § 176.061, subd. 6 (1990). These pleadings and actions demonstrate claims were asserted against Gibbs-Cook and Caterpillar that were unsustained. MARP is, therefore, subject to taxation of costs. See, e.g., Thief River Co-Operative Store Co. v. First Nat’l Bank of Thief River Falls, 131 Minn. 193, 194-95, 154 N.W. 953, 954 (1915); McKinley v. National Citizens Bank of Mankato, 127 Minn. 212, 214-15, 149 N.W. 295, 296 (1914); see also State ex rel. Bergin v. Fitzsimmons, 226 Minn. 557, 565, 33 N.W.2d 854, 858 (1948) (intervenor entitled to costs as prevailing party where relator took neutral position and intervenor was real party in interest).
Alternatively, MARP urges costs and disbursements taxed jointly against MARP and the Schweichs should be included in the statutory formula of Minn.Stat. § 176.061, subd. 6, as “reasonable costs of collection.” The statute does not define or limit what constitutes “reasonable costs of collection”; however, in Hodder v. Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co., 426 N.W.2d 826, 838 (Minn.1988), cert. denied — U.S.-, 109 S.Ct. 3265, 106 L.Ed.2d 610 (1989), this court remarked that a plaintiff’s costs taxed to another were properly excluded from the formula. The converse of this principle would require inclusion of costs taxed to a plaintiff.
In light of our language in Hodder, the trial court erred by including in the formula a percentage of Schweichs’ costs. All of Schweichs’ costs were taxed against Ziegler, and including those costs in the calculation under Minn.Stat. § 176.061, subd. 6, was improper because the Schweichs did not have to pay them. Hodder, 426 N.W.2d at 838. Additionally, the Schweichs remain jointly liable with MARP to Gibbs-Cook and Caterpillar for costs those defendants incurred. Those costs, properly taxed against the Schweichs, are “reasonable costs of collection” within the meaning of Minn.Stat. § 176.061, subd. 6. Remand is necessary to account for costs taxed against the Schweichs in the statutory formula. See Kempa v. E.W. Coons Co., 370 N.W.2d 414, 419-20 (Minn.1985).
VII.
The trial court’s declaration that Minn. Stat. § 549.23 (1988) violates Minn. Const, art. 1, § 8, is reversed. The remaining judgment and orders are affirmed, except that the case is remanded (1) for reduction of judgment on the loss of consortium award; (2) for a recalculation under Minn. Stat. § 176.061, subd. 6, that (a) excludes plaintiff’s costs taxed against another and (b) includes costs taxed against plaintiff; and (3) to revise judgment accordingly.
Affirmed in part, reversed in part, and remanded.
SIMONETT, J., took no part in the consideration of this case.
. Section 487.23, subd. 3 states in relevant part:
(b) If any other party to the action desires a trial by jury when none is demanded in the note of issue served upon the party, the party shall serve a demand for trial by a jury on all other parties to the action and file it with the court administrator, with proof of service, within ten days after the note of issue was served upon the party.
(c) If a jury is not demanded at the time and in the manner provided in sections 487.01 to 487.38, all parties waive trial by jury. Jury trial may be waived also in the manner provided by rule 38.02 of the rules for municipal courts promulgated by the supreme court and rules promulgated by the supreme court from time to time for county courts.
Minn.Stat. § 487.23, subd. 3(b), (c) (1990) (emphasis added).
. In federal practice, the mere checking of the jury demand box on the civil cover sheet is insufficient demand for jury trial. See Wall v. National Railroad Passenger Corp., 718 F.2d 906, 909 (9th Cir. 1983); Cochran v. Birkel, 651 F.2d 1219, 1221 n. 4 (6th Cir.1981), cert. denied 454 U.S. 1152, 102 S.Ct. 1020, 71 L.Ed.2d 307 (1982); The Personal Touch, Inc. v. Lenox, Inc., 122 F.R.D. 470, 471 (E.D.Pa.1988).
. Section 549.23 provides in relevant part: Subdivision 1. Definition. For purposes of this section, "intangible loss” means embarrassment, emotional distress, and loss of consortium. Intangible loss does not include pain, disability or disfigurement.
Subdivision 2. Limitation. In civil actions, whether based on contract or tort, the amount of damages per person for intangible losses may not exceed |400,000.
Minn.Stat. § 549.23 (1988). This statute was repealed effective May 4, 1990, applying to *733causes of action arising on or after that date. Act of May 3, 1990, ch. 555, §§ 23, 24, 1990 Minn. Laws 1557, 1565.
. One commentator notes the Haney test is not applied rigidly, favoring reading section eight as a guiding principle. Mickelsen, The Use and Interpretation of Article I, Section Eight of the Minnesota Constitution 1861 — 1984, 10 Wm. Mitchell L.Rev. 667, 694 (1984).

=== CASE 9737447 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:25:26.168349+00 ===

COYNE, Justice
(dissenting).
I respectfully dissent. The right to trial by jury is expressly preserved by the Bill of Rights of both the United States Constitution and the Minnesota Constitution. U.S.Const, amend. VII; Minn. Const, art. I, § 4. The majority, however, arrogating unto itself the role of factfinder, has found *736waiver of that constitutional right despite written notice, served and filed, of the expectation of all three defendants that the facts of this case would be found by a jury.
The trial notice issued in response to the plaintiffs note of issue demanding a court trial was accompanied by a pre-trial questionnaire. Each party was directed to complete the questionnaire and return it to the court. Each of the three defendants answered question 14 — whether the trial was to be by jury or by the court — by stating that it was to be a jury trial. Each of the three defendants filed the questionnaire with the court, and defendants Ziegler and Gibbs-Cook also served it on the plaintiff. Nevertheless, when court convened on the appointed trial date the trial was still scheduled for trial by the court alone.
That the defendants’ demand for a jury trial did not escape the attention of the plaintiff, even though it appears that neither the judge nor the court administrator had noted it, is obvious from the events immediately preceding the commencement of the trial. As soon as they became aware of the absence of a jury panel, the defendants orally renewed their demand for a jury trial. The plaintiff then presented a written memorandum in support of his position that the defendants should be denied a jury trial.
In denying the defendants’ demand the trial court seems to have recognized that the defendants had not intentionally relinquished their right to a jury trial, for its ruling of a technical “waiver” was based on noncompliance with a nonexistent court rule. As the majority concedes, a statute setting rules of practice for an inferior court which no longer exists cannot supersede the Minnesota Rules of Civil Procedure. Unlike the federal rules [Fed.R. Civ.P. 38(b) ], neither the Minnesota Rules of Civil Procedure nor the first judicial district’s rules of practice set a format or deadline for a demand for jury trial, There are, of course, some practical limitations on the assertion of the right to a jury trial: a party cannot acquiesce in a court trial and then, when disappointed in the outcome, demand a jury trial. See Parsons Electric Co. v. Village of Watertown, 283 Minn. 505, 509-10, 169 N.W.2d 20, 22-23 (1969); Pearson v. Bertelson, 249 Minn. 218, 223, 82 N.W.2d 66, 70 (1957). Here, however, both written and oral demands were made prior to trial.
The majority rather cavalierly dismisses the written demand made several months prior to trial as nothing more than simply marking “jury trial” on the court’s questionnaire and then finds waiver in the failure to reiterate the demand prior to the morning of trial. Certainly, hindsight suggests the desirability of repeating the demand at the pre-trial conference, but unless one takes the position that the district court’s pre-trial questionnaire is nothing but make-work, there should be no necessity for repetitive demands in order to preserve a constitutional right. A court should indulge every reasonable presumption against waiver. Moreover, a party should be able to rely on the assertion made in a document filed with the court and served on the adversary pursuant to the court’s direction. To say, as does the majority, that such a demand is not a demand at all and that reiterating the demand as soon as it is apparent that the original demand has been overlooked and before trial commences constitutes the intentional relinquishment of the fundamental right to a jury trial seems to me to evince a scant regard for a right guaranteed by the Minnesota Constitution to remain inviolate.
Accordingly, I would reverse and remand to the district court for a jury trial.

=== CASE 2210496 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:53.989006+00 ===

463 N.W.2d 308 (1990)
STATE of Minnesota, Respondent,
v.
Christopher Lorance PETERSON, Appellant.
No. C9-90-1617.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
December 4, 1990.
*309 Kenneth L. Hamrum, Morris, for appellant.
Hubert H. Humphrey, III, Atty. Gen., St. Paul, Charles C. Glasrud, Morris City Atty., Morris, for respondent.
Considered and decided by SHORT, P.J., and LANSING and GARDEBRING, JJ.
OPINION
LANSING, Judge.
FACTS
While having his demolition derby car towed to the county fair, Christopher Peterson was ticketed for driving an unsafe vehicle in violation of Minn.Stat. § 169.47. Because the car had been prepared for a demolition derby, it had no windshield, headlights, brake lights, tail lights, or turn signals. Peterson sat in the driver's seat while a commercially licensed tow truck pulled the car on a chain. All four wheels were on the road, and Peterson controlled the steering and braking of the car. The car engine was not running.
Peterson was convicted of the misdemeanor violation, fined $20 and assessed $10 in fees. The court suspended the $20 fine on the condition that Peterson not violate section 169.47 for one year. Peterson appeals.
ISSUE
1. Did the court err in determining that Peterson was "driving" for purposes of applying Minn.Stat. § 169.47?
2. Did the court err in convicting Peterson for acts he committed under the direction of a licensed tow truck operator?
ANALYSIS
I
It is significant to our analysis that this was not a typical towing situation in which the car is elevated at an angle by the tow truck so that only two of the car's wheels have contact with the ground. Instead, Peterson's car was towed on a chain directly behind the tow truck with all four wheels on the road. This towing arrangement required Peterson to steer the car to keep it straight behind the tow truck and to apply the brakes to stop or slow the car when the tow truck stopped or decelerated.
Minn.Stat. § 169.47 provides that it is unlawful
to drive or for the owner to cause or knowingly permit to be driven on any highway any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person, or which does not contain those parts or is not at all times equipped with such lamps and other equipment in proper condition and adjustment as required in this chapter * * *.
Minn.Stat. § 169.47, subd. 1 (Supp.1989) (emphasis added).
Chapter 169 does not define "drive" or "driving." The commonly accepted meaning *310 of "drive" is "to operate the mechanism and controls and direct the course of (as a vehicle)." Webster's Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary (1983). The Minnesota Supreme Court has applied that definition, saying:
Driving and operating ordinarily refer, we think, to manipulation of the motor vehicle's mechanical features to control the vehicle's movement.
West Bend Mut. Ins. Co. v. Milwaukee Mut. Ins. Co., 384 N.W.2d 877, 879 (Minn. 1986).
Peterson's demolition derby car was a vehicle being "transported or drawn upon a highway." See Minn.Stat. § 169.01, subd. 2. Peterson could turn the steering wheel to direct the course of the vehicle and could apply the brakes to control speed. He also was able to shift the gears and operate the parking brake. We conclude that Peterson was driving for purposes of applying section 169.47.
This conclusion is supported by legal commentary and Minnesota case law interpreting other sections of Chapter 169. Discussing section 169.13 (reckless driving), the authors of Minnesota Misdemeanors & Moving Traffic Violations explain:
The statute does not resolve the question of whether the driving must occur while the vehicle is moving by its own force, and one could commit reckless driving while coasting down a hill with the engine off or while being towed by another vehicle.
M. Costello, R. Frase & S. Simon, Minnesota Misdemeanors & Moving Traffic Violations 607-08 (2d ed. 1990). In Dept. of Pub. Safety v. Juncewski, 308 N.W.2d 316 (Minn.1981), the court held that a driver seated behind the steering wheel, with the key in the ignition, was "in physical control" of the vehicle while under the influence of alcohol. See Minn.Stat. § 169.121. The court noted that in other jurisdictions, defendants have been found guilty of "driving a motor vehicle" under similar circumstances. Juncewski, 308 N.W.2d at 320 (citing State v. Cannon, 56 Haw. 161, 532 P.2d 391 (1975); State v. Brown, 5 Or.App. 412, 485 P.2d 444 (1971)).
Policy considerations also support the conclusion that Peterson's actions constitute driving. Section 169.47 is designed to keep unsafe and dangerous vehicles off the road. Peterson's vehicle and the method by which it was being transported were inherently unsafe. As the trial court explained:
[S]imply because there is a second driver who must respond in tandem to the lead vehicle's driver's responses, the possibility of an accident is greater than that in other towing situations.
Peterson's car lacked essential equipment  headlights, tail lights, brake lights, and turn signals. The absence of this equipment presented a hazard to approaching automobiles, especially at night. See Barrett v. Nash Finch Co., 228 Minn. 156, 161, 36 N.W.2d 526, 529 (1949).
Finally, we note that it may be possible to use the definition of "driver" contained in Chapter 169 to define "driving." Minn. Stat. § 169.01, subd. 25 classifies "every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle" as a driver. From this definition it could be concluded, as the trial court did, that driving means to drive or to be in actual physical control. Because we conclude that Peterson was driving, we do not consider whether, in the alternative, he was in actual physical control.
II
Peterson contends that because he followed the tow truck driver's instructions, he cannot be found guilty under section 169.47. We do not agree. Specific intent is not an element of the offense of driving a vehicle in an unsafe condition. See State v. Johnson, 358 N.W.2d 127 (Minn.App.1984) (discussing careless driving). Peterson's general intent to take actions which constituted physical control of the unsafe car satisfies the intent requirement of Minn.Stat. § 169.47. His lack of criminal intent and reliance on the tow truck driver's instructions are not a defense. See e.g., United States v. Anderson, 879 F.2d 369 (8th Cir.), cert. denied, ___ U.S. ___, 110 S.Ct. 515, 107 L.Ed.2d 516 (1989) (defense of good faith *311 reliance on expert advice is used only to refute the allegation that defendant intended to commit the crime); People v. Mendro, 731 P.2d 704 (Colo.1987) (good faith reliance on accountant's advice did not preclude defendant's conviction for theft).
DECISION
Because Peterson was operating the controls of his vehicle and directing its course, he was driving for purposes of applying Minn.Stat. § 169.47. His reliance on the tow truck operator's instructions does not constitute a defense.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 2210481 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:53.670599+00 ===

241 Cal.App.2d 554 (1966)
SECURITY FIRST NATIONAL BANK, as Administrator with the Will Annexed, etc., Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
HOWARD N. WHITTAKER, Defendant and Respondent.
Civ. No. 7820.
California Court of Appeals. Fourth Dist., Div. One.
Apr. 18, 1966.
Richard H. Oftedal for Plaintiff and Appellant.
Harwood, Heffernan, Soden & Corfman and Mark A. Soden for Defendant and Respondent.
WHELAN, J.
The personal representative of plaintiff Stathis appeals from a judgment of nonsuit granted under section 631.8 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
Plaintiff's complaint was to quiet title to an undivided one-half interest in an on-sale general license, an on-sale beer and wine license issued to a restaurant known as Lido Castaway, in all of the furniture, fixtures and equipment of the restaurant and in all other property of the Lido Castaway business.
The oral proceedings at the trial were brief. There had been an earlier trial of the case and plaintiff perhaps assumed that *556 the familiarity of both sides with the factual background as developed in the former trial lingered on in the courtroom like perfume from the tomb of some long-dead Egyptian.
At the second trial no witness was sworn; four exhibits of plaintiff were marked for identification. Plaintiff's exhibit 1, a copy of a notice of dissolution of a partnership known as Lido Castaway between defendant and John J. Cirillo, which was signed by defendant and published on July 18, 1962, was received in evidence.
Plaintiff's exhibit 2 for identification is a certified copy of an order of the referee in bankruptcy of the bankrupt estate of John J. Cirillo. It was made July 20, 1962, and it confirmed to plaintiff the sale for $300 of "all the right, title and interest" of Cirillo "in and to the partnership known as 'Lido Castaway.' "
Plaintiff's exhibits 3 and 4 for identification were a reporter's transcript of the proceedings in bankruptcy, and the notice of the meeting of creditors.
Defendant's objections to the introduction of plaintiff's exhibits 3 and 4 for identification were sustained; his objection to plaintiff's exhibit 2 was overruled. Nevertheless, plaintiff's exhibit 2 is not marked as having been received in evidence.
Upon this state of the record, plaintiff rested. Following the granting of defendant's motion, findings were prepared and signed. Finding No. 1 was that Cirillo was adjudicated a bankrupt on April 26, 1962, and that the referee purported to take jurisdiction of Cirillo's partnership interest and to sell such interest to defendant and confirmed such sale to defendant.
The other findings were that plaintiff was not the owner of a one-half interest in any of the specific property described in the complaint and was not entitled to possession thereof.
The judgment went beyond the findings to adjudge that plaintiff has no right, title or interest either in the personal property described in the complaint and findings, or in that business known as the "Lido Castaway."
The defendant's answer alleged that by written agreement dated October 29, 1960, defendant Howard N. Whittaker and defendant John J. Cirillo entered into a partnership; that certain of the assets of such partnership consisted of certain of the property described in plaintiff's complaint.
[1] Cirillo's bankruptcy dissolved the partnership. (Corp. Code,  15031, subd. (5)) but did not terminate the partnership *557 (Corp. Code,  15030) in the absence of specific agreement that it should have that effect, of which there is no evidence.
[2] Cirillo was a coowner of the specific partnership property, but his right therein was not separately assignable and was not subject to execution. (Corp. Code,  15025.)
[3] Cirillo's interest in the partnership was his share of the profits and surplus; that interest was personal property (Corp. Code,  15026); that interest was assignable (Corp. Code,  15027), and its assignment transferred to the assignee the right to an accounting (Corp. Code,  15027, subd. (2); Chatten v. Martell, 166 Cal.App.2d 545 [333 P.2d 364]).
[4] The sale of the bankrupt's interest in the partnership did not purport to do more than transfer Cirillo's interest in the partnership. It was not a sale of particular assets. (Anderson v. United States, 131 F.Supp. 501, 503.)
[5] Unless there was a different agreement, the non-bankrupt partner had the right to wind up the partnership affairs. (Corp. Code,  15037.)
[6] The rights of Cirillo and his assignee to share in any surplus upon the winding up of the partnership affairs are as set forth in section 15038, Corporations Code, notwithstanding that Cirillo may wrongfully have brought about the dissolution of the partnership. (Vangel v. Vangel, 45 Cal.2d 804 [291 P.2d 25, 55 A.L.R.2d 1385].)
[7] Since the assignment to plaintiff did not vest him with title to any specific property, the motion for judgment was properly granted. The findings of fact are supported because of the lack of evidence.
Because the judgment might be subject to misinterpretation should there be proceedings for accounting between the parties, we deem it proper to modify it so that the second paragraph, commencing with the words "It Is Adjudged" on line 1, and ending with the words "and equipment thereon" on line 4, be amended to read as follows: "It Is Adjudged that plaintiff Peter J. Stathis has no right, title or interest in and to any of the furniture, fixtures and equipment located at Lido Castaway, 730 Lido Park Drive, Newport Beach, California, nor in any other property owned by the business known as Lido Castaway, nor in ...."
The judgment is modified in the particulars herein set forth; as so modified, the judgment is affirmed, with costs to respondent.
Brown (Gerald), P. J., and Coughlin, J., concurred.

=== CASE 2210500 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:54.052221+00 ===

241 Cal.App.2d 541 (1966)
ASSOCIATES DISCOUNT CORPORATION, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
TOBB COMPANY, INC., Defendant and Appellant.
Civ. No. 7699.
California Court of Appeals. Fourth Dist., Div. One.
Apr. 18, 1966.
David H. R. Pain for Defendant and Appellant.
Smith, Prante & Biggins and Todd Smith for Plaintiff and Respondent.
COUGHLIN, J.
Plaintiff Associates Discount Corporation, as assignee of the lessor of a lease of personal property, recovered judgment against the defendant Tobb Co., Inc., as lessee, for the balance of rental unpaid thereunder. Defendant appeals.
The lease was evidenced by a written instrument dated December 20, 1960, between Capital Resources, Inc., an equipment leasing corporation, as lessor, and Tobb Co., Inc., the defendant, as lessee; was executed on behalf of the latter by Winton B. Oster, as president, and Roy F. Berrett, as secretary; incorporated an attached "Schedule," also executed on behalf of defendant by Oster, as president, and Berrett as secretary, and bearing the corporate seal, which provided, among other things, that the lessee should pay lessor the sum of $1,250 per month rental for 60 months; and was assigned by Capital Resources to plaintiff, Associates Discount Corporation, *545 a commercial financing firm engaged in the business of obtaining leases at a discount.
Accompanying the lease and attached "Schedule" was a document entitled "Certified Copy of Resolution and Designation of Agents" executed by Berrett as secretary of defendant corporation and bearing its seal. It certified that the board of directors of defendant had adopted a resolution authorizing any officer of the corporation, among other things, "to execute, acknowledge and deliver and/or appoint another to execute, acknowledge, and deliver on behalf of this Corporation and in its name, any and all notes, drafts, assignments, repurchase agreements, bills of sale, chattel mortgages, conditional sales contracts, trust receipts and any and all other instruments which he may deem necessary or convenient in the transaction of business of the undersigned. ..."
Defendant was a corporation formed by four medical doctors, viz., Oster, Berrett, Bowers and Thayer, each of whom was a director and shareholder, and owned 25 percent of its shares. Originally defendant was the owner of the equipment covered by the lease. Oster and Berrett, doing business as Ocean Beach Medical Group, leased the equipment from defendant and paid it $1,800 per month as rental. Early in December 1960, as a result of negotiations between Oster, purportedly on behalf of defendant, a man named Morrison, representing H & M Management Company, Capital Resources and the plaintiff, defendant sold the equipment to H & M Management Company for $50,000 which, in turn, sold it to Capital Resources for the same amount; the latter leased it back to defendant under the subject lease and assigned the same, together with its interest in the equipment, to plaintiff for $50,000; in the course of the transaction plaintiff paid $50,000 to Capital Resources, which paid the same amount to "H & M Management Corporation and Winton B. Oster, M.D." by a check reciting, "Acceptance of this check shall constitute full payment to H & M Management Corp. for equipment sold to Capital Resources, Inc., as specified in an inventory list captioned Exhibit 'A' attached to a lease agreement between Capital Resources, Inc., and Tobb Corporation."
Two letters to "H & M Management Co.," each dated December 1, 1960, signed by Oster for defendant as president and bearing its corporate seal, respectively demanded payment of $50,000 for the purchase of the equipment and acknowledged receipt of payment in full therefor. *546
The lease provided for a security deposit of $6,250 which was paid by Oster to Capital Resources and retained by the latter. Following its execution Oster paid plaintiff monthly rental installments totaling $17,500. The lease provided in the event of default in payment of any installment the lessor might declare the entire rent provided for thereunder immediately due and payable. Under date of February 9, 1962, demand in writing was made upon defendant for payment of three delinquent rental installments. Upon continued failure to pay such, all the remaining rental installments were declared due and payable. Suit to recover this amount was filed. Plaintiffs in the action were Associates Discount Co., Inc., Capital Resources and a copartnership known as Thornally-Bird Industries. Defendant contested liability on the ground the lease had been executed without its authority; was in violation of designated statutory provisions; constituted a usurious loan; and lacked consideration. The court found, among other things, the lease was valid; was not a loan; Capital Resources owned the equipment at the time the lease was executed, having acquired title from H & M Management Co., which in turn had acquired title from defendant; Oster and Berrett, as president and secretary respectively of defendant, had authority to transfer the equipment to H & M Management Co.; Capital Resources entered into the lease with defendant; Oster and Berrett had authority to enter into the lease; pursuant to the terms of the lease, by virtue of the accelerated payment of the agreed rental installments, there was unpaid $51,250; that, contrary to defendant's contentions, the transfer of the equipment did not constitute a sale of substantially all of defendant's assets subject to the regulation prescribed by section 3901 of the Corporations Code; and that Capital Resources assigned its interest in the equipment and the lease to plaintiff Associates Discount Corporation. Judgment was entered in favor of this plaintiff alone and against defendant for the amount unpaid under the lease and an additional sum of $5,500 as attorney's fees.
On appeal defendant attacks the foregoing findings as not supported by the evidence; attacks other findings for the same reason; and contends the court erred in the rejection of testimony.
As the finding that Oster and Berrett had authority to transfer the equipment to H & M Management Company and to execute the lease is supported by the evidence, any deficiency respecting other findings sustaining the transaction on other grounds need not be considered. [1] It is a settled *547 rule that if there is one or more sustained findings upon which the judgment may rest, it will be concluded on appeal the trial court did rest its judgment upon that finding or those findings and other findings may be disregarded. (Brewer v. Simpson, 53 Cal.2d 567, 584 [2 Cal.Rptr. 609, 349 P.2d 289].)
[2] The finding that Oster and Berrett had authority to execute the lease is supported by the fact that it purports to be executed by them on behalf of the corporation and the "Schedule" as a part thereof likewise purports to be executed by them for the corporation and bears its seal; the further fact that a certified copy of a resolution authorizing any officer of the corporation to execute "any and all other instruments which he may deem necessary or convenient in the transaction of business" of the corporation was certified to be correct by Berrett as secretary of the corporation under the seal of said corporation; and circumstances justifying an inference that such authority had been given.
Defendant's by-laws provided its president and secretary should execute, in its name, "all deeds, bonds, contracts, and other obligations and instruments authorized by the Board of Directors to be executed." [3] An instrument signed by officers of a corporation, purportedly on its behalf, and bearing its seal, is prima facie evidence that the officers signing such executed the same under authority duly given them by the board of directors. (Corp. Code,  833; Thomas V. Peterson, 213 Cal. 672, 674 [3 P.2d 306]; Potts Drug Co. v. Benedict, 156 Cal. 322, 327 [104 P. 432, 25 L.R.A. N.S. 609]; Andres v. Fry, 113 Cal. 124, 127 [45 P. 534]; Sime v. Malouf, 95 Cal.App.2d 82, 93-94 [212 P.2d 946, 213 P.2d 788]; Solorza v. Park Water Co., 86 Cal.App.2d 653, 659-661 [195 P.2d 523].) [4] Likewise, a certification by the secretary of a corporation, bearing its corporate seal, that the board of directors adopted a resolution authorizing the execution of the instrument by designated officers is evidence of the authority of those officers to execute that instrument. (Purser v. Eagle Lake Land & Irr. Co., 111 Cal. 139, 141-142 [43 P. 523].) [5] The act of a secretary in so certifying the adoption of the resolution by the corporation is within his authority and binding upon it even though the resolution was spurious. (Condor Corp. v. Cunningham, 71 Cal.App.2d 25, 33 [162 P.2d 21].) [6] The effect of an instrument executed by its officers on its behalf, bearing its corporate seal, and accompanied by a certification by its secretary under the corporate seal that a resolution authorizing execution of the instrument *548 by those officers had been adopted by the board of directors creates a disputable presumption that the instrument is the act of the corporation. (Purser v. Eagle Lake Land & Irr. Co., supra, 111 Cal.139, 141-142; Miners' Ditch Co. v. Zellerbach, 37 Cal. 543, 597-599; Sime v. Malouf, supra, 95 Cal.App.2d 82, 93-94; Solorza v. Park Water Co., supra, 86 Cal.App.2d 653, 659-661.) To rebut this presumption defendant relies upon the testimony of its directors that execution of the lease was not authorized, and upon the absence of any record of the adoption of the subject resolution in the minutes of the corporation. However, there was evidence establishing it had made two previous loans from a bank and supplied the latter with copies of resolutions authorizing such which did not appear in its minutes. [7] In addition, there is evidence inferentially supporting the conclusion that the fact of execution of the lease had been brought to the attention of each of the directors within a month thereafter and no action was taken to disaffirm it which, in turn, supports the conclusion its execution had been authorized.
[8] The finding that defendant transferred the equipment to H & M Management Company which in turn transferred it to Capital Resources is supported by the recital in the lease that, "The equipment is and shall at all times be and remain, the sole and exclusive property of lessor." In addition, the documents respectively demanding payment from H & M Management Company for the purchase of the equipment and acknowledging receipt of full payment therefor, executed by Oster as president on behalf of defendant to which its corporate seal was attached, under the rules heretofore noted, support the conclusion that defendant transferred the equipment to H & M Management Company. Furthermore, defendant's corporate minutes contain a resolution adopted by its board of directors on March 6, 1962, that the company sell the equipment in question to Ocean Beach Medical Group, i.e., Oster and Berrett "effective December 1, 1960."
[9] Defendant contends the court erred in admitting, over objection, the foregoing letter from Oster, as president of defendant, to H & M Management Company requesting remission of $50,000 for the purchase of the equipment. The basis for this contention is that the letter was not admissible to establish Oster's authority. However, it was not admitted for this purpose. The letter purports to be executed by defendant, acting through Oster as president, and bears its corporate seal. Under the rule heretofore noted, prima facie it is the act of the corporation; is a demand for the purchase price of equipment; *549 and was relevant to establish a circumstance from which the court was entitled to conclude a sale had taken place.
[10] Defendant's attack upon the validity of the transfer to H & M Management Company because of an alleged noncompliance with the requirements of section 3901 of the Corporations Code lacks merit for several reasons. The requirements in question are imposed only on a sale by a corporation which would "dispose of all or substantially all of its property and assets. ..." (Corp. Code,  3901.) The court found the sale here did not dispose of all or substantially all of the defendant's property and assets. This finding is adequately supported by the evidence, defendant's contention to the contrary notwithstanding. [11] Furthermore, the corporation, as distinguished from its stockholders or creditors, may not rely upon a failure to comply with the requirements in question to invalidate such a sale. (Solorza v. Park Water Co., supra, 86 Cal.App.2d 653, 659.) [12] In addition, as noted, all of defendant's stockholders and directors approved a sale of the subject equipment to Ocean Beach Medical Group, of which Oster was a member, the same to be effective as of December 1, 1960. Under these circumstances, reliance upon an alleged failure to comply with section 3901 may not be urged as a defense to invalidate the subject transfer. (See McDermott v. Bear Film Co., 219 Cal.App.2d 607, 612 [33 Cal.Rptr. 486].)
The findings that the lease sued upon actually was such and not a pledge or mortgage, and that the transaction in question was not a loan subject to the usury laws, are supported by substantial evidence. Defendant's contention to the contrary argues the weight rather than the sufficiency of the evidence and is without merit. (See Thomas v. Hunt Mfg. Corp., 42 Cal.2d 734, 736 [269 P.2d 12]; Cottle v. Gibbon, 200 Cal.App.2d 1, 4 [19 Cal.Rptr. 82].)
The finding of fact and conclusion of law on the issue of damages, awarding plaintiff the accelerated unpaid rental installments, is supported by the evidence and the law in the premises. [13] Upon default in the payment of rent under a lease providing for payment of rental in installments, the lessor may rest upon his lease and sue the lessee to recover each installment, or the whole thereof, when it becomes due. (Bradbury v. Higginson, 162 Cal. 602, 604 [123 P. 797]; Salvation Army v. Daily Telegram, 125 Cal.App. 743, 745 [14 P.2d 123].) Defendant's contentions that the court applied the wrong measure of damages, and that awarding the unpaid balance due under the lease constituted an award of liquidated *550 damages, are without merit. Plaintiff rested upon the lease. The remaining installments payable thereunder became due upon acceleration. Thus, the total unpaid stipulated rent was due at that time. Defendant remained in possession of the equipment. No contention is made to the contrary. No liquidated damage issue was involved.
Defendant's assertion of error in the rejection of evidence concerns (1) an order denying its offer to introduce questions and answers submitted to and obtained from Oster pursuant to the provisions of section 2030 of the Code of Civil Procedure; (2) an order striking an answer to a question tending to prove that Capital Resources knew the money paid by it for purchase of the equipment was to be used by Oster personally and not by defendant; and (3) an order sustaining objections to allegedly material questions asked of Dr. Bowers.
Defendant directed interrogatories to Oster pursuant to the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure section 2030;  [fn. 1] served a copy thereof upon plaintiff; received answers thereto; served a copy thereof upon plaintiff; and offered the questions and answers in evidence. Dr. Oster had died in the meantime. Plaintiff's objection thereto was sustained. The issue for determination is whether, under section 2030, interrogatories by one party to an action directed to an adverse party and answers of the latter thereto are admissible in evidence against a third party. In support of its affirmative position on this issue, defendant directs attention to the provision of section 2030 that such interrogatories and answers "may be used to the same extent as provided in subdivision (d) of Section 2016 of this code for the use of the deposition of a party"; to the provisions of the latter section which, at the time of trial,  [fn. 2] declared a deposition "may be used against any party who was present or represented at the taking of the deposition or who had due notice thereof, in accordance with any one of the following provisions: ... (2) The deposition of a party to the record of any civil action or proceeding ... may be used by an adverse party for any purpose. (3) The deposition of a witness, whether or not a party, may be used by any party for any purpose if the court finds: (i) that the witness is dead"; to the fact that Oster was an adverse party and is dead; and to the further fact that plaintiff was given copies of the interrogatories and answers. [14] Plaintiff contends the interrogatories *551 and answers thereto may be used in lieu of a deposition only upon adherence to the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure, section 2020. The latter code section provides for the taking of the "deposition of any person upon written interrogatories"; directs the service of copies of all such interrogatories upon all parties; authorizes the latter to serve cross-interrogatories; permits re-direct and recross-interrogatories by the respective parties; and provides for an order, upon good cause shown, that the deposition "shall not be taken except by allowing oral examination by one or more parties." These requirements and procedures are not prescribed by section 2030, the principal objective of which is to provide a discovery procedure directed to an adverse party and, incidentally, to authorize the use of his answers in lieu of testimony obtained by deposition. Whether that section authorizes the use of such answers against a third party must be determined in light of all sections of the code upon the general subject. (Select Base Materials, Inc. v. Board of Equalization, 51 Cal.2d 640, 645 [335 P.2d 672].) Sections 2030 and 2016 were added to the code in 1957. As originally adopted section 2030 did not contain the present provisions requiring service upon a third party of copies of the interrogatories propounded and of the answers received in the proceeding initiated under that section. As a consequence, these interrogatories and answers could not be used in lieu of a deposition pursuant to the privilege granted by section 2016 because such use was authorized only "against any party who was present or represented at the taking of the deposition or had due notice thereof." [15] In 1963 an amendment to section 2030 provided that, "Solely for their information, copies of all interrogatories and of all answers thereto shall be served upon all other parties. ..." (Italics ours.) The indicated intent of this provision is to limit the purpose of the requirement respecting service of copies; to make it clear that the receipt of such did not impose an obligation upon or permit the "other parties" to participate in the proceeding; to eliminate any basis for a claim that the receipt of notice of the proceeding through receipt of copies of the questions propounded and answers received authorized their use against the "other parties"; and, thus, to retain the previously existing status of the law respecting their use in lieu of a deposition. (See 37 State Bar J. 586; 38 State Bar J. 683.)
It would be unreasonable and absurd to permit questions and answers respectively propounded and received in an interrogatory *552 proceeding between two parties to be used against a third party when the latter is not given the right to propound cross-interrogatories or to exercise the privilege conferred upon the party initiating the proceeding by section 2030 to require the adverse party to whom the interrogatories are directed to make a further response. Equally unreasonable and absurd would be a system for the preservation of the testimony of witnesses generally which permits such by an interrogatory procedure in lieu of depositions where the right to cross-interrogate or to examine orally is conferred upon all parties, but permits an alternate interrogatory procedure to be invoked by one of the parties when the witness is an adverse party under which the right to cross-interrogate or to examine orally is not extended to other parties.
[16] Where the construction of a statute is necessary, it should be interpreted so as to produce a result that is reasonable (Metropolitan Water Dist. v. Adams, 32 Cal.2d 620, 630 [197 P.2d 543]; consideration should be given to the consequences that will flow from a particular interpretation (Estate of Ryan, 21 Cal.2d 498, 513 [133 P.2d 626]; Jaynes v. Stockton, 193 Cal.App.2d 47, 56 [14 Cal.Rptr. 49]); a construction " 'which is consistent with sound sense and wise policy, with a view to promoting justice' " should be accepted (Estate of Todd, 17 Cal.2d 270, 275 [109 P.2d 913]); that which would produce an absurdity should be rejected (Stockton School Dist. v. Wright, 134 Cal. 64, 68 [66 P. 34]); the consideration given to phraseology should be limited to the end that the purpose of the statute will not be sacrificed to a literal construction of any part thereof (Select Base Materials v. Board of Equalization, supra, 51 Cal.2d 640, 645; San Bernardino Fire & Police Protective League v. City of San Bernardino, 199 Cal.App.2d 401, 410-414 [18 Cal.Rptr. 757]); and, instead, that interpretation which will effect such purpose should be adopted. (Select Base Materials v. Board of Equalization, supra, 51 Cal.2d 640, 645; Dickey v. Raisin Proration Zone No. 1, 24 Cal.2d 796, 802 [151 P.2d 505, 157 A.L.R. 324].) [17] Applying these rules of interpretation to the code sections under consideration here dictates the conclusion that questions and answers produced under the interrogatory procedure authorized by section 2030 may not be used in lieu of a deposition as against a third party to the action.
[18] Defendant, through counsel, asked Dr. Bowers, as a witness, a series of questions to which objections were sustained. The alleged purpose thereof was to elicit testimony that Oster had not been permitted to act without board *553 approval. The position of the court in sustaining the objections appears from its statement that there was no showing Oster had been authorized to act without board approval; that the questions were directed to testimony in rebuttal of a fact about which plaintiff had offered no proof. No error occurred.
During the examination of Edward Brown, president of Capital Resources, by defendant, the court, on its own motion, ordered an answer of the witness stricken. Defendant contends this was error. The incident occurred after counsel for defendant read to the witness, by way of impeachment, a question and answer from his deposition; was asked by the witness to read other questions and answers by way of explanation; hesitated doing so; instead, asked the question to which the witness gave the answer that was stricken, which was followed by an ejaculation by the attorney for plaintiff: "Just a minute. Just a minute" and the court's order striking the answer; subsequently read the requested questions and answers from the deposition; did not renew the question which theretofore elicited the answer that was stricken; or did not move that the answer be reinstated. [19] A fair consideration of the record dictates the conclusion the stricken answer had been given before the attorney for plaintiff had an opportunity to make an objection, and the order of the court striking such was to afford that opportunity, following which the court and counsel engaged in a discussion respecting the reading of requested additional questions and answers. To assert exclusion of the answer as error on appeal, defendant should have repeated the question, asked that the answer be reinstated, or otherwise obtained a ruling from the court respecting the reason for its exclusion. (Generally see People v. Corrigan, 48 Cal.2d 551, 556 [310 P.2d 953]; People v. Pacheco, 220 Cal.App.2d 320, 326 [33 Cal.Rptr. 735]; Drullinger v. Erskine, 71 Cal.App.2d 492, 500 [163 P.2d 48]; People v. Ingersoll, 21 Cal.App. 763 [132 P. 1052].)
Included in the judgment is an award for $5,500 attorney's fees. The lease obligated the lessee to pay "all costs and expenses, including attorneys' fees, incurred by lessor" in enforcing any of its terms. The court found that plaintiff, Associates Discount Corporation, "incurred reasonable attorney's fees of $5,500 in the prosecution of this action." Defendant claims there is no evidence to support this finding. [20] Employment by plaintiff of attorneys representing it in the prosecution of this action was inferable from the fact of such representation. In the absence of evidence showing *554 the terms of this employment, and there was none here, the court was entitled to infer an agreement by plaintiff to pay a reasonable attorneys' fee for the services rendered. Based on the showing respecting the extent and nature of the services rendered by plaintiff's attorneys in the case, as reflected in the record and proceedings before it, the trial court was authorized to determine the reasonable value of those services without the aid of expert evidence on the subject (Hedden v. Waldeck, 9 Cal.2d 631, 639 [72 P.2d 114]; Kirk v. Culley, 202 Cal. 501, 508 [261 P. 994]), and to conclude that the expense incurred by plaintiff for attorneys' fees to time of entry of judgment was $5,500.
Defendant advances a number of other grounds for reversal and the parties have presented their contentions pro and con respecting such. The issues thus raised are not determinative of the appeal in that they involve the sufficiency of the evidence to support findings not requisite to an affirmance of the judgment, e.g., that Oster was general manager of the defendant corporation, and plaintiff was negligent in dealing with him.
The judgment is affirmed.
Brown (Gerald), P. J., and Whelan, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. At this time Oster was a defendant under plaintiff's complaint and a cross-defendant under a cross-complaint by Tobb Company, Inc., et al.
[fn. 2]  2. See Stats. of 1963, ch. 1744, pp. 3477- 3479.

=== CASE 2210430 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:52.749158+00 ===

463 N.W.2d 923 (1990)
Sheryl Randall STROH, Plaintiff and Appellee,
v.
TOWN OF JAVA, South Dakota, a Municipal Corporation, Defendant and Appellant.
No. 17051.
Supreme Court of South Dakota.
Considered on Briefs September 21, 1990.
Decided December 12, 1990.
Mark K. Kroontje of Seiler & Cain, Herreid, for plaintiff and appellee.
R. Stephen Cowan of Von Wald Law Offices, Selby, for defendant and appellant.
PER CURIAM.
The town of Java (Java) appeals from a summary judgment in favor of Sheryl Stroh (Stroh) in her breach of contract action. We reverse and remand.
FACTS
Java owns a municipal bar. On November 16, 1988, Java and Stroh entered into a written "Bar Work Agreement" (contract), under which Stroh contracted to manage the bar. The contract was signed by Stroh and Arthur C. Frank (Frank), president of the Java town board. Stroh had considered leasing the bar from Java and, after signing the contract, she asked what would happen if she decided to lease the bar. In response, on Stroh's copy of the contract, Frank penciled in language stating, "agreement can be terminated by either party with two weeks notice." Apparently, Frank later had this "termination" language typed in on Java's copy of the contract.
Prior to entering into the contract with Stroh, Java had been attempting to lease the bar. Java continued these efforts after contracting with Stroh. On January 13, 1989, Frank informed Stroh's husband, Rodney, that a party had been located to lease the bar. Frank also informed Rodney that Java would no longer need Stroh's services after January 31, 1989. No formal action by the Java town board authorized Frank to convey this notice.
On January 17, 1989, Stroh received a hand-delivered letter signed by Frank and Java's finance officer informing her that Java would be entering into an operating *924 agreement for the bar with another party on February 1, 1989, and that her employment would no longer be needed after January 31, 1989. Again, no formal action by the Java town board authorized this written notification before it was sent.
A special meeting of the town board was held on January 30, 1989. At that special meeting, the Java town board voted to enter into an operating agreement for the bar with Kent and Holly Wolforth. Although Stroh attended the meeting, there was no discussion of her employment or the termination of her contract.
Stroh left Java's employment on February 1, 1989. In March 1989, Stroh commenced this action for breach of contract. In her first cause of action, Stroh alleged that the "termination" language was added after the execution of the contract, without her consent, and was thus unenforceable. The trial court assumed the "termination" language was enforceable and resolved the case on Stroh's second cause of action. Thus, Stroh's appeal is based solely upon her second cause of action which alleged that Java's termination of the contract was ineffective because the Java town board had not formally voted to terminate her contract. Stroh further alleged that Frank's letter of termination was also an unauthorized and ineffective attempt to terminate the contract. On November 7, 1989, the Java town board voted to expressly ratify Frank's termination of Stroh's contract.
The trial court granted summary judgment in favor of Stroh. The trial court concluded that Frank's unauthorized actions constituted ineffective attempts to terminate Stroh's contract. The trial court held that the town board's November 7, 1989, express ratification of Frank's actions could not retroactively validate his actions and that recognition of the express ratification, "would be unconscionable if it were upheld." The trial court thus resolved the case on Stroh's second cause of action and determined that the first cause of action was rendered moot. The trial court entered a Judgment in favor of Stroh for $13,815.54 plus costs. Java appeals.
DECISION
A summary judgment will be affirmed if there are no genuine issues of material fact and the legal questions have been correctly decided. Bego v. Gordon, 407 N.W.2d 801 (S.D.1987). Neither party argued that there were material questions of fact. Consequently, review of the trial court's decision centers on the legal question of whether the actions of the Java town board could and did ratify Frank's unauthorized termination of Stroh's contract.
A municipality may reserve the right to terminate a contract. S & D Maintenance Co., Inc. v. Goldin, 844 F.2d 962 (2nd Cir.1988); Refreshment Services Co. v. City of Cleveland, 63 Ohio St.2d 89, 406 N.E.2d 1115 (1980). See also 10A McQuillin, Municipal Corporations § 29.120 (3rd ed.1990). Java has not alleged that Frank, as town board president, had authority to independently exercise the termination clause without some form of board approval.[*] Java concedes that the town board did not authorize the termination of Stroh's contract prior to Frank's actions. However, Java contends that the town board subsequently ratified Frank's actions and thereby authorized and validated the termination of Stroh's contract. Accordingly, Java contends that there was no breach of contract.
This Court has previously held that a municipality may ratify contracts which were entered into without prior authorization by the governing body. City of Vermillion v. Hugener, 75 S.D. 106, 59 N.W.2d 732 (1953). In Hugener, the city council of Vermillion voted to ratify the *925 unauthorized actions of city officials who entered into a lease and option to purchase. In upholding the municipal ratification, this Court stated,
[w]e recognize that a municipality may not by waiver, or ratification, or acts ordinarily amounting to an estoppel give vitality to a prohibited contract.
* * * * * *
The city had authority in the first instance to enter into the contracts in question and attempted to do so in an irregular manner. The city could ratify these contracts and the court was warranted in finding that there had been a ratification.
Hugener, 75 S.D. at 110, 59 N.W.2d at 734.
Similarly, in Stockwell v. City of Sioux Falls, 68 S.D. 157, 159, 299 N.W. 453, 454 (1941), upholding Sioux Falls' ratified purchase of a gravel pit, this Court explained that: "[t]he [contract] was within the general corporate powers of the defendant city, and any unauthorized acts of the officers or agents of the city leading up to the [contract] were subject to ratification by the city." See also McCarthy v. City of Murdo, 68 S.D. 271, 1 N.W.2d 812 (1942) (ratification of a municipal employment contract).
Java argues that, on January 17, 1989, when the town board unanimously voted to enter into an operating agreement for the town bar with the Wolforths, it also impliedly ratified the previously unauthorized actions of Frank in terminating Stroh's contract. This Court has upheld the implied ratification of municipal contracts in at least two cases, although without explicitly identifying the ratification as implied. Stockwell, 68 S.D. at 454, 299 N.W. at 454; McCarthy, 68 S.D. at 275, 1 N.W.2d at 813. See also McMahon v. City of Des Moines, 232 Iowa 240, 4 N.W.2d 866 (1942). However, we have not discussed the concept of ratification in a municipal contract case. In other ratification cases, not involving municipalities, we have explained that:
The affirmance required to establish ratification may be either express or implied from conduct showing an election to treat an unauthorized act as authorized, or by conduct which can be explained only if there was such an election. Ratification requires intent to ratify plus full knowledge of the material facts.
Bank of Hoven v. Rausch, 382 N.W.2d 39, 41 (S.D.1986) (citations omitted).
Other jurisdictions have explicitly applied those same principles of ratification to municipal contracts. For example:
Ratification by a municipal corporation, like ratification by a private corporation or by an individual, `may be by express assent, or by acts or conduct of the principal, inconsistent with any other supposition than that he intended to adopt and own the act done in his name.'
City of New York v. Heller, 127 Misc.2d 814, 487 N.Y.S.2d 288 (N.Y.Civ.Ct.1985) aff'd 131 Misc.2d 485, 503 N.Y.S.2d 995 (N.Y.App.Div.1986) citing Self v. City of Long Beach, 286 N.Y. 382, 36 N.E.2d 630 (1941). See also La. Consumer's League v. City of Baton Rouge, 431 So.2d 35 (La.Ct.App.1983) writ denied 435 So.2d 431 (La.1983); City of New Britain v. Hancock, 34 Conn.Supp. 14, 373 A.2d 859 (1976).
The facts of this case demonstrate that the Java town board impliedly ratified Frank's unauthorized termination of Stroh's contract. Frank's actions simply constituted an unauthorized attempt to exercise the termination clause. If we assume that the termination clause was valid, Java had the ability and authority to exercise the termination clause and, as a matter of law, had the same ability to ratify Frank's actions. The Java town board's decision to enter into a bar lease agreement with the Wolforths is incompatible with the continued existence of Stroh's contract. Java could not lease the bar to the Wolforths and maintain an agreement with Stroh to operate the bar. Thus, it is clear that by approving a lease of the bar, the town board was also approving the termination of Stroh's contract.
Having concluded that the town board's January 17, 1989 actions constituted ratification of Frank's actions, we find it unnecessary to address Java's alternative argument concerning the express ratification *926 on November 7, 1990. The summary judgment is reversed. However, because of the trial court's prior erroneous resolution of that issue, other issues of law and fact, including the validity and enforceability of the two week termination clause in the contract, were left unresolved. The matter is remanded for resolution of remaining issues in accordance with this opinion.
NOTES
[*]  In Finck v. City of Tea, 443 N.W.2d 632 (S.D.1989) this Court held that a mayor in an aldermanic form of municipal government has statutory authority to terminate appointive city officers. See SDCL 9-14-13. However, with regards to a town run by a board of trustees, no such statute authorizes the president of a town board to terminate contracts. Rather, SDCL 9-7-7 provides that, "[a] majority of the members of the board shall constitute a quorum, but no act of the board shall be effective unless consented to by a majority of the members."

=== CASE 9737450 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:25:28.990434+00 ===

MESCHKE, Justice,
concurring.
While I join in Justice Levine’s opinion, I caution that this opinion should not be read too broadly. While the res judicata effect of the initial arbitration is not irrational in this case, application of res judicata in other arbitrations may go beyond the scope of the submission to arbitration.
Not every second arbitration will duplicate a first one, even for highway construction contracts. See NDCC 24-02-26.1, 24-02-27, 24-02-28, 24-02-29, 24-02-30 and 24-02-31. Particularly, see NDCC 24-02-32. It seems to me that, under many circumstances, these statutes contemplate more than one arbitration on a single highway construction contract.
This statutory plan for arbitrating disputes in highway construction contracts does not clearly preclude “splitting a cause of action,” as in civil actions. Cf. 46 Am. Jur.2d Judgments § 405 (1969). Arbitration parties should be concluded only as to those matters that were submitted to arbitration, that have been heard, and that were the subject of an arbitration award. 5 Am.Jur.2d Arbitration and Award § 147 (1962). In this case, I am satisfied that it was not irrational to rule that the second arbitration claim included matters submitted and determined in the first arbitration proceeding.

=== CASE 2210503 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:54.108728+00 ===

241 Cal.App.2d 186 (1966)
THELMA COPELAND et al., Plaintiffs and Appellants,
v.
DEPARTMENT OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL, Defendant and Respondent.
Civ. No. 27887.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Three.
Mar. 29, 1966.
Murray M. Chotiner for Plaintiffs and Appellants.
Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, and Lynn Henry Johnson, Deputy Attorney General, for Defendant and Respondent.
FORD, J.
This is an appeal from a judgment denying a peremptory writ of mandate in a proceeding brought to review the order of the respondent Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control that the on-sale beer license of the petitioners be revoked  [fn. 1] because of the conviction on or about March 10, 1961, of the petitioner Copeland of three counts of violation of section 476a of the Penal Code.  [fn. 2] The action of the respondent was taken pursuant to the provision of section 24200, subdivision (d), of the Business and Professions Code whereunder a ground constituting a basis for the suspension or revocation of such a license is the "plea, verdict, or judgment of guilty to any public offense involving moral turpitude."
The petitioners make two contentions. One is that the offenses of which the petitioner Copeland was convicted did not inherently and necessarily involve moral turpitude and, consequently, the order cannot stand because the respondent did not consider the circumstances of the offenses and thereupon make a determination as to whether moral turpitude was involved. The second contention is that, in any event, there *188 was no basis for the order because, prior to the hearing of the accusation against the petitioners, as to each charge the petitioner Copeland was released from "all penalties and disabilities resulting from the offense or crime" of which she was convicted pursuant to the provisions of section 1203.4 of the Penal Code.  [fn. 3]
The petitioners' position is untenable. [1] One essential element of the crime of which the petitioner Copeland was convicted is the intent to defraud. (People v. Rush, 172 Cal.App.2d 431, 434-435 [341 P.2d 788].) Consequently, that crime is a public offense involving moral turpitude. (In re Hallinan, 43 Cal.2d 243, 247 [272 P.2d 768]; Burr v. Immigration & Naturalization Service (9th Cir. 1965) 350 F.2d 87, 91-92.)
[2] As used in section 1203.4 of the Penal Code the words "penalties and disabilities" have reference to criminal penalties and disabilities or to matters of a kindred nature. [3] But the disciplining of licensees such as the petitioners herein is for the protection of the public in the exercise of the police power and not for the purpose of punishing any licensee. (See Kelly v. Municipal Court, 160 Cal.App.2d 38, 44 [324 P.2d 990]; Epstein v. California Horse Racing Board, 222 Cal.App.2d 831, 840 [35 Cal.Rptr. 642].) [4] It is settled that proceedings to suspend or revoke business or professional licenses are not included among the penalties and disabilities that are released by a dismissal pursuant to section 1203.4. (Meyer v. Board of Medical Examiners, 34 Cal.2d 62, 66-67 [206 P.2d 1085]; Fountain v. State Board of Education, 157 Cal.App.2d 463, 469 [320 P.2d 899].) [5] The fact that, unlike the situation with respect to certain other regulatory statutes subjecting various licensees to disciplinary action because of conviction of designated offenses, there is no express statutory provision that section 1203.4 is not applicable to proceedings under subdivision (d) of section 24200 of the *189 Business and Professions Code does not aid the petitioner because such statutory enactments merely constituted the codification of the governing law as to the effect of section 1203.4 as theretofore determined. (See Kelly v. Municipal Court, supra, 160 Cal.App.2d 38, 42-44; People v. Taylor, 178 Cal.App.2d 472, 475-476 [3 Cal.Rptr. 186].)
The judgment is affirmed.
Shinn, P. J., and Kaus, J., concurred.
"(a) Any person who ... willfully, with intent to defraud, makes or draws or utters or delivers any check ... upon any bank ... for the payment of money, knowing at the time of such making, drawing, uttering or delivering that the maker ... has not sufficient funds in, or credit with said bank ... for the payment of such check ... and all other checks ... upon such funds then outstanding, in full upon its presentation, although no express representation is made with reference thereto, is punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than one year, or in the state prison for not more than 14 years."
"Every defendant who has fulfilled the conditions of his probation for the entire period thereof, or who shall have been discharged from probation prior to the termination of the period thereof, shall at any time thereafter be permitted by the court to withdraw his plea of guilty and enter a plea of not guilty; or if he has been convicted after a plea of not guilty, the court shall set aside the verdict of guilty; and in either case the court shall thereupon dismiss the accusations or information against such defendant, who shall thereafter be released from all penalties and disabilities resulting from the offense or crime of which he has been convicted."
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. The order of revocation was stayed upon condition that within a designated period of time the petitioner Copeland divest herself of all interest in the licensed premises and refrain from any participation in the business.
[fn. 2]  2. Section 476a is in part as follows:
[fn. 3]  3. Section 1203.4 of the Penal Code is in part as follows:

=== CASE 2210507 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:54.183063+00 ===

463 N.W.2d 817 (1990)
236 Neb. 765
JOSEPH HEITING AND SONS, a Partnership, Appellant,
v.
JACKS BEAN COMPANY, a Colorado Corporation, Appellee.
No. 88-774.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
December 14, 1990.
*819 Peter C. Wegman, of Rembolt Ludtke Parker & Berger, Lincoln, for appellant.
Paul W. Snyder, of Van Steenberg, Chaloupka, Mullin, Holyoke, Pahlke, Smith, Snyder & Hofmeister, Scottsbluff, for appellee.
HASTINGS, C.J., and BOSLAUGH, WHITE, CAPORALE, SHANAHAN, GRANT, and FAHRNBRUCH, JJ.
HASTINGS, Chief Justice.
The plaintiff, Joseph Heiting and Sons (Heiting), has appealed the order of the *820 district court which entered summary judgment in favor of the defendant, Jacks Bean Company (Jacks). Heiting had filed suit for damages for breach of an alleged oral contract for the sale of its beans to Jacks. Heiting assigns as error that the court incorrectly determined that there were no genuine issues of material fact and failed to find that an exception to the statute of frauds provision of Neb.U.C.C. § 2-201 (Cum.Supp.1990) applied to the facts of this case. We reverse and remand for further proceedings.
Summary judgment is proper when the pleadings, depositions, admissions, stipulations, and affidavits in the record show that no genuine issue exists as to any material fact or as to the ultimate inferences that may be drawn from any material fact and that, as a matter of law, the moving party is entitled to judgment. Neb.Rev.Stat. § 25-1332 (Reissue 1989); First Nat. Bank v. Chadron Energy Corp., 236 Neb. 199, 459 N.W.2d 736 (1990); Rosnick v. Dinsmore, 235 Neb. 738, 457 N.W.2d 793 (1990). In reviewing a summary judgment, we view the evidence in a light most favorable to the party against whom the judgment is granted and give such party the benefit of all reasonable inferences deducible from the evidence. Id.
Jacks is a Colorado corporation with headquarters in Holyoke, Colorado. Jacks purchases beans at its warehouse, processes the beans, and eventually sells the beans. Jacks has a procedure in receiving the beans. A grower brings the beans to Jacks' facility in Sheridan County, Nebraska. The manager of the facility, Richard Schneider, takes a 500-gram sample from the load of beans and grades the beans on a scale of 1 to 5 based on the amount of split beans, stems, dirt, and other debris (tare) in the sample. Grade 1 is the highest and grades 4 and 5 are substandard.
If the grade assigned is acceptable to the grower, the beans are dumped into a bin at Jacks' facility and are commingled with beans from other growers. When the bins are full, the beans are transported to Jacks' processing plant, where the beans are processed. The beans are considered stored if the grower and Jacks have not reached an agreement for sale and purchase within 30 days despite the fact that a grower's particular beans may have already been processed. The storage charge to the grower is $0.003 per hundredweight per day.
Schneider receives a daily call from Jacks' headquarters in Holyoke, Colorado, advising Schneider of the prices for the various types of beans to be purchased by Jacks that day. The prices generally remain the same throughout the day, but the prices are subject to change. The daily prices are posted in the grading room at Jacks' facility, published in the Scottsbluff, Nebraska, newspaper, and broadcast over the Alliance, Nebraska, radio station. Ordinarily, the process of calling in and selling the beans previously delivered to Jacks is not in writing.
Joseph Heiting and Sons is a partnership consisting of Joseph Heiting and his sons, Steve and Tim. The partnership is engaged in farming. The partners each have a one-third interest in the partnership; however, Joseph Heiting (Mr. Heiting) does the selling. Heiting delivered its beans to Jacks from September 18 to September 29, 1987. Each load was graded, weighed, and receipted for by delivery of a scale ticket. During that time, Heiting delivered 12 loads of beans for a total of 2,837.75 hundred-pound bags, each assigned grade 1. The beans were commingled at Jacks' facility in Sheridan County with beans from other producers and shipped to Jacks' processing facility.
On September 30, 1987, Mr. Heiting called and told Schneider that he wanted to sell Heiting's beans. The posted price was $19. Mr. Heiting was told by Schneider that he would "call them in." Mr. Heiting construed this to mean that the beans were sold at $19. Mr. Heiting believed Jacks could purchase all the beans Heiting had to sell at the posted price because he was never informed that there was limited buying.
*821 Schneider did not recall if he or Cheryl Johnson, the bookkeeper and receptionist for Jacks, had spoken to Mr. Heiting. Schneider later stated that he had told Mr. Heiting of the limited buying when Mr. Heiting called Jacks to sell the beans.
Mr. Heiting discovered 1 or 2 days after September 30 that Jacks had not purchased the beans. The price had dropped to $18 per bag. Mr. Heiting made no attempt to sell at that price. The beans were sold in March 1988 at a price of $15 per bag. Mr. Heiting was not called back for verification of the purchase.
Although the beans were not purchased by Jacks until March 1988, Heiting received a separate check in 1987 as a freight payment of $0.25 per hundredweight for all beans delivered to Jacks. Schneider testified that the freight payment is due when a load of beans is hauled to Jacks' facility.
Heiting brought this action based on an alleged oral contract between the parties to purchase all the beans stored at Jacks for $19 per bag.
A fundamental concept in contract law is that to create a contract there must be both an offer and an acceptance. There must also be a meeting of the minds or a binding mutual understanding between the parties to the contract. See Woods v. Woods, 177 Neb. 542, 129 N.W.2d 519 (1964). A contract may be written or oral and can be shown by circumstantial evidence. See Woods, supra.
Summary judgment would not be proper if conflicting evidence is presented to show whether a contract existed. See Robert Johnson Grain Co. v. Chem. Interchange Co., 541 F.2d 207 (8th Cir.1976). When the issue is whether an acceptance of an offer was sufficient to create a contract, the issue is one of fact and summary judgment is not proper. See, Hansen v. Hill, 215 Neb. 573, 340 N.W.2d 8 (1983); Duplex Mfg. Co. v. Atlas Leasing Corp., 184 Neb. 294, 166 N.W.2d 732 (1969); Fay Smith & Associates, Inc. v. Consumers P.P. Dist., 172 Neb. 681, 111 N.W.2d 451 (1961).
Heiting has alleged that the posting of a price was an offer which it accepted. Heiting argues in the alternative that Heiting offered the beans for sale and the offer was accepted. In considering the first alternative it is necessary to look at the case of Nebraska Seed Co. v. Harsh, 98 Neb. 89, 152 N.W. 310 (1915). In Harsh, a letter was sent by Harsh to Nebraska Seed Company indicating that Harsh wanted to sell a quantity of seed and the price at which he would sell the seed. Nebraska Seed Company sent a letter to Harsh accepting the offer. Harsh failed to deliver the seed. This court concluded that Harsh's letter was not an offer but rather a proposal to make an offer. We stated that "`[t]he mere statement of the price at which property is held cannot be understood as an offer to sell.'" Id. at 91, 152 N.W. at 311 (quoting Knight v. Cooley, 34 Iowa 218 (1872)). The posting of the price on the grading room wall is similar to Harsh's letter. The posting is not an offer. The posting was merely an offer to negotiate directed at the bean growers.
Negotiations began when Mr. Heiting contacted Jacks in an effort to sell Heiting's beans. Mr. Heiting informed Jacks that he was willing to sell all Heiting's beans stored at Jacks for the price posted on the wall. The quantity and price were in the offer.
The offer was communicated to Schneider or Johnson at Jacks' facility. At the time the offer was communicated, Mr. Heiting was told that the sell orders would be called in. The sell orders were the offers to sell the quantity on hand at the posted price. Mr. Heiting did not learn until 1 or 2 days after September 30 that the beans had not been purchased.
Acceptance of an offer may be expressed in a variety of forms. Acceptance may be illustrated by "`words, conduct, or acquiescence indicating agreement.' " Overman v. Brown, 220 Neb. 788, 791, 372 N.W.2d 102, 105 (1985) (quoting 17 C.J.S. Contracts § 41 (1963)). Acceptance by an alleged act, words, or conduct is determined by a reasonable person standard. Overman v. Brown, supra (citing In re Mapes Enterprises, Inc., 15 B.R. *822 192 (D.Nev.1981)). Acceptance may also be indicated by the silence and inaction of an offeree. David City Hospital v. Gilmore, 184 Neb. 342, 167 N.W.2d 397 (1969).
Heiting offered to sell its beans at the posted price on September 30, 1987. Mr. Heiting was never informed of acceptance or rejection of the offer. When Heiting eventually did sell its beans to Jacks in March 1988, the purchase was not verified. Heiting was not informed of the acceptance or rejection of the offer. Thus, in March, the acceptance was by silence. Whether the offer was accepted in September by silence or inaction is an issue of material fact as to the existence of the alleged oral contract; therefore, summary judgment was not proper on the issue of whether a contract existed.
Next, we consider whether § 2-201, the statute of frauds, applies. The statute reads in pertinent part:
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this section a contract for the sale of goods for the price of five hundred dollars or more is not enforceable by way of action or defense unless there is some writing sufficient to indicate that a contract for sale has been made between the parties and signed by the party against whom enforcement is sought or by his or her authorized agent or broker. A writing is not insufficient because it omits or incorrectly states a term agreed upon but the contract is not enforceable under this paragraph beyond the quantity of goods shown in such writing.
....
(3) A contract which does not satisfy the requirements of subsection (1) but which is valid in other respects is enforceable
. . . . .
(c) with respect to goods for which payment has been made and accepted or which have been received and accepted (Section 2-606).
Although Schneider's deposition testimony suggests that when a producer calls in and says he wants to sell a quantity of beans and the offer is accepted there is nothing in writing between the parties to consummate the sale, exceptions to the provisions of the statute of frauds found in the Uniform Commercial Code cannot be enlarged by usage in the trade. Farmers Cooperative Ass'n of Churchs Ferry v. Cole, 239 N.W.2d 808, 814 (N.D.1976) ("exceptions to the Statute of Frauds cannot be enlarged by usage in the trade, such as a consistent failure of grain dealers to utilize written agreements in their dealings with farmers").
The statute of frauds clearly applies in this case. The sale of beans constitutes the sale of goods. The price involved is in excess of $500. Therefore, the contract for the sale and purchase of the beans is required to be in writing, or enforcement of the contract may be barred by the statute of frauds. In this case, we are concerned with the exception regarding receipt and acceptance of goods as evidence of a contract.
Heiting delivered its beans to Jacks' warehouse. The beans were commingled with beans from other growers, stored in bins, shipped to Jacks' processing facility, and eventually processed. Heiting urges the court to consider these acts as receipt and acceptance of the goods under § 2-201(3)(c), which would make the statute of frauds inapplicable to the alleged agreement.
Heiting argues that the goods have been received and accepted as defined by the Nebraska Uniform Commercial Code. Receipt of goods is defined as "taking physical possession of them." Neb.U.C.C. § 2-103(1)(c) (Reissue 1980). Acceptance occurs when the buyer "does any act inconsistent with the seller's ownership...." Neb.U.C.C. § 2-606(1)(c) (Reissue 1980).
This court has examined the issue of receipt and acceptance of goods on several occasions. In the case of In re Estate of Nelsen, 209 Neb. 730, 311 N.W.2d 508 (1981), we noted that delivery alone is not sufficient to take an oral contract for the sale of goods at a price of $500 or more out of the statute of frauds. The goods must be "`received and accepted'" to render the statute of frauds inapplicable. Id. at 733, *823 311 N.W.2d at 510. Thus, delivery of the beans to Jacks' warehouse would not be enough. There must have been an acceptance.
In Johnson v. Holdrege Coop. Equity Exchange, 206 Neb. 568, 293 N.W.2d 863 (1980), an oral contract was entered into before the grain was delivered. At the time of delivery, the grain was tested and commingled with other grain. The grower's particular grain was impossible to recover. We noted that the actions of the warehouse were inconsistent with the grower's ownership. This court concluded that the actual delivery of goods at a time the price was capable of being made definite may be sufficient to constitute an acceptance. See Rotterman v. General Mills, Inc., 245 Iowa 229, 61 N.W.2d 718 (1953). We held that there was an issue of fact and that therefore summary judgment was not proper.
The grower's grain in Johnson was commingled with grain of a lesser quality. Heiting's beans were commingled with beans of the same quality as those delivered. However, in both cases the particular goods delivered could not be returned in the same condition as the goods were in when delivered. The Iowa Supreme Court has stated that when the original goods cannot be returned it may be a sale. See Rotterman, supra. Heiting's original beans could not be returned. Although this is not conclusive on the issue of acceptance of the goods, it does offer some support to that proposition.
"Acceptance," as it is used in § 2-201(3)(c), could be evidenced by the following:
(1) Heiting could do nothing further to deliver or present the beans for acceptance. The beans were out of Heiting's control. Delivery occurs when the seller does everything necessary to put goods completely and unconditionally at the buyer's disposal. Goosic Constr. Co. v. City Nat. Bank of Crete, 196 Neb. 86, 241 N.W.2d 521 (1976).
(2) Jacks could do nothing further to indicate acceptance of the beans except to pay for the beans. Jacks had already exercised complete control over the beans. See, generally, O'Day v. George Arakelian Farms, Inc., 24 Ariz.App. 578, 540 P.2d 197 (1975) (holding that lettuce was received and accepted because buyer did acts inconsistent with seller's ownership).
(3) The particular beans of Heiting's could not be returned. See, generally, Rotterman, supra (finding that where seller cannot get the original grain back, it may be a sale).
There is an issue as to whether or not the receipt and acceptance of the goods were sufficient to bar the application of the statute of frauds. Therefore, summary judgment was not proper.
The North Dakota Supreme Court has stated that "where the conduct that is relied upon for part performance is consistent with the contract, such conduct is sufficient to take the contract out of the statute of frauds even though the conduct is not inconsistent with some other arguable possible arrangement between the parties." Hofmann v. Stoller, 320 N.W.2d 786, 791 (N.D.1982). The conduct of the parties could be perceived as consistent with an oral contract.
In Wilson v. Remmel Cattle Co., Inc., 542 S.W.2d 938 (Tex.Civ.App.1976), the appellants, the Wilsons, delivered to and placed in a separate pen on the premises of Remmel Cattle Co., Inc., a commercial feedlot engaged in feeding and marketing cattle, a quantity of Wilsons' cattle. The agreement was that the Wilsons would feed and medically attend to their cattle, furnishing the necessary feed and medicine. For the use of the pen, the Wilsons were to perform custom cattle work for Remmel.
Later, Remmel Cattle Co. and Charles Kent Remmel, the manager of the feedlot, sued the Wilsons for feed and care of the cattle, and the Wilsons counterclaimed, alleging an oral agreement pursuant to which the Remmels orally agreed to purchase these cattle. A jury failed to find that the Wilsons agreed with the Remmels to furnish feed and maintenance for the cattle, but found that the Remmels agreed *824 to purchase the cattle for a certain amount, and returned a verdict in a dollar amount for the Wilsons. The trial court denied the Wilsons' motion for judgment on the verdict, but granted Remmels' motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict. The Wilsons appealed.
In reversing the judgment and remanding the cause, the Texas appeals court stated:
In our view and contrary to the respective positions of the Wilsons and the Remmels, neither receipt and acceptance nor non-receipt and non-acceptance was established by the evidence as a matter of law. The fact that the cattle were located in the feedlot at the time of the pleaded oral contract does not, under the description of the agreement placing them there, either establish physical possession in the Remmels so as to foreclose their taking physical possession under a later contract of sale or ripen into their receipt and acceptance of the cattle upon the mere showing of an oral contract.... Their [the parties'] testimony, which only scantly described their dealings, was neither undisputed nor so clear as to conclusively show whether the Remmels did or did not receive and accept the cattle pursuant to an oral contract, and merely raised that factual issue for resolution by the jury.
Id. at 941-42.
We agree that where the evidence as to receipt and acceptance under the Uniform Commercial Code is not conclusive, the question is one of fact to be resolved by the fact finder.
It cannot be said that there exist no genuine issues of material fact. Summary judgment was inappropriate in this instance. The judgment of the district court is reversed, and the cause is remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
REVERSED AND REMANDED FOR FURTHER PROCEEDINGS.

=== CASE 2210510 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:54.232108+00 ===

185 Mich. App. 446 (1990)
463 N.W.2d 144
PRINGLE
v.
YPSILANTI REGIONAL PSYCHIATRIC HOSPITAL
MORGAN
v.
YPSILANTI REGIONAL PSYCHIATRIC HOSPITAL
Docket Nos. 115003, 116304.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided September 12, 1990.
James A. Tanielian, for plaintiffs.
Frank J. Kelley, Attorney General, Gay Secor Hardy, Solicitor General, and George L. McCargar and Gary L. Finkbeiner, Assistant Attorneys General, for defendants.
Before: GILLIS, P.J., and BRENNAN and REILLY, JJ.
PER CURIAM.
In these consolidated appeals, defendants appeal as of right from the circuit courts' orders which determined that weekly net wage as used in MCL 330.1113; MSA 14.800(113) was equal to the average weekly wage defined in MCL 418.371(2); MSA 17.237(371)(2) and that they were prohibited from discharging plaintiffs from employment and, thereby, terminating their supplemental benefits pursuant to MCL 330.1113; MSA 14.800(113). We reverse.
Plaintiff Pringle was an employee of the Ypsilanti Regional Psychiatric Hospital and was assaulted in the course of his employment. He made a claim for workers' compensation. In determining *449 the amount of benefits to be paid, the worker's compensation bureau applied the following formula pursuant to MCL 418.371; MSA 17.237(371):
(1) The weekly loss in wages referred to in this act shall consist of the percentage of the average weekly earnings of the injured employee computed according to this section as fairly represents the proportionate extent of the impairment of the employee's earning capacity in the employments covered by this act in which the employee was working at the time of the personal injury. The weekly loss in wages shall be fixed as of the time of the personal injury, and determined considering the nature and extent of the personal injury. The compensation payable, when added to the employee's wage earning capacity after the personal injury in the same or other employments, shall not exceed the employee's average weekly earnings at the time of the injury.
(2) As used in this act, "average weekly wage" means the weekly wage earned by the employee at the time of the employee's injury in all employment, inclusive of overtime, premium pay, and cost of living adjustment, and exclusive of any fringe or other benefits which continue during the disability. Any fringe or other benefit which does not continue during the disability shall be included for purposes of determining an employee's average weekly wage to the extent that the inclusion of the fringe or other benefit will not result in a weekly benefit amount which is greater than 2/3 of the state average weekly wage at the time of injury. The average weekly wage shall be determined by computing the total wages paid in the highest paid 39 weeks of the 52 weeks immediately preceding the date of injury, and dividing by 39.
The bureau determined Pringle's average weekly wage was $648.73 and, therefore, determined that he was entitled to $383.41 in benefits.
Pringle also applied for supplemental benefits *450 pursuant to MCL 330.1113; MSA 14.800(113), which provides:
A person employed by the department who is injured as a result of an assault by a recipient of mental health services shall receive his full wages by the department until workmen's compensation benefits begin and then shall receive in addition to workmen's compensation benefits a supplement from the department which together with the workmen's compensation benefits shall equal but not exceed the weekly net wage of the employee at the time of the injury. This supplement shall only apply while the person is on the department's payroll and is receiving workmen's compensation benefits and shall include any employee who is currently receiving workmen's compensation due to an injury covered by this section. Fringe benefits normally received by an employee shall be in effect during the time the employee receives the supplement provided by this section from the department.
Using the Personnel-Payroll Information System for Michigan Manual of the Department of Management and Budget, as directed by the Civil Service Commission, an employee in Ypsilanti Regional Psychiatric Hospital's personnel department determined Pringle's weekly net wage was $336.81. The formula used multiplied an employee's hourly rate by eighty hours because employees were paid on a biweekly basis. Holiday overtime, regular overtime, step increases and annual increases were not included in determining an employee's gross pay. The employee's gross pay was then entered into a computer program along with the employee's marital status and number of dependents. We note that the employee's marital status and number of dependents could be determined from Form 100, which is filed with the *451 worker's compensation bureau upon the filing of a workers' compensation claim. Using this information, the amount the employee paid in federal and state income tax as well as FICA could be determined. Whether the employee paid city taxes was also considered. An employee's weekly net wage was then determined by subtracting deductions for federal and state income taxes, FICA and city income tax, if applicable, from his gross wages and dividing by two. Because Pringle's workers' compensation benefits ($383.41) exceeded his net weekly pay ($336.81), Ypsilanti Regional Psychiatric Hospital denied his request for supplemental benefits pursuant to MCL 330.1113; MSA 14.800(113). At the same time, Ypsilanti Regional Psychiatric Hospital denied Pringle's request to contribute to the deferred compensation program because there were no provisions for direct payment.
Pringle sued, claiming that the workers' compensation bureau had determined his "net weekly wage" to be $648.73 and, therefore, defendants were required to pay him a supplement of $265.32 (i.e., $648.73, Pringle's "net weekly wage," minus $383.41, Pringle's workers' compensation) pursuant to MCL 330.1113; MSA 14.800(113). Pringle also claimed that he was entitled to contribute to the deferred compensation program because it was a fringe benefit pursuant to MCL 330.1113; MSA 14.800(113). In addition to monetary damages, Pringle requested a declaratory judgment that the workers' compensation bureau's determination of his average weekly wage be treated as his weekly net wage.
Subsequently, Ypsilanti Regional Psychiatric Hospital sent Pringle a letter informing him that his supplemental pay was limited to fifty weeks and that, if he failed to provide medical documentation *452 that he could return to work shortly, he would be fired. Pringle filed a motion for a restraining order preventing Ypsilanti Regional Psychiatric Hospital from limiting his supplemental pay and from terminating his employment.
The court granted Pringle's request for an ex parte temporary restraining order and issued an order to show cause. Despite defendants' objections at the hearing, the court ordered the temporary restraining order continued.
Defendants filed a motion for summary disposition, claiming that they had properly determined weekly net wage and that that term was not equivalent to the term average weekly wage. Defendants further argued that deferred compensation was not a fringe benefit and, even if it was, Pringle was not entitled to it because he was not entitled to the supplemental benefit pursuant to MCL 330.1113; MSA 14.800(113).
Pringle responded, claiming that weekly net wages should be determined by a formula like the one used to determine average weekly wage. Pringle also argued that the intention of the Legislature was to provide a supplemental benefit. Pringle further claimed that, because he was entitled to the supplemental benefit, he was entitled to participate in the deferred compensation program, which was a fringe benefit.
At an evidentiary hearing, the parties agreed that it was improper to terminate whatever supplemental benefit Pringle might have been entitled to after fifty weeks. See, e.g., Michigan State Employees Ass'n v Dep't of Corrections, 172 Mich App 155; 431 NW2d 411 (1988). The parties also agreed to determine if firing Pringle after fifty weeks was appropriate. See Jesse v Dep't of Mental Health, 130 Mich App 350; 343 NW2d 548 (1983), lv den 422 Mich 860 (1985), where this Court held that *453 MCL 330.1113; MSA 14.800(113) was not violated by the Department of Mental Health's practice of terminating employees after one hundred weeks of disability. We note that once an employee is no longer on the department's payroll, he is no longer entitled to the supplemental benefit. MCL 330.1113; MSA 14.800(113). Jesse, supra.
At the hearing, Pringle called Philip Helms, who was the president of a local union and secretary of the mental health coordinating committee in 1975. Helms testified that MCL 330.1113; MSA 14.800(113) was drafted after he and five other Department of Mental Health employees were stabbed by a patient. He stated that the purpose of the law "was to see that an employee that was injured and disabled in this kind of situation did not suffer a loss of income." Helms also testified that if an employee was denied the supplemental benefit he was nonetheless entitled to fringe benefits.
The court held that the statute did not specify that weekly net wage must be determined using a forty-hour work week. The court held that the statute was unambiguous and that defendants' rules defining weekly net wage "would violate the constitutional prohibitions against delegation of power and due process." The court then held:
[T]he power to limit supplemental benefits to an amount less than the average weekly wage finding of the Workers' Compensation Board has not been delegated to the Department of Management and Budget. Nor has the power to arbitrarily terminate employment after 50 or 100 weeks of disability been granted to these agencies by the Legislature. For these reasons, the policy of the respective departments is proscribed.
Plaintiff's [Pringle's] employment was hazardous, and, in recognition of the hazards of this type *454 of employment, the Legislature created [1976 PA 414, MCL 330.1113; MSA 14.800(113)] to insure that an employee continue to receive his former level of income.
The Court finds that the benefit here is tied as a supplement to Workers' Compensation as a disability benefit and that the benefit should run with Workers' Compensation for as long as the disability continues.
Finally, this Court also rules that Plaintiff [Pringle] is entitled to the continuation of his fringe benefits.
Following the court's decision, plaintiff John Morgan filed his suit, alleging that under that decision he was entitled to supplemental benefits pursuant to MCL 330.1113; MSA 14.800(113) and that his employment could not be terminated after fifty weeks.
Morgan was also injured in an assault by a resident. Morgan's average weekly wage was $477.73, entitling him to $276.54 in workers' compensation benefits. Ypsilanti Regional Psychiatric Hospital's employment personnel determined that Morgan's weekly net wage was $326.99 and that his supplemental benefit was $50.45 (i.e., $326.99, Morgan's weekly net wage, minus $276.54, Morgan's workers' compensation). Morgan claimed that he was entitled to $201.19 (i.e., $477.73, Morgan's average weekly wage, minus $276.54, Morgan's workers' compensation).
Morgan also requested an ex parte restraining order preventing Ypsilanti Regional Psychiatric Hospital from terminating his employment and, thereby, his supplemental benefit. The circuit court denied Morgan's request for an ex parte temporary restraining order, but granted an order to show cause why a preliminary injunction should not be issued.
*455 In response to the order to show cause, defendants claimed that Morgan was not entitled to injunctive relief. Defendants stated that Morgan was to be terminated after one hundred weeks. Defendants claimed that their policy of termination was proper, citing Jesse, supra. Defendants noted that Michigan State Employees Ass'n, supra, was distinguishable because there the employee's supplemental benefit had been cut off even though the employee had not been terminated. In any event, defendants noted that Morgan had failed to exhaust his administrative remedies regarding his discharge, citing Samuel v Dep't of Mental Health, 140 Mich 101; 364 NW2d 294 (1985).
In their trial brief, defendants again claimed that they could properly terminate Morgan and, therefore, his supplemental benefit. MCL 330.1113; MSA 14.800(113). Jesse, supra. Defendants also claimed that they had properly interpreted that statute to define weekly net wage and that that term was not synonymous with the term average weekly wage.
Morgan claimed that his weekly net wage should be the average weekly wage because that was the average amount he earned and based his spending on. Morgan further argued that he could not be fired because doing so would deprive him of due process. Relying on Michigan State Employees Ass'n, supra, Morgan argued that the supplement should run with workers' compensation for as long as the disability continued. Morgan argued that if the Legislature had intended a time limit on the supplemental benefit it could have put one in the statute.
The court agreed with the court's opinion in Pringle's case and, therefore, granted Morgan's request for a restraining order and declaratory judgment.
*456 If a statute is unambiguous, this Court will avoid further interpretation and will not vary the clear meaning of the statute; however, if the statute is ambiguous, it is this Court's duty to effect the intent of the Legislature. Niggeling v Dep't of Transportation, 183 Mich App 770, 775; 455 NW2d 415 (1990). Specific words in a given statute are to be assigned their ordinary meaning, unless a different interpretation is indicated. Id.
MCL 330.1113; MSA 14.800(113) uses the term "weekly net wage." The circuit court judges held that this term was equivalent to the term "average weekly wage" as defined in MCL 418.371(2); MSA 17.237(371)(2). We disagree. If the Legislature had intended to use that term, it could have done so, but it did not. MCL 330.1113; MSA 14.800(113) refers to full wages as well as weekly net wage. We believe that this indicates the Legislature's intent to determine an assaulted employee's compensation by his base salary (i.e., excluding overtime). Moreover, we believe that taking FICA and tax deductions normally made in determining an employee's net wage is appropriate given the Legislature's use of the term "weekly net wage." We also believe that this interpretation achieves the legislative purpose of supplementing an assaulted employee's workers' compensation so that he does not suffer financial hardship. In sum, defendants properly determined the respective plaintiffs' weekly net wage.
We now turn to Pringle's claim that he was entitled to participate in the deferred compensation plan because it was a fringe benefit. Even assuming that this was a fringe benefit, we hold that Pringle was not entitled to it. MCL 330.1113; MSA 14.800(113) provides that fringe benefits "shall be in effect during the time the employee receives the supplement provided by this section." *457 Because Pringle was not entitled to the supplement, he was not entitled to fringe benefits.
We recognize that this result may be harsh, and arguably unfair, because the assaulted employees whose weekly net wage exceeds their weekly workers' compensation benefits will be entitled to fringe benefits whereas those whose weekly net wage is less than their weekly workers' compensation benefits, no matter how minuscule the difference, will not. Nevertheless, this is the result we are constrained to reach under the clear language of the statute.
Finally, we hold that the Department of Mental Health could fire plaintiffs after one hundred weeks. Jesse, supra. Because plaintiffs would no longer be on the Department of Mental Health's payroll, they would not be entitled to the supplement. MCL 330.1113; MSA 14.800(113). Jesse, supra. We agree with defendants that Michigan State Employees Ass'n, supra, is distinguishable because there the plaintiff's supplemental benefits were terminated even though she remained on the department's payroll. In any event, we agree with defendants that judicial review is precluded until plaintiffs exhaust their administrative remedies. Samuel, supra.
Reversed.

=== CASE 9737451 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:25:34.496876+00 ===

EICH, C. J.
Karl Weberg appeals from a judgment of divorce. He raises two issues: (1) whether his disability benefits are available for payment of maintenance to his former wife, Mary Ann Weberg; and (2) whether the trial court abused its discretion in failing to limit the maintenance to a specific term of years. Mary Ann Weberg cross-appeals, challenging the court's ruling that a worker's compensation settlement received by Karl *543should be excluded from the marital estate. We affirm the judgment in all respects.
The Webergs were married for twenty-one years. At the time of the divorce, Karl Weberg was forty-four years old and Mary Ann Weberg was forty years old. They have two children, both of whom are adults. Prior to the marriage, Karl Weberg was severely wounded in Vietnam. He was discharged from the army with a physical disability rating of seventy percent. In spite of this disability, he worked for the Chrysler Corporation for ten years during the marriage. After he ended his employment at Chrysler in 1979, his physical status was re-evaluated by the Veterans' Administration as 100 percent permanently disabled. His current income is derived solely from disability payments. He receives Veterans' Administration benefits of $1,469 per month, social security disability, benefits of $854 per month, and a disability benefit from Chrysler of $221 per month.
Mary Ann Weberg enjoys good physical and emotional health. She has been employed outside the home since 1980 and presently works forty hours per week at a clinic, earning $5.86 per hour ($234 per week).
The trial court awarded Mary Ann Weberg maintenance of $746 per month for an indefinite period. The maintenance payment, when combined with her employment income, gives her approximately forty-five percent of the parties' total combined income. The marital assets were divided fifty-fifty, each party receiving assets valued at $14,649. Karl Weberg retained as separate property the sum of $10,737, representing the remainder of a lump-sum worker's compensation settlement he had received for injuries incurred during his employment at Chrysler.
Karl Weberg argues first that his federal military disability payments and social security disability pay*544ments should not be considered by the court in awarding maintenance. He points out that his military disability payments may be assigned only if specifically permitted by statute, relying on several federal cases and 38 U.S.C. sec. 3101, which provides that veterans' benefits are only assignable to the extent authorized by law.1 He makes the same point with respect to his social security disability benefits, referring us to 42 U.S.C. 1383(d) and 42 U.S.C. 407 which he claims prohibit the benefits from being attached by creditors, including former spouses.2 We are not persuaded. We believe that Leighton v. Leighton, 81 Wis. 2d 620, 261 N.W.2d 457 (1978), controls the issue and requires rejection of Weberg's argument.
Leighton held that a veteran's disability pension is income to be considered in allowing maintenance rather than property to be divided at divorce. Id. at 637, 261 N.W.2d at 465; see also Richardson v. Richardson, 139 Wis. 2d 778, 783-84 n.2, 407 N.W.2d 231, 234 (1987). The Leighton court stated that a military disability pension "is a federally-provided replacement for earning *545capacity lost.... It is analogous to a disability benefit paid under the Social Security Act to a disabled or handicapped worker . . .. [The payments are] income to the defendant, material only to his ability to pay alimony, if alimony were awarded." Id. at 636-37, 261 N.W.2d at 465.
We also reject Weberg's assertion that Leighton is no longer persuasive because of McCarty v. McCarty, 453 U.S. 210 (1981), and its progeny, notably Mansell v. Mansell, 490 U.S. 581 (1989), on which he places principal reliance. The issue in Mansell, however, was whether "military retirement pay waived by the retiree in order to receive veterans' disability benefits" could be treated as property to be divided between divorcing parties under the language of the Uniformed Services Former Spouses Protection Act, 10 U.S.C. sec. 1408. The Court concluded that the waived retirement pay could not be treated as divisible property upon divorce.
In this case we are not asked to divide Weberg's benefits or award any portion thereof to his wife. We are to decide only whether the payments Weberg is presently receiving may be considered by the court as a factor in assessing his ability to pay spousal maintenance. We thus consider Mansell to be distinguishable on the facts and reject Weberg's claim that it mandates reversal.
Weberg next argues that the trial court abused its discretion by awarding maintenance to Mary Ann Weberg without considering her needs, his ability to pay, and the effects of the property division. He also maintains that the award disregarded the fairness objectives of LaRocque v. LaRocque, 139 Wis. 2d 23, 33, 406 N.W.2d 736, 740 (1987), because it did not take into account the source of his income (disability payments) and was not limited in time.
*546Whether to award maintenance — and the duration and amount thereof if an award is to be made — are matters committed to the sound discretion of the trial court. Bahr v. Bahr, 107 Wis. 2d 72, 77, 318 N.W.2d 391, 395 (1982). Generally, we look for reasons to sustain the trial court's discretionary decision, Loomans v. Milwaukee Mut. Ins. Co., 38 Wis. 2d 656, 662, 158 N.W.2d 318, 320 (1968), and we need not agree with the decision to sustain it. Independent Milk Producers Co-op v. Stoffel, 102 Wis. 2d 1, 12, 298 N.W.2d 102, 107 (Ct. App. 1980). Because the exercise of discretion "is not the equivalent of unfettered decision-making," in order to sustain a discretionary determination we must be able to see that the court made a "reasoned application of . . . the appropriate legal standard[s] to the relevant facts in the case." Hedtcke v. Sentry Ins. Co., 109 Wis. 2d 461, 471, 326 N.W.2d 727, 732 (1982), quoting Hartung v. Hartung, 102 Wis. 2d 58, 66, 306 N.W.2d 16, 20 (1981). Thus, "if the record shows that discretion was in fact exercised and we can perceive a reasonáble basis for the court's decision," we will affirm. Prahl v. Brosamle, 142 Wis. 2d 658, 667, 420 N.W.2d 372, 376 (Ct. App. 1987).
When fixing maintenance, the starting point is sec. 767.26, Stats., which sets forth several specific factors to be considered by the court and concludes with a "catchall" provision allowing the court to consider any other factors it may deem relevant. Parrett v. Parrett, 146 Wis. 2d 830, 837, 432 N.W.2d 664, 667 (1988). The enumerated factors are designed to further the general objectives of maintenance, which are "to support the recipient spouse in accordance with the needs and earning capacities of the parties (the support objective) and to ensure a fair and equitable financial arrangement between the *547parties in each individual case (the fairness objective)." LaRocque, 139 Wis. 2d at 33, 406 N.W.2d at 740.
The record satisfies us that the trial court properly exercised its discretion. The court gave careful and extensive consideration to each of the statutory factors in light of the facts of the case and reached a reasoned and reasonable result. Although the court did not make a specific finding of Mary Ann Weberg's needs, it considered those needs as reflected in her budget in arriving at its decision. And despite Weberg's contrary assertion, the trial court repeatedly referred to the property agreement in its findings.
We also believe that the fairness objective of LaRoc-que was met by the court's award. The court did not mechanically apply a fifty-fifty formula to determine maintenance. It considered whether each party was likely to attain a pre-divorce standard of living in the future, taking into account the nature and the sources of their incomes, their future earning potential, and the taxes each must pay. The court then awarded Mary Ann Weberg forty-five percent of their total combined income, stating that the less-than-equal award would give her "an incentive to apply herself . . . [and] utilize the talents that. . . she has." The court also stated that, because of Karl Weberg's disability, "it is fair and equitable to give him a larger share of the total income of the parties." The court's discretionary determination was thus the "product of a rational mental process by which the facts of record and law relied upon [were] stated and . . . considered together for the purpose of achieving a reasoned and reasonable determination." LaRocque, 139 Wis. 2d at 27, 406 N.W.2d at 737. There was no abuse of discretion.
*548As we have noted, the trial court denied Mary Ann Weberg's request that a bank account containing the remainder of a worker's compensation settlement for job-related injuries suffered by Karl several years prior to the divorce be treated as marital property and divided equally between them. We reject her challenge to that ruling.
Decisions relating to the division of marital property are reviewed for abuse of the trial court's discretion under the standards we have discussed earlier in this opinion. Asbeck v. Asbeck, 116 Wis. 2d 289, 293, 342 N.W.2d 750, 752 (Ct. App. 1983).
Section 767.255, Stats., provides that all property of the parties to a divorce — other than that acquired by one of them through gift, bequest, devise or inheritance — is subject to division. Thus, we have held that "since [a personal injury] settlement was not a gift, bequest, devise or inheritance, it must be a divisible asset." Mack v. Mack, 108 Wis. 2d 604, 608, 323 N.W-2d 153, 154-55 (Ct. App. 1982).
Karl Weberg suggests, however, that the supreme court in Richardson and Krebs created a presumption that personal injury settlements remain the property of the injured spouse. Richardson did establish such a presumption; but the language of the opinion limited its application to inchoate claims — those which, at the time of the divorce "[have] not resulted in either a judgment or a settlement . . .." Id., 139 Wis. 2d at 785, 407 N.W.2d at 234. Krebs applied the "logic of Richardson" to payments to be made in the future to one spouse under a structured settlement of a personal injury claim. Krebs at 57, 435 N.W.2d at 243.
In this case, we believe the logic of Richardson and Krebs would make the presumption equally applicable to *549a situation where the claim is not inchoate or payable at some future time but already has been made. The Richardson court outlined its reasoning as follows:
[C]ompensation for loss of bodily function, for pain and suffering and for future earnings replaces what was lost due to a personal injury. Just as each spouse is entitled to leave the marriage with his or her body, so the presumption should be that each spouse is entitled to leave the marriage with that which is designed to replace or compensate for a healthy body. We therefore conclude that the statutory presumption of equal division should be altered . . .. Instead of presuming equal distribution of a personal injury claim, the court should presume that the injured party is entitled to all of the compensation for pain, suffering, bodily injury and future earnings. Richardson, 139 Wis. 2d at 786, 407 N.W.2d at 234-35.3
*550The trial court, of course, must still consider the factors set out in sec. 767.255, Stats. Thus, "the court may alter the presumed distribution [retention of the settlement by the injured spouse] after considering the special circumstances of the personal injury claim . . . and of the parties under the statutory factors listed in sec. 767.255." Krebs at 58, 435 N.W.2d at 244, quoting Richardson, 139 Wis. 2d at 786, 407 N.W.2d at 235.
Here, Mary Ann Weberg contends that the settlement funds are marital property because they were co-mingled with marital funds when they were transferred to a joint account and used, in part at least, "for joint and family purposes."
The trial court, rejecting that argument, found that: (1) the funds with which the account was opened were the proceeds of Weberg's worker's compensation settlement; (2) while they were placed in a joint account, these funds "were not co-mingled" with marital assets; and (3) although some monies withdrawn from the account were used for alleged "family" purposes, the account was held jointly only "for the purpose of protecting [Mary Ann Weberg] in the event of [Karl's] death."
Karl. Weberg testified that the settlement funds were placed in a joint account with his wife so that she would be the beneficiary of the account in case something happened to him. There also was evidence that occasional withdrawals from the account were used to pay the couple's debts.
There was no evidence that the funds were co-mingled with other marital assets. Nor do we believe that the fact that Weberg may have used some of the interest generated by the account, and some of the principal, to pay marital debts invalidates the court's findings. *551Weberg is not seeking a credit for the withdrawals from the account nor does the trial court's decision allow such a credit. It awarded him the balance of the funds, and we think that was appropriate.
In In re Popp, 146 Wis. 2d 778, 432 N.W.2d 600 (Ct. App. 1988), a divorcing wife attempted to have her husband's interest in a corporation — he had received several shares of stock as a gift — declared a marital asset available for division. While gifted property is exempt from division by statute, and a personal injury settlement is presumptively exempt by court decision, we see little difference in principle between the two when the issue is whether the exemption is lost by reason of co-mingling or, in the words of Popp, "[transmutation of non-marital property to marital property." Popp at 788, 432 N.W.2d at 603.
In Popp, the wife sought access to the stock on grounds that certain assets of the corporation had been used by the husband for marital purposes, and the trial court found in her favor. We overruled, holding that while the corporate assets used for marital purposes and to purchase "marital items" were lost to the husband, the remaining shares had retained their identity as gifted property and could not be considered part of the marital estate. Id. at 788-89, 432 N.W.2d at 603. In reaching that conclusion, we also noted the absence of any "dona-tive intent (actual or constructive) on [the husband's] part" which would support a finding that he "expressly or impliedly indicated that he wished or intended to . . . convert [the shares] to marital property." Id. at 789, 432 N.W.2d at 603.4
*552The trial court's findings that Weberg's settlement funds were not co-mingled so as to change their identity to marital property are not clearly erroneous, and the court's resolution of this issue evidences a rational process based on and consistent with the applicable law as developed in Richardson, Krebs and Popp. Given that, and because the result was one a reasonable court could reach, the trial court did not abuse its discretion in excluding the challenged account from the marital estate.
By the Court. — Judgment affirmed.
Section 3101(a) provides: "Payments of benefits due or to become due under any law administered by the Veterans' Administration shall not be assignable except to the extent specifically authorized by law and such payments made to, on account of, a beneficiary shall be exempt from . . . claim[s] of creditors and shall not be liable to attachment, levy or seizure by or under any legal or equitable process whatever, either before or after receipt by the beneficiary."
Read together, the two sections provide that "[t]he right of any person to any future payment under this title . . . shall not be transferable or assignable . . . and none of the moneys paid or payable . . . shall be subject to . . . attachment... or other legal process."
Richardson limited application of the presumption to compensation for personal injury and future earnings, stating that for other elements of damages, "such as those that compensate for medical or other expenses and lost earnings incurred during the marriage, the court should presume equal distribution." Id., 139 Wis. 2d at 786, 407 N.W.2d at 235.
In Krebs, however, the court appears to have dropped the qualification, for there the structured settlement did not distinguish among the various elements of damage, yet the court applied the Richardson presumption. After quoting the rule — and its limitation — from Richardson, the Krebs court stated: "In spite of the lack of identification of separate amounts making up the structured settlement, we believe that the logic of Richardson applies and the trial court should employ the presumption that the injured [spouse] is entitled to the remainder of the settlement." Krebs, 148 Wis. 2d at 57, 435 N.W.2d at 243.
The same is true here. The record of Weberg's settlement does not disclose any division or separation based on type of damage. Under Krebs, that fact is immaterial and the presump*550tion that the settlement remains the property of the injured person is fully applicable.
In Popp, we quoted a statement from Brandt v. Brandt, 145 Wis. 2d 394, 427 N.W.2d 126 (Ct. App. 1988), a case in which the issue was the divisibility of an investment bank account initially *552funded by the wife's inherited property. During the course of the marriage, however, deposits, additions and withdrawals were made to the account as part of the couple's unusually widespread investment and banking activities involving at least thirty different sole and joint investment, savings and checking accounts. Because the couple's funds "regularly flowed into, out of, and back and forth between all of these accounts" — including the wife's investment account — we were unable to trace the funds remaining in that account to the original inheritance. We noted, however, that had the "countless transactions" undertaken with respect to the investment account been limited to withdrawals — as is the case here — "a commingling problem would not be present since the account, although diminished, would still consist of inherited assets." Id. at 413, 427 N.W.2d at 133.
We believe that is the case here. There is no dispute that the account in issue was funded with Weberg's personal injury settlement; all that occurred since it was opened was that some withdrawals were made for family purposes. That does not change the remainder of the account to marital property.

=== CASE 9737452 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:25:34.502513+00 ===

SUNDBY, J.
(concurring). This appeal presents an important family law question which is not answered by any Wisconsin decision: Does a Wisconsin court have jurisdiction under sec. 767.26, Stats., to include Veter*553ans' Administration benefits, received as compensation for a service-connected disability, as income in determining maintenance? I write separately on this question because I do not believe that the Wisconsin decisions, including Leighton v. Leighton, 81 Wis. 2d 620, 261 N.W.2d 457 (1978), on which the majority relies, answers this question.
In Leighton, the wife contended that in dividing the parties' property, the trial court should have considered the present value of the monthly veterans' disability benefits that the husband was receiving. The court rejected her contention explaining, "We . . . view the disability benefits in the case before us as income to the [husband], material only to his ability to pay alimony, if alimony were awarded." Id. at 637, 261 N.W.2d at 465. The court relied on Kronforst v. Kronforst, 21 Wis. 2d 54, 123 N.W.2d 528 (1963) where the court treated the husband's social security disability benefit as income in determining an appropriate alimony award and not as an asset in the division of the marital estate.
Neither Kronforst nor Leighton considered 38 U.S.C. sec. 3101(a) or any of its predecessors. However, this statute was considered in Pfeil v. Pfeil, 115 Wis. 2d 502, 341 N.W.2d 699 (Ct. App. 1983). Section 3101(a) provides in part:
Payments of benefits due or to become due under any law administered by the Veterans' Administration shall not be assignable except to the extent specifically authorized by law, and such payments made to, or on account of, a beneficiary shall be exempt from taxation, shall be exempt from the claim of creditors, and shall not be liable to attachment, levy, or seizure by or under any legal or equitable process whatever, either before or after receipt by the beneficiary . . ..
*554In Pfeil, the court held that military service disability benefits, which had not lost their exempt status, were not assets subject to division as part of the marital assets of the parties. Further, the court said that such benefits could not be considered by the trial court to justify an offsetting award to the wife. The court relied on 38 U.S.C. sec. 3101(a) (1979), Hisquierdo v. Hisquierdo, 439 U.S. 572 (1979) and McCarty v. McCarty, 453 U.S. 210 (1981).
However, the Pfeil court was not faced with the question of whether U.S.C. sec. 3101(a) precluded consideration of military service disability benefits in determining child support or alimony (maintenance). In His-quierdo, the Court held that a statute similar to sec. 3101(a) but applicable to Railroad Retirement Act disability and retirement benefits, precluded a California community property award to the wife in a suit for dissolution of a marriage. In McCarty, the Court held that federal law precluded a state court from dividing military nondisability retired pay pursuant to state community property laws, upon dissolution of a marriage. Thus, none of these cases considered whether military service disability benefits could be used in determining maintenance or child support in a divorce action.
In In re Gardner, 220 Wis. 493, 264 N.W. 643 (1936), the court held that a divorced wife awarded child support was not a "creditor" of the disabled veteran within the federal exemption statute, and hence was entitled to payment of accrued support money from accumulated government payments made to the veteran's guardian. At that time, however, the predecessor to 38 U.S.C. sec. 3101(a) applied to "money due, or to become due," to any pensioner. Section 3101(a) now extends to payments "made to, or on account of, a beneficiary" under any of the laws relating to veterans. In *555Rose v. Rose, 481 U.S. 619, 624 n.2 (1987), the appellant and the solicitor general cited Gardner in support of their contention that the lower courts are divided on the issue of whether state courts may award alimony or child support out of benefits paid to a disabled veteran.
In Rose, the Court held that a Tennessee statute allowing state courts to require veterans to pay child support out of federal veterans' disability benefits was not preempted by federal law. One of the federal statutes the appellant in Rose relied on was 38 U.S.C. sec. 3101(a). The Court said that the legislative history of this section recognizes two purposes: (1) To avoid the possibility of the Veterans' Administration being placed in the position of a collection agency; and (2) to prevent the deprivation and depletion of the means of subsistence of veterans dependent upon these benefits as the main source of their income. Rose, 481 U.S. at 630.
The Court held that neither purpose was constrained by allowing the state court to hold appellant in contempt for failing to pay child support. The Court said that "the exercise of state-court jurisdiction over appellant's disability benefits [did not] deprive appellant of his means of subsistence contrary to Congress' intent, for these benefits are not provided to support appellant alone." The Court pointed to S. Rep. No. 98-604, at 24 (1984) which states that veterans' disability benefits are intended to "provide reasonable and adequate compensation for disabled veterans and their families." Rose, 481 U.S. at 630 (emphasis supplied by Rose court). The Court further said that, "as evidenced by sec. 3107(a)(2), the provision for apportionment . . . Congress clearly intended veterans' disability benefits to be used, in part, for the support of veterans' dependents." Id. at 631.
It was on this basis that the Court distinguished such cases as Wissner v. Wissner, 338 U.S. 655 (1950) *556(widow did not have community property claim to one-half the proceeds of life insurance policy of her deceased army officer husband), Hisquierdo, and Ridgway v. Ridgway, 454 U.S. 46 (1981) (state court's divorce decree preempted by federal statute giving army officer husband unqualified right to designate life insurance policy beneficiary). The Court pointed out that consistent with the distinction suggested in Wissner, Congress had amended the Social Security Act to authorize garnishment of certain federal benefits for spousal and child support, but not for community property divisions. Rose, 481 U.S. 632 n.6 (citing 42 U.S.C. secs. 659 and 662). The Court said:
We construed these amendments to "expressly override" the anti-attachment provision for support claims, finding it "logical to conclude that Congress . . . thought that a family's need for support could . justify garnishment, even though it deflected other federal benefit programs from their intended goals, but that community property claims, which are not based on need, could not do so."
Id. (quoting Hisquierdo, 439 U.S. at 587).
The Court noted that the critical difference between Ridgway and the case before it was that Congress had not made appellant the exclusive beneficiary of the disability benefits. Rose, 481 U.S. at 634.
As we have demonstrated, these benefits are intended to support not only the veteran, but the veteran's family as well. Recognizing an exception to the application of sec. 3101(a)'s prohibition against attachment, levy, or seizure in this context would further, not undermine, the federal purpose in providing these benefits.
*557Id. The Court noted that in Hisquierdo, the Court had "again" discussed an exception to the anti-garnishment statute for alimony and child support in noncommunity property cases. Rose, 481 U.S. at 632 (citing Hisquierdo, 439 U.S. at 587. The Rose court stated that the suggested basis for the Wissner exception "was that family support obligations are deeply rooted moral responsibilities, while the community property concept is more akin to an amoral business relationship." Rose, 481 U.S. at 632 (citing Wissner, 338 U.S. at 660).
These cases convince me that Mansell v. Mansell 490 U.S. 581, 109 S. Ct. 2023, 104 L. Ed. 2d 675 (1989) does not place veterans' disability benefits beyond the reach of a Wisconsin trial court in determining a maintenance award. Appellant argues that the result in Man-sell — exclusion of waived military retirement pay from property divisible upon divorce — "is a clear indication that Congress did not intend that veterans' disability payments would be included in assets divided in a divorce." However, the Former Spouses' Protection Act deals only with military retirement pay, not disability payments. As the Mansell Court notes, the Act was enacted "[i]n direct response to McCarty." Mansell, 104 L. Ed. 2d at 682. McCarty held that the federal statutes then governing military retirement pay prevented state courts from treating military retirement pay as community property. Had the congress intended, that the Act was to apply to military disability pay, it presumably would have said so.
Congress must be presumed to have been aware of the decisions distinguishing between retirement pay and disability pay, insofar as such pay is subject to the anti-attachment statute. The Act authorized state courts to treat "disposable retired or retainer pay" as community property. Id. (citing 10 U.S.C. sec. 1408(c)(1)). "Dispos*558able retired or retainer pay" is defined as "the total monthly retired or retainer pay to which a military member is entitled," minus certain deductions. Id. (citing 10 U.S.C. sec. 1408(a)(4) (1982 ed., Supp. V)). Among the amounts required to be deducted from total pay are any amounts waived in order to receive disability benefits. Mansell, 104 L. Ed. 2d at 682-83 (citing 10 U.S.C. sec. 1408(a)(4)(B)).
Unlike the appellant, I find nothing in the Former Spouses' Protection Act or Mansell which provides any indication, clear or otherwise, that Congress did not intend that veterans' disability benefits would be included in assets divided in a divorce. The Act and Mansell are simply silent as to disability pay except that any retirement pay waived to receive disability benefits may be treated by state courts as community property military retirement pay. Presumably, the same result would be reached in an equitable distribution state. See Mansell, 104 L. Ed. 2d at 682 n.2.
I conclude from the foregoing that veterans' disability benefits continue to be benefits available to the veteran and his or her family. Such benefits are therefore subject to a Wisconsin state court's áuthority to consider veterans' disability benefits in determining child support or maintenance,

=== CASE 9737453 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:25:36.100005+00 ===

TOMLJANOVICH, Justice.
In the early evening of February 18, 1988, Olmsted County sheriff’s deputies discovered the bodies of Paulette, Bernard, Diane, and Richard Brom on the second floor of the Brom family home.1 All four individuals had sustained numerous gashes in the head and upper body.' Police subsequently found a blood-stained ax in the basement that forensic tests indicated was used to kill all four victims. Tests also revealed the ax handle bore appellant’s palm and finger prints.
On February 19, 1988, Rochester police officers arrested appellant in connection with the deaths of his parents and siblings. Because he was 16 years old at the time, appellant was initially charged in the juvenile justice system. After a much-publicized reference hearing and appeal, however, appellant was referred for prosecution as an adult. See In re D.F.B., 433 N.W.2d 79 (Minn.1988). Primarily in response to adverse publicity generated by his reference hearing, appellant moved the trial court for a change of venue pursuant to Minn.R.Crim.P. 25.02.2 The court denied appellant’s motion, but noted both its intention to permit thorough voir dire and its willingness to entertain a renewed motion for a change of venue once jury selection was completed.
Sixty-three potential jurors were interviewed in seven days of voir dire. Each was questioned by counsel regarding the influence of media coverage on her or his pretrial impressions and opinions. All acknowledged some awareness of the press coverage appellant’s case received and several admitted predetermined opinions with respect to appellant’s guilt. None of those actually empaneled, however, were challenged for cause by either the defense or the state and at the close of voir dire, neither the defense nor the state moved for a change of venue.
Because appellant pleaded both not guilty and not guilty by reason of mental illness, his trial proceeded in two phases as required by Minn.R.Crim.P. 20.02.3 Phase *761one was limited to a determination of whether appellant was guilty of first or second degree murder in connection with the deaths of his parents and siblings. During phase one, defense counsel made an offer of proof requesting permission to introduce expert psychiatric testimony regarding appellant’s capacity to premeditate his actions.4 The trial court denied this request and the defense rested without offering testimony. The jury was instructed that it should not consider evidence of appellant’s mental illness in its phase one deliberations and found appellant guilty of four counts of murder in the first degree.
In phase two of his trial, appellant bore the burden of proving his legal mental illness by a preponderance of the evidence.5 The defense presented expert testimony from one psychiatrist who concluded that appellant did not understand that killing his parents and siblings was wrong when he did so and that, therefore, he was legally insane. The state offered expert testimony from four psychiatrists. Of these four witnesses, two concluded that appellant was not legally insane at the time he committed the murders and two did not offer an opinion as to his legal mental illness. All of the experts agreed, however, that appellant suffered some form of mental illness or impairment.
Having been instructed regarding appellant’s burden of proving his legal mental illness by a preponderance of the evidence, the jury returned verdicts of guilty as to four counts of murder in the first degree. The trial court then imposed four life sentences, pursuant to Minn.Stat. § 609.185 (1990), one for the murder of each victim. The court specified that three of these sentences would run consecutively, while the fourth would run concurrently to the last consecutive term.
DISCUSSION
I. Change of Venue
Appellant claimed the trial court violated his right to due process of law by denying his pretrial motion for a change of venue. He requested this court grant him a new trial.
In State v. Buschkopf 373 N.W.2d 756 (Minn.1985), this court held that where no seated juror was challenged for cause and defense counsel exercised only 12 of 15 peremptory challenges, defendant was presumed “satisfied with the jury as selected, and [was without ground] to assert the necessity of a venue change.” Id. at 769. Appellant’s claim is nearly identical to that raised in Buschkopf. Each of the 63 potential jurors interviewed was questioned by both the defense and prosecution regarding exposure to pretrial publicity and media coverage related to appellant’s case. Although all acknowledged some degree of exposure, none of the 15 individuals actually empaneled was challenged for cause on any ground, and in the course of voir dire appellant exercised only 14 of his 15 peremptory challenges. Appellant is therefore not entitled to a new trial.
Moreover, in denying appellant’s motion the trial court indicated that it would “certainly entertain another motion for a change of venue,” pursuant to Rule 25.02, *762subd. 4 of the Minnesota Rules of Criminal Procedure, following jury selection.6 Where a defendant is granted leave to renew his motion for change of venue immediately before trial, but declines to do so, he waives “any right he may have had to a change of venue.” State v. Knowlton, 383 N.W.2d 665, 669 (Minn.1986); see also State v. Fratzke, 354 N.W.2d 402, 407 (Minn.1984) (where defendant is given opportunity to object to jurors after voir dire but does not do so, right to change of venue is waived). In Knowlton, the defendant’s motion for a change of venue due to pretrial publicity was denied, but the trial court instructed him that he could renew his motion at the time of trial. The defendant did not do so. Knowlton, 383 N.W.2d at 669. Likewise, the trial court here emphasized that appellant would be permitted to move for a change of venue once jury selection was completed. Appellant, however, made no such motion. He is therefore not entitled to the relief he requests.
We note that the newspaper coverage appellant pointed to in support of his motion appeared 16 months before his trial. We have consistently held that a substantial interval of time between the publicity complained of and the trial date decreases the likelihood of juror prejudice owing to that publicity. See State v. Fratzke, 354 N.W.2d 402, 407 (Minn.1984) (seven-month interval lessened potential for juror prejudice due to adverse publicity); State v. Swain, 269 N.W.2d 707, 720 (Minn.1978) (lapse of six months decreased likelihood of pretrial prejudice); State v. Hogan, 297 Minn. 430, 437, 212 N.W.2d 664, 669 (1973) (three-month lapse decreased potential for pretrial prejudice due to media coverage). The trial court was therefore correct in giving substantial weight to the interval of time between the publicity appellant identified as prejudicial and the date of his trial.
II. Psychiatric Testimony Regarding Premeditation
Appellant claimed that in prohibiting expert psychiatric testimony from the guilt phase of his bifurcated trial, the trial court precluded his defense as to the element of premeditation and thereby denied him due process of law.
Appellant’s claim is not new to this court. In State v. Bouwman, 328 N.W.2d 703 (Minn.1982), we held expert psychiatric testimony inadmissible with respect to the elements of premeditation and intent. Id. at 706. Although appellant correctly indicates that Bouwman focused almost exclusively on the rationale for precluding such testimony as to the element of criminal intent, we do not read Bouwman to permit a meaningful distinction between intent and premeditation with respect to our prohibition of psychiatric testimony.
In Bouwman, we reasoned that psychiatric testimony is irrelevant as to intent because intent must almost always be inferred from the circumstances surrounding a particular crime. See Bouw-man, 328 N.W.2d at 705. Essentially, the fact finder is presented with physical evidence related to a given act and asked to draw on its sensory perceptions, life experiences, and common sense to determine whether that act was indeed intentional. Id. Because psychiatric evidence “does not relate to the physical evidence upon which the jury is to determine the issue of intent,” it is irrelevant to that issue and cannot be admitted either to prove or to disprove it. Id. Such evidence only becomes relevant when a criminal defendant's mental incapacity is actually put into issue — that is, in phase two of a bifurcated trial. See Minn.R.Crim.P. 20.02, subd. 6(2) — (4); see also Bouwman, 328 N.W.2d at 705.
Bouwman does not permit a different result with respect to premeditation. Although premeditation7 involves “more *763than an intent to kill,” it, like intent,8 is “subjective” and must be inferred from “the totality of the circumstances surrounding the crime.” State v. Ulm, 326 N.W.2d 159, 162 (Minn.1982) (citing State v. McCullum, 289 N.W.2d 89, 91 (Minn.1979)); see also Bouwman, 328 N.W.2d at 705. Indeed, both elements must be inferred from physical evidence related to a particular act. See Bouwman, 328 N.W.2d at 705. Thus, psychiatric testimony is no more relevant to determining premeditation than it is to the determination of intent.
Further, this court has followed Bouw-man in rejecting subsequent challenges to the prohibition of psychiatric testimony as to the element of premeditation without developing a separate, premeditation-based rationale. See State v. Hoffman, 328 N.W.2d 709, 715-17 (Minn.1982) (psychiatric testimony confined to mental illness phase of trial and not admissible with respect to determining premeditation); State v. Jackman, 396 N.W.2d 24, 29 (Minn.1986) (affirming rejection of psychiatric testimony on the issue of premeditation). Appellant has not elucidated, and we do not now perceive, a means by which we might permit the introduction of psychiatric testimony as to premeditation without dismantling the entire bifurcated trial process. We therefore reiterate our conclusion in Bouw-man that psychiatric testimony is inadmissible as to the element of premeditation.9
This court previously concluded that prohibiting psychiatric testimony from the guilt phase of a bifurcated trial does not violate a criminal defendant’s right to due process of law. See State v. Jackman, 396 N.W.2d 24, 29 (Minn.1986). In Jackman, the trial court refused defendant Jack-man’s request to introduce psychiatric testimony regarding premeditation and intent during phase one of his bifurcated, first degree murder trial. Id. at 27. On appeal, Jackman argued that the trial court thereby denied him due process of law. Id. at 29. As does appellant here, he contended that precluding such testimony effectively denied him the opportunity to defend against the state’s allegation that he intended and premeditated his conduct. Id. This court, however, rejected that claim, holding that prohibiting psychiatric testimony from the guilt phase of a bifurcated trial does not impinge the guarantee of due process of law. Id. Finding no reason to reach a different result here, we again *764conclude that prohibiting a criminal defendant from introducing testimony we have consistently deemed irrelevant, see Bouwman, 328 N.W.2d at 705, does not violate that individual’s right to due process.
In applying the due process clause of the Minnesota Constitution, Minn. Const, art. I, § 7, this court is bound by decisions of the United States Supreme Court regarding what is prohibited by the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment to the United States Constitution. See State v. Oman, 261 Minn. 10, 21, 110 N.W.2d 514, 522-23 (1961). The United States Supreme 1 Court has not recently addressed the constitutionality of excluding psychiatric testimony from the guilt phase of a bifurcated trial. However, in 1929 and again in 1942, it dismissed due process challenges to a bifurcated trial procedure similar to that presently used in Minnesota for want of a substantial federal question. See Troche v. California, 280 U.S. 524, 50 S.Ct. 87, 74 L.Ed. 592 (1929); Coleman v. California, 317 U.S. 596, 63 S.Ct. 162, 87 L.Ed. 487 (1942). These dismissals, though summary, operate as decisions on the merits of the claims raised, see Hicks v. Miranda, 422 U.S. 332, 344, 95 S.Ct. 2281, 2289, 45 L.Ed.2d 223 (1975), and indicate that a bifurcated trial procedure in which psychiatric testimony is inadmissible on the issue of premeditation does not violate the federal due process guarantee.10
III. Evidence of Mental Illness
Appellant claimed that he demonstrated his legal mental illness by a preponderance of the evidence and that his convictions should therefore be reversed.
A defendant must demonstrate that “at the time of committing the alleged criminal act [she or he] was laboring under such defect of reason, from [mental illness or deficiency] as not to know the nature of the act, or that it was wrong” in order to be excused from criminal responsibility because of ■ mental illness. Minn.Stat. § 611.026 (1990).11 “In Minnesota, a defendant must prove mental illness at the time of the crime by a preponderance of the evidence.” DeMars v. State, 352 N.W.2d 13, 16 (Minn.1984) (citing State v. Malley, 285 N.W.2d 469, 472 n. 3 (Minn.1979)). Where a criminal defendant who raised the defense of mental illness at trial challenges his conviction, “[t]his court conducts ‘a rigorous review of the record to determine whether the evidence, direct and circumstantial, viewed most favorably to support a finding of guilt, was sufficient to permit the [fact finder] to reach its conclusion.’ ” Id. (quoting State v. Mytych, 292 Minn. 248, 252, 194 N.W.2d 276, 279 (1972)).
This court has consistently held that the issue of legal mental illness is a question for the finder of fact to resolve. See State v. Gore, 451 N.W.2d 313, 316 (Minn.1990) (expert opinion testimony did not compel verdict of not guilty by reason of mental illness); State v. Schneider, 402 N.W.2d 779, 786 (Minn.1987) (legal mental illness is a jury question); State v. Rawland, 294 Minn. 17, 45, 199 N.W.2d 774, 789 (1972) (ultimate determination as to legal mental illness rests with the fact finder). As well, we have granted broad deference to the fact finder in determining the appropriate weight to assign expert psychiatric testimony. See DeMars v. State, 352 N.W.2d 13, 16 (Minn.1984) (fact finder not bound by expert testimony even where that testimony supports finding of legal mental *765illness); State v. Linder, 304 N.W.2d 902, 907 (Minn.1981) (fact finder is the judge of the credibility of expert testimony regarding mental illness).
At trial, appellant offered the expert opinion of one psychiatrist who testified that appellant did not understand that killing his family was wrong at the time he did so. In response, the state offered expert testimony from two psychiatrists who concluded that appellant knew what he was doing at the time of the murders and knew that it was wrong. Further, the state introduced testimony from two other psychiatrists who, while not reaching an ultimate conclusion as to appellant’s legal mental illness, substantially undercut the testimony of appellant’s psychiatric expert. We do not agree with appellant that the evidence of his legal mental illness as defined by Minn.Stat. § 611.026 (1990) viewed most favorably toward a finding of guilt compels a verdict of not guilty due to mental illness. We therefore affirm his convictions.
IV. Imposition of Consecutive Life Sentences
Appellant contends the trial court abused its discretion in imposing three of his four life sentences consecutively.
Whether to impose concurrent or consecutive multiple life sentences for first degree murder falls within the discretion of the trial court. Minn.Stat. § 609.15 (1990); see also Bangert v. State, 282 N.W.2d 540, 547 (Minn.1979) (construing Minn.Stat. § 609.15 to permit imposition of consecutive life sentences). When reviewing imposition of consecutive life sentences, this court considers whether consecutive sentences “are commensurate with culpability and not an exaggeration of defendant’s criminality.” Bangert, 282 N.W.2d at 547.
In Bangert, we affirmed consecutive life sentences where the defendant shot and killed two victims while they slept. Id. at 543. Similarly, in State ¶. Olson, 291 N.W.2d 203 (Minn.1980), this court concluded that consecutive life sentences were indeed appropriate where a defendant “with premeditation methodically burned three people to death.” Id. at 208; see also State v. Marquardt, 294 N.W.2d 849, 851 (Minn.1980) (consecutive sentences appropriate where seven victims were shot). Like the defendants in both Bangert and Olson, appellant was convicted for the premeditated murder of multiple victims. After hearing the testimony offered and observing the witnesses who testified, the trial court concluded that three consecutive and one concurrent life terms were appropriate. We find no ground on which to conclude that three consecutive life sentences exaggerate either appellant’s culpability or his criminality. We therefore hold that the trial court did not abuse its sentencing discretion and affirm the sentences it imposed.12
V. Credit for Pre-Trial Detention
Appellant claimed, and the state agreed, that he is entitled to credit against his life sentences for the time he was detained prior to trial.
The Rules of Criminal Procedure state that the sentencing court “[s]hall assure that the record accurately reflects all time spent in custody in connection with the offense or behavioral incident for which sentence is imposed. Such time shall be automatically deducted from the sentence and the term of imprisonment_” Minn. R.Crim.P. 27.03, subd. 4(B). In Escobedo v. Oleisky, 339 N.W.2d 263 (Minn.1983), this court concluded that Rule 27.03 requires that a juvenile defendant certified for prosecution as an adult receive credit for time spent in juvenile detention awaiting certification. Appellant was detained from his arrest through his sentencing in connection with the offenses for which he was convicted. See State v. Brown, 348 N.W.2d 743, 748 (Minn.1984) (time spent in out-of-state custody in connection with Minnesota *766charges entitles defendant to credit for that time). He is therefore entitled to credit against each of his life sentences for all of the time he was detained. We order his sentences to be modified accordingly.
. Paulette Brom was appellant’s mother, Bernard Brom his father, Diane Brom his younger sister, and Richard Brom his younger brother.
. A motion for change of venue due to prejudicial pretrial publicity "shall be granted whenever it is determined that the dissemination of potentially prejudicial material creates a reasonable likelihood that in the absence of such relief, a fair trial cannot be had.” Minn.R.Crim.P. 25.02, subd. 3.
.The Rules of Criminal Procedure provide for a two-part trial where a criminal defendant raises both the defense of not guilty and the defense of mental illness:
(2) Separate Trial of Defenses. If a defendant notifies the prosecuting attorney * * * of an intention to rely on the defense of mental illness or mental deficiency together with a defense of not guilty, * * * there shall be a separation of the two defenses with a sequential order of proof before the court or jury in a continuous trial in which the defense *761of not guilty shall be heard and determined first, and then the defense of the defendant’s mental illness or deficiency.
Minn.R.Crim.P. 20.02, subd. 6(2).
. Defense counsel stated:
The defense recognizes that under the current state of the law in Minnesota, specifically State v. Bouwman, that expert psychiatric testimony on the subject of premeditation in phase one of a bifurcated trial is inadmissible. Recognizing that, we wish to make an offer of proof that if called to testify in phase one, Dr. Carl Malmquist, a psychiatrist, would testify in essence that if we take things in an obvious but superficial manner, it would appear that the acts of David Brom were thought about intermittently for months prior to their occurrence. However, that ignores complicated questions with respect to the nature of his thought processes, his capacity to act otherwise, and the origins and other contributing factors that led to his preoccupation with suicide and homicide. And that Dr. Malmquist has difficulty as a psychiatrist getting into the questions of premeditation.
. "In Minnesota, a defendant must prove mental illness at the time of the crime by a preponderance of the evidence." DeMars v. State, 352 N.W.2d 13, 16 (Minn.1984) (citing State v. Malley, 285 N.W.2d 469, 472 n. 3 (Minn.1979)).
. Rule 25.02, Subd. 4. states: "If a motion for [change of venue] is made or if reconsideration of a prior denial is sought, it may be granted notwithstanding the fact that a jury has been sworn to try the case.” Minn.R.Crim.P. 25.02, subd. 4.
. "For the purposes of [murder in the first degree], ‘premeditation’ means to consider, plan or prepare for, or determine to commit, the act referred to prior to its commission." Minn.Stat. § 609.18 (1990).
*763Premeditation means that defendant considered, planned, prepared for, or determined to commit the act before defendant committed it. Premeditation, being a process of the mind, is wholly subjective and hence not always susceptible to proof by direct evidence. It may be inferred from all the circumstances surrounding the event. It is not necessary that premeditation exist for any specific length of time. A premeditated decision to kill may be reached in a short period of time. However, an unconsidered or rash impulse, even though it includes an intent to kill, is not premeditated.
10 Minn.Dist. Judges Ass'n, Minnesota Practice, CRIMJIG 11.02 (3d ed. 1990).
. "['Intent'] means that the actor either has a purpose to do the thing or cause the result specified or believes that the act, if successful, will cause that result." Minn.Stat. § 609.02, subd. 9(4) (1990). "In order to have had an intent to kill, defendant must have acted with the purpose of causing death (or defendant must have believed that the act would have that result).” 10 Minn.Dist. Judges Ass'n, Minnesota Practice, CRIMJIG 11.02 (3d ed. 1990).
. The dissent suggests that the expert testimony appellant sought to introduce "was clearly relevant in determining the absence or presence of the requisite premeditation, under the circumstances of this case.” In his offer of proof to the trial court, however, appellant's counsel stated "that Dr. Malmquist has difficulty as a psychiatrist getting into the questions of premeditation.” Thus, while a different trial record might well persuade us otherwise, we cannot conclude on the record before us that the proffered expert testimony was so clearly relevant to the issue of premeditation as to mandate its admission.
Further, we do not quibble with the dissent as to the incidence of mental impairment and agree “that evidence of mental impairment is well within the common experience of the average person and capable of lay understanding." We cannot agree, however, that experience with the behavioral manifestations of mental impairment necessarily entails experience with the technical jargon of psychiatry. The jurors who convicted appellant were presented extensive evidence as to his conduct leading up to the morning of February 18, 1988. We are unwilling on the record before us to conclude that the expert testimony appellant offered to introduce would have assisted those jurors in determining whether appellant premeditated that conduct.
. We note that in reviewing federal due process challenges to bifurcated trial procedures similar to Minnesota's, three United States Courts of Appeals have upheld those procedures. See Campbell v. Wainwright, 738 F.2d 1573, 1581 (11th Cir.1984), cert, denied, 475 U.S. 1126, 106 S.Ct. 1652, 90 L.Ed.2d 195 (1986) (noting the questionable utility of psychiatric evidence as to premeditation and upholding Florida’s bifurcated procedure); Meunch v. Israel, 715 F.2d 1124 (7th Cir.1983), cert. denied, 467 U.S. 1228, 104 S.Ct. 2682, 81 L.Ed.2d 878 (1984) (upholding Wisconsin's bifurcated trial procedure that precludes psychiatric testimony from guilt phase); Wahrlich v. Arizona, 479 F.2d 1137 (9th Cir.1973) cert. denied, 414 U.S. 1011, 94 S.Ct. 375, 38 L.Ed.2d 249 (1973) (upholding Arizona's bifurcated procedure and noting that psychiatric testimony is not probative of intent).
. Appellant chose not to challenge the increasingly controversial M’Naghten mental illness standard, thus we do not address the validity of that standard.
. Although we are not prepared to impose further restrictions on the exercise of sentencing discretion, we note that both the defendant sentenced and the public would benefit from an explanation on the record of the factors considered in imposing consecutive, rather than concurrent, life sentences.
. The Third Circuit Court of Appeals, in U.S. v. Pohlot, 827 F.2d 889, 903 (3rd Cir.1987), a case challenging an interpretation of the Insanity Defense Reform Act of 1984, 18 U.S.C. § 17, which would either explicitly or implicitly bar a defendant from introducing evidence of mental abnormality on the issue of mens rea, was unwilling to create a rule of evidence that would raise such substantial constitutional issues in the absence of explicit congressional direction.

=== CASE 9737454 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:25:36.105262+00 ===

WAHL, Justice,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent.
Substantial constitutional considerations require reconsideration of our decision in State v. Bouwman, 328 N.W.2d 703 (Minn.1982) which prohibits a criminal defendant from introducing expert psychiatric opinion evidence of mental abnormality or mental disorder to negate the requisite mens rea, in that case intent and premeditation. As the Supreme Court of Colorado has aptly stated, “A rule [of evidence] precluding the defendant from contesting the culpability element of the charge would render the prosecution’s evidence on that issue uncon-testable as a matter of law, in derogation of the presumption of innocence and the constitutional requirement of prosecutorial proof of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.” Hendershott v. People, 653 P.2d 385, 391 (Colo.1982); e.g., Sandstrom v. Montana, 442 U.S. 510, 520-24, 99 S.Ct. 2450, 2457-59, 61 L.Ed.2d 39 (1979); Morissette v. United States, 342 U.S. 246, 274-75, 72 S.Ct. 240, 255-56, 96 L.Ed. 288 (1952). Requiring the prosecution to establish the culpable mental state beyond a reasonable doubt while, at the same time, prohibiting the defendant from presenting evidence to contest this issue is also a violation of due process. Hendershott v. People, 653 P.2d at 391.1
Our decision in Bouwman misconceived the nature of the defendant’s right to present evidence to negate an element of the offense charged:
* * * The defendant has the right to offer evidence which disputes the physical facts upon which the inference of the fact of intent is sought to be established by the prosecution. However, psychiatric evidence is of no value at this part of the trial since it does not relate to the physical evidence upon which the jury is to determine the issue of intent. Rather, such expert testimony relates to the mental capacity of the defendant and is properly part of defendant’s case wherein he must establish the defense of mental illness by the appropriate standard. (Emphasis added.)
Bouwman, 328 N.W.2d at 705.
As the Pohlot court has noted, “the mere fact that a defendant has the right to introduce psychiatric evidence in support of the affirmative defense of insanity does not justify barring the evidence from negating the government’s case in chief.” U.S. v. Pohlot, 827 F.2d at 901.
* * * The Supreme Court has indicated that although a state may constitutionally shift the burden of proving insanity to the defendant, Leland v. Oregon, 343 U.S. 790, 72 S.Ct. 1002, 96 L.Ed. 1302 (1952), it did not sanction, and probably would not sanction, a jury charge that prevented a jury from considering evidence of mental abnormality in determining whether the state had proven premeditation and deliberation beyond a reasonable doubt. In upholding the verdict, the Court stated: “It is apparent that the jury might have found appellant to have been mentally incapable of the premeditation and deliberation required to support a first degree murder verdict * * * and yet not have found him to have been legally insane.” Id. at 794, 72 S.Ct. at 1005 (Emphasis added.).
Id.
Both the ABA Criminal Justice Mental Health Standards, Standard 7-6.2 (1989), and the ALI Model Penal Code § 4.02(1) provide that evidence concerning a defendant’s mental condition should be admissible at a criminal trial whenever it is relevant to prove that a defendant did or did not have the state of mind required for the *767offense charged. This relevant evidence may often come in the form of properly qualified expert testimony. See Criminal Justice Mental Health Standards, Standard 7-6.2 commentary at 348 (1989).2
The defendant, in the case before us, admitted he committed the acts which resulted in the four deaths but sought to introduce expert psychiatric opinion to negate the element of premeditation. Premeditation, as this court has held, involves, in addition to the mere intent to kill, a pre-existing reflection and deliberation. See e.g., State v. Ulm, 326 N.W.2d 159 (Minn.1982); State v. Lemire, 315 N.W.2d 606 (Minn.1982). We have stated that inferences of pre-existing reflection and deliberation are properly drawn only from physical evidence. Bouwman, 328 N.W.2d at 705. It cannot be said, however, that direct inquiries into impaired mental states have no relevance or value in determining whether an individual did, in fact, reflect or deliberate on an act. It is conceivable that a person whose actions are steered by powerful mental aberrations may leave behind physical evidence indicating a pre-existing reflection and deliberation, but that when the mental condition is itself directly explored, the jury may find the inference of premeditation substantially rebutted. Dr. Malmquist’s proffered testimony was clearly relevant in determining the absence or presence of the requisite premeditation, under the circumstances of this case.3
A finding of premeditation is to be based upon the circumstances as a whole. State v. McCullum, 289 N.W.2d 89, 92 (Minn. 1979). Defendant’s mental impairment is as much a part of those circumstances as intoxication, infancy, senility and other conditions recognized by this court as probative of defendant’s state of mind. Although to some extent, conditions such as intoxication or infancy are capable of quantification, they, like mental illness, can only indicate the degree to which a condition impaired defendant’s mental processes4. All of these conditions acknowledge a mental disability of some type and all are probative as to whether a defendant formulated the required mens rea.
This court, in Bouwman, distinguished evidence of intoxication and infancy from evidence of mental impairment, adopting the reasoning of the ninth circuit:
Exposure to the effects of age and of intoxicants upon state of mind is a part of common human experience which fact finders can understand and apply; indeed, they would apply them even if the state did not tell them they could. The esoterics of psychiatry are not within the ordinary ken. The differences are sufficiently manifest to thwart constitutional attack.
Bouwman, 328 N.W.2d at 706 (quoting Wahrlich v. State, 479 F.2d 1137, 1138 (9th Cir.1973)).
If jurors’ inability to comprehend psychiatric testimony was ever a compelling distinction, it has no current application. Statistics indicate that one in seven adults in the United States suffers from a diagnosable mental disorder and is in need of professional treatment in any six month period of time. Regier, MD, et al, One-Month Prevalence of Mental Disorders in the United States, 45 Archives Gen’l Psychiatry 977, 981, Table 4 (November 1988). One in five adults in this country suffers from diagnosable mental illness at some point in their life time. Id. In a recent *768study, one in three adults in the United States reported that they or someone in their family have sought help from a psychiatrist or psychologist at sometime in their lives. Executive Summary, Public Attitudes Toward People with Chronic Mental Illness, Prepared for The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation on Chronic Mental Illness, at 2 (April 1990). In light of these statistics, there is little doubt that evidence of mental impairment is well within the common experience of the average person and capable of lay understanding.
Moreover, the jury, in the insanity phase of the bifurcated trial, relies on expert psychiatric testimony to determine whether defendant has proved by a preponderance of the evidence that at the time of the offense he or she “was laboring under such a defect of reason * * * as not to know the nature of the act, or that it was wrong.” Minn.Stat. § 611.026 (1990). The “esoter-ics” of psychiatry are no more beyond the ken of the jurors when they determine the presence or absence of the required mens rea in the guilt phase of the trial than when they determine the presence or absence of legal sanity in the insanity phase. We tolerate the “battle of experts” in other areas of the law but allow our distaste of such a battle to limit the rights of criminal defendants.
In Bouwman we mistakenly equated the evidentiary doctrine providing for the admission of evidence of mental abnormality to negate mens rea with the doctrine of diminished responsibility. “Diminished responsibility,” as the Commentary to Standard 7-6.2 describes it, is used most often to refer to sentencing rules that “accord mitigating impact to mental abnormality falling short of mental nonresponsibility [insanity] and not negating mens rea.” Criminal Justice Mental Health Standards, Standard 7-6.2 at 352.
It is argued that admitting non-insanity psychiatric evidence to negate the mens rea element of the crime will do violence to the system of bifurcation mandated by Minn.R. Crim.P. 20.02, subd. 2. Prior to the Bouw-man decision, however, the Minnesota Rules of Criminal Procedure, as adopted in 1975, afforded a unitary or bifurcated trial, at the option of the defendant. The rules were amended in 1984 to accommodate the holdings of Bouwman and State v. Hoffman, 328 N.W.2d 709 (Minn.1982), released the same day, which essentially mandated bifurcation. Reversal of Bouwman, on constitutional grounds, would signal the return to a rule which allows the defendant to make the critical and strategic decision whether to bifurcate the insanity phase of the trial.
I would reverse the convictions and remand for a new trial at which expert testimony as to defendant’s state of mind at the time of the killings in order to negate the state’s claim that he acted with premeditation would be admitted. This decision, as defendant’s counsel has so eloquently argued, would constitute nothing more than the reaffirmation of several concepts basic to our system of jurisprudence: the presumption of innocence and the due process requirement that the state prove each element of the crime beyond a reasonable doubt and the defendant’s right to present relevant evidence in his defense.
. The normal requirements for expert opinion testimony include appropriate educational credentials and evaluation techniques and a showing that the opinion is based on "specialized knowledge which can assist the factfinder." Criminal Justice Mental Health Standards, Standard 7-3.10 introduction to commentary (1989).
. Commentators have recognized that a mental illness may negate the culpability element of a greater degree of a homicide offense but not of a lesser one, 1 Robinson, Criminal Law Defenses Sec. 64(a) at 273 (1984), and that if a subjective state of mind is an element of the crime, any testimony as to its existence or absence is relevant evidence; Arenella, The Diminished Capacity and Diminished Responsibility Defenses: Two Children of a Doomed Marriage, 77 Colum. L.Rev. 828, 833 (1977).
.One person with a blood alcohol level of .25 may be able to formulate specific intent, another incapable. One eight-year-old child may intend the consequences of her actions, another may not.

=== CASE 2211974 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:14.12704+00 ===

11 Cal.App.2d 430 (1936)
SANTO BETTOLO, Respondent,
v.
SAFEWAY STORES, INC. (a Corporation), et al., Appellants.
Civ. No. 9921.
California Court of Appeals. First Appellate District, Division Two.
January 27, 1936.
Milton L. Selby and Drummond Wilde for Appellants.
J. W. Coleberd and H. W. Call for Respondent.
Nourse, P. J.
Plaintiff sued for damages for false imprisonment and had a verdict for $1500 against all the defendants. Since there was no evidence even remotely connecting the defendant Morelli with the incident, the trial court granted him a new trial. The other defendants have appealed from the judgment on the verdict.
Plaintiff entered a store operated by the corporation in South San Francisco, gathered some groceries from the shelves, which he put in a carrying bag, and some candy, which he placed in his overcoat pocket. He then went to the checking stand where he exhibited the groceries and paid for them. Two employees had seen him take the candy, and when defendant Johnson learned that it had not been paid for, he followed the plaintiff to the sidewalk and forced him to return to the store. There he was searched, but no candy was found; but it was discovered later among some vegetables at a counter where plaintiff had stood just before leaving the store. Plaintiff was detained about ten or twelve minutes and then permitted to leave. No physical violence or injury is charged; the claim for damages rests solely upon the detention in the store. These facts all stand uncontradicted. Plaintiff did not deny that he had taken the candy, nor that he had been warned to stay away from the store because he had been seen taking groceries on another occasion.
The appellants have advanced five separate grounds for reversal, but, for the sake of brevity, we will limit our consideration to these two--the denial to them of the right to defend on the ground of probable cause, and the excessive damages.
[1] The trial court instructed the jury that it should disregard any evidence tending to prove probable cause, and that such defense was not applicable in actions for false imprisonment where exemplary damages were not asked. The instruction was error and palpably prejudicial. Any person may make an arrest for a misdemeanor committed in his presence. (Sec. 837, Pen. Code.) The owner of property may, for the purpose of protecting it, restrain, for a reasonable time and for the purpose of investigation, one whom he *432 has reasonable and probable cause for believing has interfered with or stolen it. (Collyer v. S. H. Kress & Co., 5 Cal.2d 175 [54 PaCal.2d 20]; Mackie v. Ambassador Hotel etc. Corp., 123 Cal.App. 215, 221 [11 PaCal.2d 3]; Gisske v. Sanders, 9 Cal.App. 13, 15 [98 P. 43]; Allen v. McCoy, 135 Cal.App. 500, 506 [27 PaCal.2d 423, 28 PaCal.2d 56]; Michel v. Smith, 188 Cal. 199, 205 [205 P. 113]; Van Fleet v. West American Ins. Co., 5 Cal.App.2d 125 [42 PaCal.2d 378, 43 PaCal.2d 557]; Jacques v. Childs Dining Hall Co., 244 Mass. 438 [138 N.E. 843, 26 A.L.R. 1329].)
In the Collyer case, which was also one in which exemplary damages were not asked, the Supreme Court, referring to the issue of probable cause as a defense, said, "Ordinarily, the owner of property, in the exercise of his inherent right to protect the same, is justified in restraining another who seeks to interfere with or injure it. (11 R. C. L. 805.)" And again, "However, those authorities which hold, where a person has reasonable grounds to believe that another is stealing his property, as distinguished from those where the offense has been completed, that he is justified in detaining the suspect for a reasonable length of time for the purpose of investigation in a reasonable manner (Jacques v. Childs Dining Hall Co., 244 Mass. 438 [138 N.E. 843, 26 A.L.R. 1329]; Fenn. v. Kroger Grocery & Baking Co., (Mo.) 209 S.W. 885; Sweeney v. F. W. Woolworth Co., 247 Mass. 277 [142 N.E. 50, 31 A.L.R. 311, 314]; 25 Cor. Jur. 471) must necessarily proceed upon the theory that probable cause is a defense. And this is the law because the right to protect one's property from injury has intervened."
[2] The undisputed evidence shows reasonable and probable cause for the detention. Johnson had seen the respondent pick up the candy and conceal it in his pocket. This was verified by another employee in the store. There has been no denial from the respondent. He was detained less than fifteen minutes, which was not shown to have been an unreasonable time for the investigation.
[3] The excessive verdict cannot be defended. Respondent proved no actual damage of any character. He was unemployed at the time, and had worked but ten days over a period of nine months. After the arrest, he had had reasonably steady employment. The only persons who knew of the detention, aside from the appellants, were respondents' *433 friends to whom he gave the information. None of them thought he had committed an offense, and none caused him any loss of employment or other injury. The verdict of $1500 was purely a sympathy verdict inspired by prejudice and unsupported by any competent evidence of damage. The respondent rested his demand for compensation on section 3333 of the Civil Code, which fixes the measure of damages in cases of this kind as "the amount which will compensate for all the detriment proximately caused thereby". He did not ask for exemplary or punitive damages, and could not have recovered such under the evidence. If he was entitled to any damages at all, he could have had nothing more than nominal damages within the provisions of section 3360 of the Civil Code. (Maher v. Wilson, 139 Cal. 514, 520 [73 P. 418].)
The judgment is reversed.
Sturtevant, J., and Spence, J., concurred.

=== CASE 2210527 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:54.582984+00 ===

185 Mich. App. 620 (1990)
463 N.W.2d 179
DOLENGA
v.
AETNA CASUALTY & SURETY COMPANY
Docket No. 113198.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided October 2, 1990.
Bellanca, Beattie & De Lisle, P.C. (by Frank D. Eaman), for plaintiffs.
Vandeveer Garzia, (by Robert D. Brignall), for defendants.
Before: SHEPHERD, P.J., and SAWYER and McDONALD, JJ.
PER CURIAM.
Plaintiffs appeal from an order of the circuit court granting summary disposition in favor of defendants on plaintiffs' claim for tortious interference with an advantageous business relationship. Although the trial court's order fails to state under which subrule summary disposition was granted, it was presumably granted under MCR 2.116(C)(10), no genuine issue of material fact. We reverse.
Plaintiff Dolenga, through his business, plaintiff Disability Services, Inc., is engaged in providing rehabilitation services to a variety of clients, including *622 workers' compensation claimants. In the instant case, Richard Bobier had sustained a rotator cuff injury while in the employment of Bechtel and working at The Detroit Edison Belle River plant. Bobier was treated by Dr. Michael Baghdoian, an orthopedic surgeon. During the course of treatment, Dr. Baghdoian suggested the option of vocational rehabilitation and referred Bobier to plaintiffs. Bobier had a meeting with Dolenga and his associate, Eva Guerra.
After that meeting, Guerra sent a letter to defendant Aetna Casualty & Surety Company which requested authorization for a rehabilitation evaluation as part of Bobier's workers' compensation benefits. Defendant Joanne Shankin, a registered nurse in the employment of Aetna as a rehabilitation coordinator, responded with a letter to Guerra stating that they were denying authorization for plaintiffs to work with Mr. Bobier, that Dr. Baghdoian had no authority to make referrals for vocational rehabilitation to any vendor, and that Aetna would be making other arrangements for vocational rehabilitation, presumably with a different vendor. On the same date, Shankin sent a letter to Dr. Baghdoian noting that he had referred Bobier to plaintiffs and further directing Baghdoian and his associates to cease making any referrals to any specific rehabilitation vendors, and in particular to plaintiffs. Shankin's letter further claimed to reserve its "right" under the Workers' Disability Compensation Act to make its own referrals.
Thereafter, plaintiffs instituted the instant action on the basis of defendants' alleged tortious interference. Apparently, the Bobier matter has not been the only dispute between the parties.
Over the course of a number of motion hearings, the trial court ruled that defendants had the right *623 to select the rehabilitation vendor and that there was no genuine issue of material fact concerning whether defendants did anything improper in denying authorization for Bobier to work with plaintiffs and, instead, referring Bobier to a different vendor.
On appeal, plaintiffs first argue that the trial court erred in ruling that an insurance carrier has the right to select a rehabilitation vendor for the employee where the employee's physician has referred the employee to another vendor. We agree. Defendants, both in Shankin's letters to Dr. Baghdoian, and apparently others, and during the course of litigation, have maintained that a workers' compensation insurance carrier has a right to select a rehabilitation vendor for the employee. In support of this presumed right, defendants rely upon MCL 418.319; MSA 17.237(319), the provision in the compensation act which relates to rehabilitation services. Defendants' reliance is misplaced. While it is true that under that section an employee is entitled to receive rehabilitation services if necessary and, in fact, the employer may insist that the employee receive rehabilitation services, the fact that the act allows the employer or the employer's insurance carrier to voluntarily offer to provide those services does not, as defendants seem to conclude, equate to the employer or carrier having the right to select the vendor of those services. Nothing in § 319 either explicitly or implicitly grants such a right to a workers' compensation carrier.
On the other hand, neither does the act explicitly grant the right of selection to the claimant as suggested by plaintiffs. Plaintiffs rely on MCL 418.315; MSA 17.237(315), which provides that an employee has the right to select the physician of his choice after ten days from the inception of *624 medical care. However, since Mr. Dolenga, to our knowledge, is not a physician, this section is inapplicable.
It does, however, seem reasonable to conclude that the person receiving the services, the claimant, should normally be the person who selects the vendor. If, at that point, the employer or carrier is dissatisfied with the employee's choice of vendor, it can petition the bureau for a resolution of the dispute under MCL 418.319(2); MSA 17.237(319)(2). Both defendant Aetna and defendant Shankin misapprehend the role and authority of the compensation carrier in providing these benefits. That role is to pay for the treatment, not provide it. Ultimately, since it is the claimant who receives the medical treatment or rehabilitation services, it ought normally to be the claimant who chooses the provider of those services, subject to the dispute resolution procedures under the act if the claimant's choice is objectively unreasonable. Plaintiffs are correct to the extent that they point out that § 315 at least implicitly recognizes that it is the worker's choice of whom to utilize for the providing of services, not that of the employer or carrier. The trial court's conclusion to the contrary was incorrect.
Of course, to say that it is the employee's right to choose the provider of a particular service does not compel the conclusion that the employer or carrier cannot voice an opinion on which provider a claimant should consider for those services. That is, there is nothing wrong, as a general proposition, with the carrier recommending to a claimant a particular provider. For that matter, it is probably to be expected that the carrier would at least initially select the provider when it does offer the rehabilitation services and insist that the employee take advantage of those services as is the *625 carrier's right under § 319. We are not, however, faced with a situation in this case where the carrier instigated the utilization of rehabilitation services. We are cognizant of the fact that defendants represent in their brief on appeal that they voluntarily offered rehabilitation services. We are also cognizant that this is a flagrant misrepresentation of the facts of this case by defendants. The undisputed truth of the matter is that the claimant, in essence, initiated the issue of utilizing rehabilitation services upon the recommendation and referral of his treating physician. The only "voluntary offer" posed by defendants was defendant Shankin's offer to have a different vendor provide rehabilitation services to the claimant following her refusal to authorize the providing of those services by plaintiffs.[1]
For the above reasons, we conclude that neither an employer nor a compensation carrier has the right to unilaterally reject a claimant's choice of a rehabilitation services vendor and insist upon its own choice by way of denying authorization to the vendor selected by the claimant and referring the claimant to the carrier's own vendor. Rather, where, as here, a claimant initiates the issue of rehabilitation services, and nominates his own vendor, either by way of his own selection or acceptance of a referral by a third party, the proper procedure under the compensation act would be for the carrier to either accept the request by the claimant to receive rehabilitation services from that particular vendor or, if the *626 carrier has objections to either the providing of rehabilitation services at all or to the vendor selected, the carrier may instigate the dispute resolution procedures under the act. The carrier should not, however, simply deny the authorization for the vendor selected by the patient and substitute its own vendor.
The conclusion of what is the proper procedure under the compensation act does not, however, resolve the question whether defendants engaged in the tortious interference with an advantageous business relationship. Rather, it only supports the conclusion that defendants were not enforcing their rights under the compensation act to make a choice of vendor. It is still necessary for plaintiffs to establish that the tort, and each of its elements, had been committed. In this regard, the parties dispute whether plaintiff can come forth with the facts to establish one of the necessary elements of the tort of tortious interference with a business relationship, namely, whether the tortfeasor acted with an improper motive. In this context, improper means illegal, unethical or fraudulent. See Michigan Podiatric Medical Ass'n v Nat'l Foot Care Program, Inc, 175 Mich App 723, 735-736; 438 NW2d 349 (1989). Defendants' version of the facts certainly does not show an improper motive. Defendants' position is that defendant Shankin suggested to Bobier that he obtain rehabilitation services from a different vendor because, in defendant Shankin's opinion, that other vendor was better suited to provide the rehabilitation services required by Bobier.
However, since this is a matter of summary disposition, we do not accept the facts as proffered by defendants, but, rather, accept the facts in the light most favorable to plaintiffs. Jesson v General Telephone Co of Michigan, 182 Mich App 430, 432-433; *627 452 NW2d 836 (1990). Moreover, the courts are liberal in finding the existence of a genuine issue of material fact. Id. at 432. Plaintiffs' theory of this case presents a much darker picture.
Specifically, plaintiffs suggest that defendants' motivation for steering Bobier away from plaintiffs and to another vendor arises not from their concern with Bobier, but with their dislike of plaintiffs and, more importantly, their inability to control plaintiffs. A review of the lower court record, including deposition evidence and affidavits, indicates that plaintiffs are in a position to present evidence that defendants choose a rehabilitation services provider on the basis of the provider's willingness to follow defendants' dictates, including the termination of services to a claimant at the request of defendants regardless of whether the claimant's need for those services has been satisfied. Plaintiffs also have evidence to suggest that their reputation in the industry is one of being a "client advocate" and pressing the needs of their clients when the carriers attempt to terminate services prematurely, or at least prematurely in plaintiffs' judgment.
If the facts are as plaintiffs paint them, defendants' motivation was certainly improper, namely, attempting to control the referral process in order to be able to control the services provided a claimant and to be able to terminate those services without regard to the claimant's right to continue to receive those services. Further, under plaintiffs' version of the facts, defendants attempted to maintain their control by silencing the voices of client advocates, such as plaintiffs, by precluding the flow of business to vendors with such a reputation. Plaintiffs' version of the facts is supported by evidence garnered through the depositions and affidavits of Dolenga and others, including evidence *628 of plaintiffs' reputation in the industry, the prior instances in which defendants sought to prevent plaintiffs from providing rehabilitation services, and a memorandum obtained during discovery written by defendant Shankin which indicated that it was defendants' position that they would never voluntarily acquiesce to plaintiffs' providing rehabilitation services.[2]
Defendants' interference with plaintiffs' business relationships is further evidenced by the letter sent by defendant Shankin to Dr. Baghdoian which falsely states that defendants have the right under the compensation act to select the vendor and that Dr. Baghdoian has no authority to make referrals. As discussed above, this is simply not true. Defendants have no right to select the vendor and Dr. Baghdoian certainly has as much of a right to make a referral as anyone else. Indeed, given his status as the claimant's treating physician, we would think he would have a greater right to make a referral choice than do defendants.
In sum, there exists a genuine issue of material fact between the parties. While defendants' interference with plaintiffs' business relationships is fairly obvious on the evidence before us, given that they successfully terminated the business relationship between Bobier and plaintiffs, the question whether defendants were acting with an improper motive remains in dispute. While it is certainly possible that a jury could conclude from the evidence garnered thus far that defendants were acting with a proper motive of assisting claimants in obtaining the best available services, there is *629 certainly evidence from which the jury could conclude that defendants were acting improperly, unethically, fraudulently, and possibly even illegally. The important point, however, is that this is a question for the jury to answer and the trial court erred in granting summary disposition.
Reversed and remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. We do not retain jurisdiction. Plaintiffs may tax costs.
NOTES
[1]  We should also note that we are not entirely convinced of defendants' premise that, even if they were to have voluntarily offered the services, they could choose the vendor. Certainly defendants could have recommended a vendor as part of the offer, but we are not convinced they would have the right to insist upon that vendor if the claimant, for whatever reason, indicated a preference for a different vendor. However, since those are not the facts of the case before us, we need not resolve that question.
[2]  This would seem to contradict deposition testimony by defendant Shankin that she would refer matters to plaintiffs in the "appropriate cases."

=== CASE 2210528 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:54.587342+00 ===

241 Cal.App.2d 659 (1966)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
BARBARA JEAN ELLIOTT, Defendant and Appellant.
Crim. No. 10615.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Three.
Apr. 22, 1966.
Leonard Nasatir for Defendant and Appellant.
Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, William E. James, Assistant Attorney General, and Walter R. Jones, Deputy Attorney General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
FRAMPTON, J. pro tem.  [fn. *]
Defendant was charged, by information, filed by the District Attorney of Los Angeles County with the crime of pimping, a felony, in violation of section 266h, Penal Code, in counts I, III, V, and VII thereof, and with the crime of pandering, a felony, in counts II, IV, VI and VIII thereof. The cause went to trial before a jury and on October 19, 1964, the jury returned its verdict finding the defendant guilty as charged in counts I, II, III, IV, VI, and VIII of the information, and not guilty as to counts V and VII thereof. A motion for a new trial was denied and probation was denied. The defendant was sentenced to state *661 prison on each count, the sentences to run concurrently. The appeal is from the judgment.
The defendant asserts two grounds for reversal as follows: (1) The judgment as to counts I and III cannot stand because only a male person may be charged and convicted of the crime of pimping as defined in section 266h, Penal Code,  [fn. 1] and (2) the trial court committed prejudicial and reversible error in failing and refusing to instruct the jury as to the defendant's right to remain silent.
The case of the prosecution rested entirely upon the testimony of the two victims who, it was shown, were prostitutes and who were known as such by the defendant and from whose earnings the defendant was charged with having derived support and maintenance, and a landlady who had rented an apartment to a person in the presence of the defendant, and where, according to the record, the defendant sent victims A and B for the purpose of engaging in and where the latter actually engaged in acts of prostitution. The defendant did not take the witness stand and testify and no witness was called in her behalf.
[1] A summary of the evidence shows that victim A first met the defendant in Orange County during the month of June 1960. Victim A informed the defendant that she had no place to go whereupon the defendant told her that she could stay with the defendant in Los Angeles and keep house for the latter.
Pursuant to this invitation, the victim came to the residence of defendant in July 1960. This residence was occupied by the defendant, her husband, Speros Steve Sarras, and a man named Joe. The first two or three weeks of her stay at the defendant's residence passed without incident. However, during this time the defendant dyed the victim's hair and bought clothing for her. Subsequently, the defendant asked victim A if she would like to go out drinking and dining with a man for money. She informed victim A that the man would pay $50 and that this rendezvous would involve having sexual intercourse with the man. The defendant gave victim A specific directions as to the time and place of the meeting and instructed her as to how she should behave. Victim A went to the designated location, met the man and engaged in an act of sexual intercourse with him for which she received the sum of *662 $50. Victim A had not, before this incident, engaged in acts of prostitution. Upon returning to the defendant's residence she gave the latter the entire sum of $50.
It appears from the record that the man told the defendant that he was not satisfied, whereupon the defendant told victim A that in order for men to continue to return as clients, they must be properly entertained. As a result of this complaint, the defendant and Sarras (her husband), took victim A to bed with them for the purpose of instructing the latter in the methods she should use in entertaining future customers. A sexual orgy ensued, the revolting details of which are not necessary to relate here, which culminated in an act of sexual intercourse between victim A and Sarras.
Victim A engaged in three acts of sexual intercourse with three different men at the residence of defendant for which she received a total of $110, all of which was given to and kept by the defendant. In August 1960 the defendant took victim A to another house of prostitution where the defendant introduced her to a woman occupant and asked if a girl was needed. The woman occupant replied that there would be an opening in about one week. About September 1, 1960, victim A began work, as a prostitute, at this house. Either the defendant or Sarras would drive victim A to this house three mornings a week and would pick her up in the evenings. While at this house of prostitution victim A engaged in about 35 acts of sexual intercourse a day with different men for money. When either the defendant or Sarras arrived to pick her up in the evening she would give her total receipts to the one or the other, depending upon which one called for her. She continued to work under this arrangement for approximately four weeks. When not working at the house of prostitution, above referred to, the defendant arranged "call dates" for victim A. These consisted of a rendezvous with men at various locations for the purpose of having sexual intercourse for money. All money was given to the defendant on the victim's return from the "call date."
In September 1960, the defendant gave victim A the sum of $120 with instructions to use it to rent a specifically designated apartment on Highland Avenue in Hollywood where victim A could work "call dates" when she was available and if not available then victim A's sister could use the apartment for a similar purpose. The apartment was rented and thereafter the defendant would send victim A there where she met men and engaged in sexual intercourse with them for money. Later she gave the money to the defendant. Thereafter the *663 defendant would make appointments for men to have sexual intercourse with Victim A either at a prearranged location or at the rented apartment. Victim A's estimate of the amount received by her from her illicit activities during this time was $1,000 per week, all of which she gave to the defendant.
During the month of September 1960, victim A introduced her sister (victim B), to the defendant. Victim B and the defendant talked about acts of prostitution and thereafter victim B moved into the residence of the defendant. The defendant instructed victim B prior to "her first date" on the proper procedure. The defendant demonstrated to victim B the "wash and disease discovery technique" by using a regular male customer as a "guinea pig." The three of them disrobed and went to bed together. The defendant then engaged in an act of sexual intercourse with the male customer while victim B watched. The defendant was paid $20 by the male customer. Later that day the defendant sent victim B to an apartment where the latter had sexual intercourse with a man for which she received $25. Victim B had acts of sexual intercourse with two different men at the residence of the defendant, for which she received a total of $45. She gave the money received from her illegal transactions to the defendant or to Sarras, the defendant's husband. The defendant arranged additional "dates" for victim B, explaining on each occasion where she would meet the man, who he was, and how much he would pay. Victim B continued in these activities for about two weeks during which time she engaged in approximately 100 acts of sexual intercourse with different men for which she received about $2,000, all of which she turned over to the defendant or to Sarras, the defendant's husband.
About September 24, 1960, victims A and B left the State of California. They returned to Los Angeles in 1962 and took up residence at the home of the father-in-law of victim A. The defendant came to the home of the father-in- law and there discussed with the victims the prospect of their returning to work for the defendant as prostitutes. Pursuant to this discussion the victims did return and thereafter the defendant sent victim A to an apartment located on Mariposa Street in Los Angeles where victim A, according to her instructions, would find another "working girl" and a maid in attendance. Victim A went to this apartment where she remained for three or four days during which time she engaged in sexual intercourse with different men for money. She gave half of her earnings received here to the maid in attendance and kept half of it for herself. *664
The defendant on August 22, 1962, with an unidentified person, rented an apartment on Wilton Place in Los Angeles. Thereafter, the landlady of this apartment observed a Negro maid to be on the premises every day. The defendant gave the address of this apartment to victims A and B and told them to go there for the purpose of engaging in acts of prostitution. Both victims engaged in acts of sexual intercourse for money with various men at this location and turned over the money received for their services to the Negro maid. The victims were arrested at the Wilton Place apartment.
The information charged the defendant solely and as a principal with the crimes of pimping and pandering and no reference is made therein to defendant's husband, Speros Steve Sarras. There is a reference, however, in the reporter's transcript to the trial, on May 21st, 22nd and 27th, 1963, of the case of People of the State of California v. Speros Steve Sarras.  [fn. 2] At the trial of the case at bench, the defendant being solely charged, the district attorney propounded his questions to the witnesses in such manner as to focus the testimony principally on the activities of the defendant Elliott. Notwithstanding this, the testimony elicited unmistakably brought out the details of the sordid partnership which existed between the defendant Elliott and her husband, Sarras, formed and carried out for the purpose of conducting a house of prostitution and to derive their support and maintenance in full or in part from the earnings of the victims whom they engaged to participate in acts of sexual intercourse for money with men customers procured by the defendant and her husband.
The evidence in the record leaves no doubt as to the guilt of the defendant as an aider and abetter of her husband, Speros Steve Sarras, in the commission of the crimes charged against her in the information.  [fn. 3]
The case was tried on the theory that the defendant aided *665 and abetted a male person (her husband), in the commission of the crimes charged. This court has ordered up and examined the superior court file in the action (Cal. Rules of Court, rule 12), and such file discloses that the jury was instructed as follows: "Any male person who, knowing a female person is a prostitute, lives or derives support or maintenance in whole or in part, from the earnings or proceeds of her prostitution, is guilty of pimping, a felony."
"The defendant is charged in Counts I, III, V and VII of the information with pimping." The jury was further instructed that "Under 266h of the Penal Code the prosecution must prove that the accused:"
"(1) is a male"
"(2) that the female is a prostitute"
"(3) that the prostitute made some earnings from her business"
"(4) that the defendant derived his support in whole or part from such earnings"
"(5) that defendant received the money given him knowing that such money was the proceeds from such earnings."
"You are instructed that if any of the five (5) elements just mentioned have not been proved beyond a reasonable doubt by the prosecution the defendant must be acquitted." The jury was also instructed on the subject of who are principals substantially in the language of section 31 of the Penal Code and was further instructed on what constitutes aiding and abetting in the commission of a crime in the language of CALJIC (rev. ed. 1958) No. 91E as follows: 'For one person to aid and abet another in the commission of a criminal offense means to knowingly and with criminal intent aid, promote, encourage or instigate by act or counsel, or by both act and counsel, the commission of such offense.""
It has been held that a female person who aids, assists and abets a male person in the commission of the crime of pimping is regarded as a principal and may be charged, tried and convicted as such. (People v. Young, 132 Cal.App. 770, 771 [23 P.2d 524]; People v. Severino, 122 Cal.App.2d 172, 180 [264 P.2d 656]; People v. Courtney, 176 Cal.App.2d 731, 740 [1 Cal.Rptr. 789].) A female person may be convicted as an aider and abettor of the crime of rape. (People v. Bartol, 24 Cal.App. 659 [142 P. 510]; People v. Smith, 204 Cal.App.2d 797, 800 [23 Cal.Rptr. 5].) [2] While in Young and Courtney, supra, the female person was charged with the crime of pimping jointly with the male person whom she aided and *666 abetted, section 971 of the Penal Code  [fn. 4] authorizes the accusatory pleading against an aider and abettor to be drawn in the identical form as an accusatory pleading against the principal. It makes no distinction between them.
As heretofore pointed out, the defendant did not testify at the trial. The district attorney, in his argument to the jury, did not comment upon the defendant's failure to testify. The defendant requested the court, and the court refused, to instruct the jury on the subject of her failure to testify. The requested instructions were in the language of CALJIC (rev. ed. 1958) Nos. 51, 51-A and 51-B.  [fn. 5]
[3] These instructions, when read together, contain a statement of the law applicable in a criminal trial, as set forth in article I, section 13 of the California Constitution, as amended in 1934,  [fn. 6] and section 1323 of the Penal Code. *667
These instructions, when given in a criminal action, constitute a judicial comment on the effect of the defendant's failure to testify. The giving of them is tantamount to the imposition of a penalty upon a defendant for his exercise of a constitutional privilege. "What the jury may infer given no help from the court is one thing. What it may infer when the court solemnizes the silence of the accused into evidence against him is quite another." (Griffin v. California (1965) 380 U.S. 609 [85 S.Ct. 1229, 14 L.Ed.2d 106, 110].) It would have been error for the trial court to have given the requested instructions.
The defendant urges that the court should have, of its own motion, instructed the jury on the right of the defendant to remain silent and that the court's failure in this respect constituted reversible error. In a case in which the defendant had requested the trial court to instruct the jury concerning his right to remain silent, it was held to be reversible error to refuse such request in view of an applicable federal statute. (Bruno v. United States (1939) 308 U.S. 287 [60 S.Ct. 198, 84 L.Ed. 257].) No statute of that nature is involved in the case at bench. Where the defendant was charged with murder and armed robbery, and elected not to take the witness stand and testify in his own behalf on the issue of guilt, and the district attorney commented thereon and the court instructed the jury regarding the legal effect of such failure to testify, within the purview of article I, section 13 of the California Constitution, it was held that the comment and the instruction constituted error, but was not reversible error unless it resulted in a miscarriage of justice within the purview of section 4 1/2 of article VI of the California Constitution. (People v. Bostick, 62 Cal.2d 820, 823 [44 Cal.Rptr. 649, 402 P.2d 529]; People v. Teale, 63 Cal.2d 178, 195 et seq. [45 Cal.Rptr. 729, 404 P.2d 209]; People v. Anderson, 63 Cal.2d 351 [46 Cal.Rptr. 763, 406 P.2d 43]; People v. Cotter, 63 Cal.2d 386, 398 [46 Cal.Rptr. 622, 405 P.2d 862].)
[4] If comment by the prosecutor and instructions by the trial court, which characterize the failure of the defendant to testify in his behalf upon the issue of guilt, as carrying an inference of guilt, do not require a reversal unless it can be said that such error has resulted in a miscarriage of justice then the failure of the trial court, of its own motion, to give an appropriate instruction directing the jury to draw no unfavorable inferences against the defendant for his not having taken the witness stand, may not be held to require a reversal of the *668 judgment, unless it can be said that such failure has resulted in a miscarriage of justice.
We have examined the entire cause, including the evidence, and if it can be said that the failure of the court to instruct the jury, of its own motion, concerning the right of the defendant to remain silent, constituted error, such error in view of the overwhelming evidence of guilt, did not result in a miscarriage of justice. (Art. VI,  4 1/2, Cal. Const.)
The judgment is affirmed.
Ford, J., and Kaus, J., concurred.
"In this connection, however, it should be noted that if a defendant does not have the knowledge that he would need to deny or to explain any certain evidence against him, it would be unreasonable to draw an inference unfavorable to him because of his failure to deny or explain such evidence." (No. 51-A.)
"In deciding whether or not to testify, the defendant may choose to rely on the state of the evidence and upon the failure, if any, of the People to prove every essential element of the charge against him, and no lack of testimony on defendant's part will supply a failure of proof by the People so as to support by itself a finding against him on any such essential element." (No. 51-B.)
NOTES
[fn. *]  *. Retired judge of the superior court sitting under assignment by the Chairman of the Judicial Council.
[fn. 1]  1. "Any male person who, knowing a female person is a prostitute, lives or derives support or maintenance in whole or in part from the earnings or proceeds of her prostitution, ... or who solicits or receives compensation for soliciting for her, is guilty of pimping, a felony, ...."
[fn. 2]  2. The record in this court shows that the defendant Speros Steve Sarras was accused by information No. 266395 filed by the District Attorney of Los Angeles County on December 10, 1962, of pimping in two counts and pandering in two counts alleged to have been committed during the period from August through September 1960. These charges involved the same victims as are involved in the case at bench. Sarras was found guilty as charged, after trial by jury, and was sentenced to state prison. An appeal followed and is now pending. (Second Criminal 9463, Division Two.)
[fn. 3]  3. "All persons concerned in the commission of a crime, whether it be felony or misdemeanor, and whether they directly commit the act constituting the offense, or aid and abet in its commission, or, not being present, have advised and encouraged its commission, ... are principals in any crime so committed." (Pen. Code,  31.)
[fn. 4]  4. "The distinction between an accessory before the fact and a principal, and between principals in the first and second degree is abrogated; and all persons concerned in the commission of a crime, who by the operation of other provisions of this code are principals therein, shall hereafter be prosecuted, tried and punished as principals and no other facts need be alleged in any accusatory pleading against any such person than are required in an accusatory pleading against a principal."
[fn. 5]  5. "It is a constitutional right of a defendant in a criminal trial that he may not be compelled to testify. Thus, whether or not he does testify rests entirely in his own decision. As to any evidence or facts against him which the defendant can reasonably be expected to deny or explain because of facts within his knowledge, if he does not testify or if, though he does testify, he fails to deny or explain such evidence, the jury may take that failure into consideration as tending to indicate the truth of such evidence and as indicating that among the inferences that may be reasonably drawn therefrom those unfavorable to the defendant are the more probable. The failure of a defendant to deny or explain evidence against him does not, however, create a presumption of guilt or by itself warrant an inference of guilt, nor does it relieve the prosecution of its burden of proving every essential element of the crime and the guilt of the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt." (No. 51.)
[fn. 6]  6. "... No person shall ... be compelled, in any criminal case, to be a witness against himself; ... but in any criminal case, whether the defendant testifies or not, his failure to explain or deny by his testimony any evidence or facts in the case against him may be commented upon by the court and by counsel, and may be considered by the court or the jury. ..."

=== CASE 2210531 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:54.633955+00 ===

463 N.W.2d 656 (1990)
Ernest KRONBERGER and Sandra Kraft, for themselves and as next friends of Casey Kronberger, Plaintiffs and Appellants,
v.
Dustin ZINS, and his next friends, Arnold Zins and Carolyn Zins, and Arnold Zins and Carolyn Zins, individually, Defendants and Appellees.
Civ. No. 900199.
Supreme Court of North Dakota.
November 29, 1990.
*657 Lester J. Schirado of Schirado Law Office, Mandan, for plaintiffs and appellants.
Curtis L. Wike of Fleck, Mather & Strutz, Bismarck, for defendants and appellees.
LEVINE, Justice.
Ernest Kronberger and Sandra Kraft appeal from an order denying Casey Kronberger a new trial on the ground that an ex parte communication between the judge and the jury was harmless error. We reverse and remand for a new trial.
This appeal involves a personal injury action against six-year-old Dustin Zins for damages sustained by seven-year-old Casey Kronberger in a "dirt ball fight" involving neighborhood children. At the close of Kronberger's case, the trial court dismissed the claims against Dustin Zins' parents, Arnold and Carolyn. After the jury returned a verdict favoring Dustin Zins and the court entered judgment, Kronberger moved for a new trial on the ground that the court improperly conducted ex parte communications with the jury contrary to section 28-14-19, NDCC.[1] In support of his motion, Kronberger offered affidavits from one of the jurors and the clerk of court.
The clerk of court's affidavit indicated that during the jury's deliberations, the bailiff received a note from the jury which he passed to the clerk. The clerk telephoned the judge at his home and relayed the question to him. She wrote the judge's response on the note submitted by the jury, gave the note to the bailiff, and he returned the note to the jury. The juror's affidavit stated that she "had written a note asking a certain question as to what the jury could or could not do which was given to Adam Geiss, the bailiff, and that the jury had received an answer to such question from the bailiff, who had informed them that the Judge had told them what they could or could not do." The juror's affidavit also contained a statement about the juror's confusion with one of the *658 questions on the jury verdict form.[2] The special verdict form contained five questions. The first three inquired as to the existence of negligence on the part of Zins, Kronberger and "someone other than Dustin Zins, Casey Kronberger, or their parents...." The fourth asked the jury to apportion fault among Zins, Kronberger, and "other persons." And the fifth question dealt with damages. Neither affidavit stated the content of the jury's question or the judge's response. The judge did not notify the parties when the question was submitted to him, and the note was not preserved.
In opposition to the motion for new trial, Zins offered second affidavits from the same juror and the clerk of court. The juror's second affidavit stated that "the question I wrote out for the bailiff was whether the jury would have to award money damages upon a finding of 50 percent negligence on plaintiff Casey Kronberger and 50 percent negligence on defendant Dustin Zins." The written response from the judge, the juror said, was "yes." The clerk of court's second affidavit contained a recitation of the question put to the judge that was identical to the juror's. The clerk also stated she "contacted the Honorable Benny A. Graff by telephone and read the jury's written question over the telephone to Judge Graff; that Judge Graff instructed [the clerk] to have the bailiff respond to the jury, in writing, that the jury was to complete the remaining questions on the verdict form."
The trial judge agreed that his contact with the jury constituted error, but concluded that Kronberger was not prejudiced by the communication. In his order denying Kronberger's motion, the Judge said, "The inquiry from the jury was generally in the nature of whether, upon answering question 4 of the special verdict form, it need proceed to question 5 of the special verdict form. The affirmative response of this Court was to allow the jury to assess whatever percentages of negligence it chose as well as damages." Kronberger appeals from the denial of a new trial and renews his challenge based on the ex parte communication.
The decision to grant or deny a new trial rests in the sound discretion of the trial court and will not be set aside on appeal unless there is an affirmative showing of manifest abuse of discretion. Olmstead v. First Interstate Bank, 449 N.W.2d 804, 807 (N.D.1989). We have defined manifest abuse of discretion as "an unreasonable, arbitrary, or unconscionable attitude on the part of the court." Holte v. Carl Albers, Inc., 370 N.W.2d 520, 524 (N.D.1985).
Relying on Ferderer v. Northern Pacific Ry. Co., 75 N.D. 139, 26 N.W.2d 236 (1947), Kronberger argues that the trial court's failure to follow the statutory procedure for communicating with the jury was error per se and that prejudice should be presumed. In Ferderer, we ordered a new trial when the non-prevailing party demonstrated from the record that the trial judge had communicated with the jury and had given additional instructions without following the statutory requirements. 26 N.W.2d at 247. We said, "the failure to comply with the provisions of a mandatory statute in a matter of such importance as instructions to the jury and communications between the trial judge and the jury constitutes error per se and must be deemed to be prejudicial either as a matter of law, or unless and until it is shown that no prejudice resulted or could have resulted from the noncompliance." Id. at 242. The prevailing party has the burden of showing that the error was not prejudicial, i.e., was harmless. Id.
Ferderer was decided before the July 1, 1957 effective date of the North Dakota Rules of Civil Procedure and specifically, *659 the harmless-error rule embodied in Rule 61, NDRCivP. Since the adoption of Rule 61, only two North Dakota cases discuss the burden of proving that an error is prejudicial, and not harmless, and they state that, generally, the burden is on the appellant. Allen v. Kleven, 306 N.W.2d 629, 639 (N.D.1981); Zimmer v. Bellon, 153 N.W.2d 757, 760 (N.D.1967). The federal courts also place the burden of showing error and harm on the appellant. See, e.g., Flanigan v. Burlington Northern, Inc., 632 F.2d 880, 889 (8th Cir.1980). However, in Andrews v. O'Hearn, 387 N.W.2d 716 (N.D.1986), we made it clear that while Rule 61, NDRCivP, did apply to improper communications to the jury, the burden was nonetheless on the prevailing party to prove that the error was not prejudicial. Id. at 724, n. 13. The Andrews case carefully preserves the "long-standing" rule of Ferderer that places the burden on the prevailing party, not on the nonprevailing party, to prove no prejudice from the improper communications. Id.
Kronberger offered proof that a written question was submitted by the jury to the judge and that the judge answered the question out of court, without notice to or the presence of counsel. Zins argues that the ex parte communication was not error because it was analogous to the instruction given in Andrews v. O'Hearn which we said was "proper." In that case, we found that the non-prevailing party was not harmed by the judge's repetition, without notice, of a previous, proper instruction admonishing the jury not to expose itself to material extraneous to the evidence presented in trial. 387 N.W.2d at 725. But we did not conclude that the reiterated and procedurally "proper" instruction given in violation of section 28-14-19, NDCC, was not error. The question we review here touches on the very substance of the jury's deliberations. We agree with the trial court that this communication constituted error. Kronberger, therefore, having established error, shifted the burden to Zins, the prevailing party, to demonstrate that the error was harmless. Ferderer, 26 N.W.2d at 243; Andrews, 387 N.W.2d at 724.
The determinative issue is, therefore, whether the trial court abused its discretion by finding in effect that Zins had met his burden of proving harmless error. Harmless error exists when the defect in the proceeding does not affect the substantial rights of the parties. NDRCivP 61. Kronberger had a right to have the jury instructed as the parties agreed or with exceptions noted to instructions with which he did not agree. NDRCivP 51. Because the judge did not call the jury into court, as required by the statute, there was no record made of the question or the court's response. The juror and the clerk of court's versions of the question put to the judge vary from the judge's own characterization of the question. The discrepancy illustrates the difficulty we face in reviewing the error acknowledged by the trial court to have been committed. Under either version, however, we view the jury's question and the trial judge's response as bearing on the law of the case and the jury's application of that law in reaching its verdict. We cannot say that this ex parte communication did not harm Kronberger's substantial rights.
Zins argues that the communication was harmless error under the rule of Andrews v. O'Hearn, 387 N.W.2d 716. In Andrews, we acknowledged two circumstances where communications between the judge and the jury that do not follow the procedure in section 28-14-19, NDCC, are harmless error. When the trial court merely reiterates a proper instruction, or gives an instruction administrative in nature, the prevailing party may overcome the presumption of harm that attaches to ex parte communications. 387 N.W.2d at 725. An administrative instruction is one that goes to the mechanics or process of jury deliberations, as for example, the jury's inability to use a dictionary or whether the jury's verdict must be rendered in writing. In this case, the question and answer concern neither a reiteration of a previously given instruction nor an instruction which is merely administrative. Instead, the question and answer go directly to the jury's consideration of the merits. Under the circumstances, Zins *660 did not overcome the presumption of harm and the trial court abused its discretion in denying a new trial. We, therefore, reverse and grant Kronberger a new trial.
Because Kronberger did not appeal from that portion of the judgment dismissing Arnold and Carolyn Zins, only Dustin Zins remains as a party defendant.
ERICKSTAD, C.J., and VANDE WALLE, GIERKE and MESCHKE, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Section 28-14-19, NDCC, provides:
"After the jurors have retired for deliberation, if there is a disagreement between them as to any part of the testimony, or if they desire to be informed of any point of law arising in the case, they may require the officer to conduct them into court. Upon their being brought into court the information required must be given in the presence of or after notice to the parties or counsel."
[2]  Because the first affidavit from the juror went beyond the questions of extraneous communication with the jury, and described the juror's mental state during deliberations, the judge could not consider that portion of the affidavit describing the juror's "confusion." NDREv 606(b); Keyes v. Amundson, 343 N.W.2d 78, 84-85 (N.D.1983). The remainder of the affidavit that was proper and the other affidavits provided adequate support for Kronberger's motion for a new trial. NDRCivP 61.

=== CASE 2210532 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:54.658643+00 ===

241 Cal.App.2d 169 (1966)
ANAHEIM UNION HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT OF ORANGE COUNTY, Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
HOPE VIEIRA, Defendant and Respondent.
Civ. No. 7895.
California Court of Appeals. Fourth Dist., Div. Two.
Mar. 28, 1966.
Eminent domain action by a school district to acquire real property for school purposes. Judgment for defendant owner reversed with directions.
Adrian Kuyper, County Counsel, and Arthur C. Wahlstedt, Jr., Deputy County Counsel, for Plaintiff and Appellant.
Caidin, Bloomgarden & Kalman and Newton Kalman for Defendant and Respondent.
KERRIGAN, J.
The school district initiated an action in eminent domain in July 1963 for the purpose of acquiring title to 20 acres of land for a school site. The defendant, Hope Vieira, is the owner of an undivided one-half interest in the subject property and the remaining interest is held by the defendant, Security-First National Bank of Los Angeles, as trustee of an estate. The case proceeded to trial before the court, sitting without a jury, in March 1964 on the sole *171 preliminary issue as to whether the plaintiff had an intention of devoting the property to a public use, with the defendant Vieira contending that the school district had no intention of utilizing the land for school purposes within a reasonable period of time, and was thus precluded from taking the property.
The trial court determined that the resolution of the school board directing the acquisition of the property was conclusive as to the issue of public necessity. Experts in the field of school expansion and planning indicated that the school would be needed and constructed by the year 1967. No evidence was introduced indicating any bad faith or fraud on the part of the school district in seeking to acquire the property.
The trial court found that the condemner did not intend to devote the land to a public use within a reasonable period of time, and entered judgment in favor of the defendant, Vieira. The coowner, Security-First National Bank, did not contest the "necessity" or "use" issues and was therefore not affected by the said judgment.
[1a] The salient issue herein involved is whether the trial court erred in ruling that the school district could not condemn the property for school purposes because the condemner did not intend to commence construction of a junior high school for a period of four years.
[2] The power of eminent domain is an inherent attribute of sovereignty. (County of San Mateo v. Coburn, 130 Cal. 631 [63 P. 78, 621].) The only limitations placed upon the exercise of the right of eminent domain are those imposed by article I, section 14, of the California Constitution and the Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution, which require that the taking of private property by a governmental agency be for a "public use" and that "just compensation" be paid for such taking. (People v. Chevalier, 52 Cal.2d 299 [340 P.2d 598].)
Section 1241, subdivision 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure provides that the adoption of a resolution to condemn private property by a vote of two-thirds of the members of a school board shall constitute conclusive evidence of the following factors: (1) the public necessity of such proposed public improvements: (2) such property is necessary for the construction of the public improvement; and (3) such proposed public improvement is planned or located in the manner which will be the most compatible with the greatest public good and the least private injury. *172
[3] Section 1241, subdivision 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure has the effect of placing the determination of the question of "necessity" within the exclusive province of the condemning body, by expressly determining that the latter's determination of "necessity" shall be "conclusive evidence" thereof. [4] Once it is judicially established that a use is public, it is within the exclusive province of the Legislature to pass upon the necessity for appropriating private property for that use. (People v. Lagiss, 223 Cal.App.2d 23 [35 Cal.Rptr. 554]; People v. Chevalier, supra, 52 Cal.2d 299.)
[5] It may be fairly stated that the substance of the defendant's objection to the taking of her land is that the school district does not presently need her land for school purposes. This contention relates to the issue of "necessity" as distinguished from the principle of "public use" and is consequently not justiciable.
[6] Motives or reasons for declaring that it is necessary to take land are immaterial once the condemner establishes that the property condemned is to be utilized for an established public use. (County of Los Angeles v. Bartlett, 203 Cal.App.2d 523 [21 Cal.Rptr. 776].)
[7] The taking of private property for school purposes is clearly a "public use" and expressly authorized by statute. (Code Civ. Proc.,  1238, subd. 3; Hayward Union High School Dist. v. Madrid, 234 Cal.App.2d 100 [44 Cal.Rptr. 268].)
[8] The taking of private property for a public purpose may not be disputed in the absence of fraud or bad faith as to its use on the part of the condemning body. (Rindge Co. v. County of Los Angeles, 262 U.S. 700 [43 S.Ct. 689, 67 L.Ed. 1186].)
[9] Where fraud or bad faith are pleaded, the determination as to public use is not conclusive, and it must then be ascertained whether the taking of private land is, in fact, for a public purpose.
[10] When the necessity for taking private property has been established by the condemner, the burden is upon the owner to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the condemner's "real purpose" in seeking to acquire the land is to devote it to some "private purpose" and not utilize it for a "public purpose." (People v. Lagiss, supra, 223 Cal.App.2d 23.)
[1b] The record is devoid of any evidence of fraud or bad faith applicable to the school district in acquiring this land. Conversely, the evidence is overwhelming that the only purpose *173 of the school district in condemning the defendant's property is to utilize it for a junior high school site, which is an established public use.
The judgment is reversed and the cause is remanded for a trial on the issue of "just compensation."
McCabe, P. J., and Tamura, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9737455 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:25:41.740649+00 ===

HARRIS, Justice.
Plaintiff manufacturer brought this action for both contribution and indemnity after settling a wrongful death action. Summary judgment was entered in favor of the defendants, one which supplied component parts to the manufacturer, and one a dealer which sold the item to the consumer. We vacate the decision of the court of appeals. We affirm the district court and remand.
The underlying wrongful death action was filed in August 1982 for the estate of Duane Hardy. Hardy was electrocuted June 7, 1982, while using a power washer manufactured by Britt-Tech. The electrocution resulted from an electrical short which existed within a transformer manufactured by American Magnetics. The transformer was purchased by Britt-Tech from American Magnetics and installed without alteration as a component part of the power washer. River City Development Company purchased the washer from Britt-Tech and sold it to Hardy.
A jury verdict was entered for Hardy’s estate but was vacated when the court sustained Britt-Tech’s motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict. On appeal the case was reversed and remanded for a new trial on damages only. See Hardy v. Britt-Tech, 378 N.W.2d 307 (Iowa App.1985). Following remand the wrongful death case was settled, and Britt-Tech paid the estate a substantial amount, receiving a release from the estate.
On July 24, 1987, Britt-Tech filed this petition in equity claiming both contribution and indemnification against American Magnetics and River City Development Company.1
Defendants answered and later filed motions for summary judgment. Although the motions lack some specificity it is clear that they were limited to Britt-Tech’s claims for contribution. There was no challenge to Britt-Tech’s claims for indemnity. The district court so understood the motions and addressed only the claims for contribution.
The trial court granted summary judgment in favor of both American Magnetics and River City upon a finding that Britt-Tech did not comply with Iowa Code section 668.6 (1985). We transferred the case to the court of appeals which affirmed partial summary judgment in favor of defendant River City but reversed the partial summary judgment in favor of defendant American Magnetics. The case is before us on further review.
I. Although Britt-Tech contends otherwise it is clear that Iowa Code chapter 668 (1989) is applicable to its contribution claims. Britt-Tech argues that the chapter does not apply because the underlying suit was brought by Hardy’s estate August 2, 1982, prior to the chapter’s effective date.
In rejecting Britt-Tech’s position, the trial court correctly anticipated our holding in Iowa National Mutual Insurance Co. v. Granneman, 438 N.W.2d 840 (Iowa 1989). In Granneman, filed a month following the trial court ruling, we held that contribution claims filed after July 1, 1984, but arising from suits filed prior to July 1, 1984, fall within the ambit of chapter 668. Id. at 842.
II. Iowa Code section 668.6(3)2 both provides for and limits contribution *29recoveries. There are only two alternative routes to recovery. In order to successfully travel the first one, Britt-Tech was required to discharge the liability of American Magnetics and River City prior to June 7, 1984 (when the estate’s two-year statute of limitations expired). But on that date Britt-Tech was still disputing the Hardy estate claim. Although an adverse verdict had been returned January 13, 1984, Britt-Tech sought and obtained a judgment notwithstanding the verdict. Thus Britt-Tech stood as the prevailing party until the court of appeals decision in 1985.
Taken alone, the constraints of section 668.6(3)(a) seem to leave tort defendants in the impossibly difficult dilemma of abandoning either their defense of the suit or their chance to seek contribution. The situation is not so desperate however when a second available alternative is considered. The legislature foresaw the possibility of unfair situations which might arise under the first alternative and therefore provided a second in section 668.6(3)(b).
The second alternative, under Iowa Code section 668.6(3)(b), allows those seeking contribution to agree to discharge liability of the person from whom contribution is sought while the action is pending and thereafter (within one year) seek contribution. To qualify under the second alternative, however, the one seeking contribution must take care to discharge the liability of the person from whom contribution is sought. To do so the release must be drawn with a view to Iowa Code section 668.7.3
The release obtained by Britt-Tech from the Hardy estate stated:
The Estate of Hardy does hereby remise, release and forever discharge Britt-Tech Corporation, its successors and assigns, and all other persons, firms or corporations, known or unknown....
The trial court held that the release executed between Britt-Tech and the Hardy estate did not satisfy the specificity requirements spelled out in Aid Insurance Co. v. Davis County, 426 N.W.2d 631 (Iowa 1988), a case decided long after Britt-Tech chose its method of seeking contribution. We held in Aid:
In our interpretation of section 668.7, we favor a rule which would require a written release to include some specific identification of the tortfeasors to be released in order for them to be discharged. While the easier course would require naming these parties, we would not require such a rigid rule if they are otherwise sufficiently identified in the manner that the parties to the release would know who was to be benefited. Such designations might include such classes as “employers,” “partners” or “officers.” While this rule may require evidentiary hearings to determine the members of the class, it provides needed flexibility. Under this rule, a general designation such as “any other person, firm or corporation” would not sufficiently identify the tortfeasors to be discharged.
Id. at 633-34.
Britt-Tech relies on Aid for the principle that extrinsic evidence is admissible to determine whether the parties intended to discharge River City and American Magnetics. Id. Britt-Tech claims the extrinsic evidence (the payment by Britt-*30Tech for 100% of the claim — more than its share) satisfies Aid by identifying the released parties.
The release here was almost identical to the one we held to be insufficient in Aid. The trial court was correct in concluding it did not identify either American Magnetics or River City. For reasons it must have deemed sufficient, the legislature structured the sufficiency of a release on its wording, not on the subjective intent of the parties. We agree with the trial court that the release was not sufficient to qualify under section 668.7.
The insufficiency of the release is also answer to another of Britt-Tech’s contentions. It is argued that the running of the statute of limitations renders both American Magnetics and River City free of liability on the underlying claim. But again, the legislature has pinned the right to seek contribution on the sufficiency of the release, not some other theory of defense.
We join the trial court in sympathizing with Britt-Tech’s difficult dilemma. When sued by the Hardy estate, prior to the enactment of chapter 668 or our decision in Aid, there was no impetus for then bringing American Magnetics or River City into the suit. As the trial court pointed out in its exceptionally thoughtful ruling:
When the injured party, Hardy’s estate, brought suit in the original case, Britt-Tech could have cross-petitioned American Magnetics and River City Development. For strategic reasons Britt-Tech may well have decided to defend alone. Procedures for contribution were substantially different prior to July 1, 1984. No criticism is leveled at Britt-Tech for the manner in which it proceeded. When the “rules of the ball game” were changed as of July 1, 1984, Britt-Tech found itself in left field with no glove, so-to-speak. It could not bring American Magnetics or River City Development into the original case, it could not know the content of the Aid decision and it wanted to take advantage of a mutually negotiated settlement. Nevertheless, they did not meet the requirements of chapter 668 insofar as actively achieving the extinction of liability of the parties from whom it now seeks contribution.
We agree, and affirm the trial court in sustaining the motions for summary judgment against Britt-Tech’s claims for contribution. The case must be remanded for further proceedings on Britt-Tech’s claims for indemnification.
DECISION OF COURT OF APPEALS VACATED; DISTRICT COURT JUDGMENT AFFIRMED AND REMANDED.
All Justices concur except CARTER, J., who concurs specially.
.Iowa Code § 668.5(2) (1989) provides:
2.Contribution is available to a person who enters into a settlement with the claimant only if the liability of the person against whom contribution is sought has been extinguished and only to the extent that the amount paid in settlement was reasonable.
. Iowa Code § 668.6(3) provides:
3.If a judgment has been rendered, an action for contribution must be commenced within one year after the judgment becomes *29final. If a judgment has not been rendered, a claim for contribution _ is enforceable only upon satisfaction of one of the following sets of conditions:
(a) The person bringing the action for contribution must have discharged the liability of the person from whom contribution is sought by payment made within the period of the statute of limitations applicable to the claimant’s right of action and must have commenced the action for contribution within one year after the date of that payment.
(b) The person seeking contribution must have agreed while the action of the claimant was pending to discharge the liability of the person from whom contribution is sought and within one year after the date of the agreement must have discharged that liability and commenced the action for contribution.
. Section 668.7 provides:
A release, covenant not to sue, or similar agreement entered into by a claimant and a person liable discharges that person from all liability for contribution, but .it does not discharge any other persons liable upon the same claim unless it so provides.

=== CASE 2210538 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:54.721109+00 ===

711 N.E.2d 323 (1999)
304 Ill. App.3d 564
238 Ill.Dec. 220
John HOHNSBEHN, Jr., Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
The BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF the POLICE PENSION FUND OF the CITY OF EAST ALTON, ILLINOIS, Defendant-Appellee.
No. 5-99-0187.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Fifth District.
April 16, 1999.
Rehearing Denied May 25, 1999.
*324 Brian A. Schroeder, Thomas F. McGuire & Associates, Ltd., Long Grove, for appellant.
Charles H. Atwell, Jr., Atwell & Atwell, Aurora, for appellee.
Justice MAAG delivered the opinion of the court:
This is a declaratory judgment and injunction proceeding filed by the plaintiff, John Hohnsbehn, Jr., alleging that the defendant, the Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund of the City of East Alton, Illinois (Board), does not have the authority to take evidence depositions of witnesses in lieu of live testimony. On March 4, 1999, the circuit court entered an order ruling against the plaintiff. The plaintiff immediately filed a notice of appeal. On March 30, 1999, this court entered an order granting the plaintiff's motion for an accelerated docket.
The Board is an administrative agency having the powers and duties set forth in article 3 of the Illinois Pension Code (Code) (40 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq. (West 1996)). The plaintiff is a recipient of a disability pension from the Board. Pursuant to section 3-115 of the Code (40 ILCS 5/3-115 (West 1996)), the Board has the right to require that the plaintiff be examined in order to verify whether the plaintiff's disability status has changed. Pursuant to this authority, the Board had the plaintiff examined by Dr. Randall Rogalsky and Maureen Ackels, a physical therapist. It is undisputed that the plaintiff was then examined by a doctor of his own choosing, Dr. James Segrist. On August 26, 1997, Dr. Segrist sent a letter to the Board, stating that the plaintiff is totally disabled for law enforcement activities.
On February 26, 1998, the Board sent the plaintiff a letter requesting that the plaintiff stipulate to the taking of Dr. Rogalsky's and Ackels' evidence depositions for presentation to the Board. The Board also indicated that another attorney, Dennis Orsey, might question these individuals on the Board's behalf. The plaintiff responded on March 2, 1998, and objected to the taking of depositions and also to the Board's hiring another attorney to question these individuals. On January 19, 1999, the plaintiff received a letter from attorney Orsey indicating that he had been retained by the Board as special counsel to represent them in the plaintiff's case. Orsey noted that he had scheduled evidence depositions for Dr. Rogalsky and Ackels on March 4, 1999.
The plaintiff filed a complaint on February 1, 1999. He later filed a motion for a preliminary injunction seeking to enjoin the evidence depositions until a ruling by the court on the merits of his complaint. The Board filed a response to the plaintiff's complaint on *325 February 25, 1999. On March 4, 1999, the circuit court denied the plaintiff's complaint for declaratory judgment. The circuit court also denied the plaintiff's motion for a preliminary injunction and his complaint for injunctive relief. The circuit court stated as follows: "The Court is of the opinion that proceeding by way of evidence depositions is permissible for hearings as would occur before the Board of Trustees, the named defendant herein. The Court declines to bar the use of Attorney Orsey as an additional attorney for the Board in any proceedings they may schedule."
It is undisputed that during the telephone hearing, counsel for the Board stated that the evidence depositions were continued to April 29, 1999, since a ruling by this court was not possible before then. The plaintiff requested that this court accelerate the docket for appeal, and on March 30, 1999, the plaintiff's request was granted.
The plaintiff claims that the Board does not have statutory authority to take the evidence depositions of witnesses. We disagree.
The Board is an administrative agency vested with extensive authority, and it exercises quasi-judicial powers. Bowden v. Flannery, 18 Ill.App.2d 299, 307, 152 N.E.2d 188, 192 (1958). "Quasi-judicial" is the term used to describe boards and agencies that, while not a part of the judiciary, exercise functions of a judicial nature. Bowden, 18 Ill.App.2d at 307, 152 N.E.2d at 192. An administrative agency is a creature of statute and has no general or common law powers. Business & Professional People for Public Interest v. Illinois Commerce Comm'n, 136 Ill.2d 192, 243, 144 Ill.Dec. 334, 555 N.E.2d 693, 717 (1989). Hence, any power or authority claimed by an administrative agency must find its source within the provisions of the statute by which the agency was created. Schalz v. McHenry County Sheriff's Department Merit Comm'n, 113 Ill.2d 198, 202, 100 Ill.Dec. 553, 497 N.E.2d 731, 733 (1986). The authority of the Board must either arise from the express language of the Act or devolve by fair implication and intendment from the express provisions of the Act as an incident to achieving the objectives for which the Board was created. See Schalz, 113 Ill.2d at 202, 100 Ill.Dec. 553, 497 N.E.2d at 733. An act by an administrative agency in excess of its limited jurisdiction is void. Business & Professional People for Public Interest, 136 Ill.2d at 243, 144 Ill.Dec. 334, 555 N.E.2d at 717.
One of the powers granted to the Board in the Code is the power to subpoena witnesses. 40 ILCS 5/3-136 (West 1996). Sections 3-131 and 3-136 state as follows:
"§ 3-131. Powers and duties of board. The board shall have the powers and duties stated in Sections 3-132 through 3-140.1 * * *." 40 ILCS 5/3-131 (West 1996).
"§ 3-136. To subpoena witnesses. [The board has the power] [t]o compel witnesses to attend and testify before it upon all matters connected with the administration of this Article, in the manner provided by law for the taking of testimony in the circuit courts of this State. The president, or any board member, may administer oaths to witnesses." (Emphasis added.) 40 ILCS 5/3-136 (West 1996).
The plaintiff claims that since there is no express provision in the statute stating that the Board has the power to take depositions of witnesses, no such power exists.
The best indicator of legislative intent is the language used in the statute itself, which must be given its plain and ordinary meaning. Paris v. Feder, 179 Ill.2d 173, 177, 227 Ill.Dec. 800, 688 N.E.2d 137, 139 (1997). When the language of a statute is clear and unambiguous, courts must enforce the statute as written and may not resort to other aids for construction. See Superior Structures Co. v. City of Sesser, 292 Ill.App.3d 848, 851, 226 Ill.Dec. 927, 686 N.E.2d 710, 712 (1997).
The plaintiff appears to focus on the language in the statute that says that the Board has the power to compel witnesses "to attend and testify before it", and the plaintiff then presumes that since an evidence deposition would not be testimony "before" the Board, the Board does not have the statutory power to take evidence depositions.
*326 While we agree with the plaintiff that a statute should be construed so that no word or phrase is rendered superfluous or meaningless (see Kraft, Inc. v. Edgar, 138 Ill.2d 178, 189, 149 Ill.Dec. 286, 561 N.E.2d 656, 660 (1990)), we note that the plaintiff fails to acknowledge what the precise definition of the word "testimony" is. The plaintiff also fails to understand that section 3-136 of the Code merely delineates a power that the Board can utilize. There is nothing in the Code that mandates that the Board actually utilize those powers. The legislature has granted the Board the power to compel witnesses to attend and testify before it. We know this to be true because section 3-136 states that testimony is to be taken "in the manner provided by law for the taking of testimony in the circuit courts of this State." (Emphasis added.) 40 ILCS 5/3-136 (West 1996). The word "testimony" means much more than mere in-person testimony at the hearing. "Testimony properly means * * * such evidence as is delivered by a witness on the trial of a cause, either orally or in the form of affidavits or depositions." (Emphasis added.) Black's Law Dictionary 1476 (6th ed.1990). Hence, the statute contemplates that testimony in the form of depositions may be used. See, e.g., 166 Ill.2d R. 202 (Supreme Court Rule 202 authorizes the taking of depositions for evidentiary purposes); 134 Ill.2d R. 212(b) (Supreme Court Rule 212(b) regulates the use of the deposition).
By so holding, we refuse to find that the Board's grant of authority by the legislature to subpoena witnesses to testify pursuant to 3-136 of the Code imposes a limitation on the Board's ability to depose witnesses.
The plaintiff also claims that the use of evidence depositions, in lieu of oral testimony, violates his due process rights. The plaintiff argues that the Board's ability to evaluate the credibility of the witnesses will be hampered if the Board is allowed to substitute an evidence deposition for in-person testimony in front of the Board. We disagree.
Section 3-136 contemplates that the taking of testimony for Board purposes must be "in the manner provided by law for the taking of testimony in the circuit courts of this State." 40 ILCS 5/3-136 (West 1996). Since we have determined that evidence depositions are a form of testimony and are allowed by section 3-136, the Board must comply with Supreme Court Rule 212, which states precisely how physicians' and surgeons' depositions should be used (134 Ill.2d R. 212). Rule 212(b) states as follows:
"The evidence deposition of a physician or surgeon may be introduced in evidence at trial on the motion of either party regardless of the availability of the deponent, without prejudice to the right of either party to subpoena or otherwise call the physician or surgeon for attendance at trial." 134 Ill.2d R. 212.
When section 3-136 and Supreme Court Rule 212(b) are construed together, if a physician's or surgeon's evidence deposition is introduced at the Board's hearing, the plaintiff can subpoena or call the physician for attendance at the hearing. Additionally, when the evidence deposition of the physician in this case is taken, the plaintiff will be given notice and a full opportunity to cross-examine the physician to the same extent as if the physician were to appear before the Board. We fail to comprehend precisely how the plaintiff's right to due process will be violated by complying with the same rules that govern testimony given in circuit court.
The plaintiff also complains that his due process rights are being violated since his own doctor is not being deposed by the Board. We disagree. There is nothing in the record to suggest that the Board is attempting to prohibit the plaintiff from deposing his own physician and introducing that evidence deposition at the hearing in the same manner that the Board intends to use Dr. Rogalsky's evidence deposition.
For these reasons, we fail to see how the plaintiff has been deprived of his right to due process and fundamental fairness.
Finally, the plaintiff makes a blanket statement at the outset of his brief that his right to a fair hearing has been compromised by the Board's decision to employ additional counsel to conduct Dr. Rogalsky's evidence deposition and to interrogate witnesses at the hearing. The plaintiff makes this statement *327 without any citation to authority. Pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 341(e)(7) (155 Ill.2d R. 341(e)(7)), argument "shall contain the contentions of the appellant and the reasons therefor, with citation of the authorities * * *." (Emphasis added.) Since the plaintiff has failed to comply with Supreme Court Rule 341(e)(7), this issue is waived. Even if this issue had not been waived, we disagree with the plaintiff's assertion. See Thurow v. Police Pension Board of Village of Fox Lake, 180 Ill.App.3d 683, 689, 129 Ill.Dec. 471, 536 N.E.2d 155, 159 (1989).
In light of the foregoing considerations, we affirm the circuit court's decision that the Board may elicit testimony in the form of evidence depositions in the manner provided by law in the circuit courts of this state.
The circuit court's order is affirmed, and this cause is remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Affirmed and remanded.
WELCH and GOLDENHERSH, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9737457 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:25:43.612057+00 ===

STONE, J.*
— By a preliminary injunction defendants were prohibited from obstructing ingress and egress to places of business of plaintiff, San Diego Gas & Electric Company, or interfering with any person using any of plaintiff’s places of business.
Specifically, defendants were limited to two pickets at the main entrance of plaintiff’s main office, and one picket at any other entrance or at the entrance or exit of any of plaintiff’s other places of business, buildings, plants, facilities and properties.
Defendants were also prohibited from exhibiting signs, posters, placards or slogans stating that plaintiff discriminates or is unfair in its hiring practices because it does not hire a certain ratio, percentage or quota of any minority group or groups, and from exhibiting signs, posters, placards or slogans designed for the purpose of compelling, intimidating or coercing in any manner, plaintiff to hire any minority group or groups in the ratio, percentage or quota of any kind, and to the ratio, percentage or quota of any kind that they bear to the total population or any other ratio, percentage or quota system of hiring.
The preliminary injunction was issued January 15, 1964, as the result of an action filed by plaintiff December 23, 1963, to end picketing that began November 4, 1963. At one time approximately 18 people entered the lobby area of plaintiff’s main office and sat on the floor; they interfered with the passage of customers in and out of the lobby and to the various *407parts of the building where business is transacted. They also interfered with the delivery of supplies.
Defendants argue that plaintiff failed to exhaust its administrative remedies before seeking an injunction, and that if the court had jurisdiction to hear the matter no evidence was adduced to support the injunctive restrictions upon defendants’ expression of their grievances. Since a review of the evidence will bear upon the issue of jurisdiction, we reserve that question for the last.
Defendants’ attack on the part of the order enjoining picketing in a manner that interferes with the passage of employees, customers and tradesmen in and out of the building and going from one place to another in the building, and limiting picketing at the main entrance and the side entrances to plaintiff’s property, appears to be largely pro forma. This conclusion stems from the concession of defendants’ counsel at oral argument that the propriety of this aspect of the order rests on a question of fact.
The classic rule that if any substantial evidence supports the finding of the trial court as to an issue of fact a reviewing court may not substitute its own evaluation of the evidence, applies to an appeal from a preliminary injunction. A reviewing court may reverse only if an abuse of discretion is shown; and it follows that if substantial evidence supports the order there is no abuse of discretion. (Union Interchange, Inc. v. Savage, 52 Cal.2d 601, 606 [342 P.2d 249].)
Further, in weighing the question of a trial court’s exercise of discretion to grant a preliminary injunction, the facts must be viewed most favorably to the plaintiff. (Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, Inc. v. Lee, 212 Cal.App.2d 23, 27-28 [27 Cal. Rptr. 833].)  Eighteen pickets sitting on the lobby floor obstructing the passage of customers and 20 to 25 pickets blocking the sidewalk entrance to plaintiff’s head office constitute substantial evidence in support of the trial court’s finding there was unreasonable interference by defendants with plaintiff’s business operations and the use of plaintiff’s premises by the public and by tradesmen. We cannot say that by limiting the number of pickets and the manner of picketing the trial court abused its discretion. (See Steiner v. Long Beach Local No. 128, 19 Cal.2d 676 [123 P.2d 20]; Chrisman v. Culinary Workers’ Local No. 62, 46 Cal.App.2d 129, 133 [115 P.2d 553]; Cox v. Louisiana, 379 U.S. 536, 554-555 [85 S.Ct. 453, 13 L.Ed.2d 471].)
*408Defendants ’ utterances, written and oral, present a much different question. First, it is contended that the order prohibiting picketing to attain quota hiring is erroneous in that Hughes v. Superior Court, 32 Cal.2d 850 [198 P.2d 885], upon which the trial court and respondent rely in large measure, is predicated upon anachronistic principles. In short, defendants argue that quota hiring, prohibited by Hughes, is no longer contrary to public policy. Even if we had authority to make this determination, which is doubtful since we are an intermediate appellate court (Auto Equity Sales, Inc. v. Superior Court, 57 Cal.2d 450, 455 [20 Cal.Rptr. 321, 369 P.2d 937]), we do not reach the question since there is nothing in the record indicating that defendants were picketing for quota hiring or demanding quota hiring by utterances written or oral.
Plaintiff contends that in negotiations between its officers or agents and the officials or agents of San Diego Congress of Racial Equality, the CORE representatives pointed out that among plaintiff’s work force approximately 1 per cent are Negroes, whereas approximately 7 percent of the population in the area are Negroes. Defendants counter that this was simply the basis of their contention that plaintiff is unfair to Negroes in its hiring practices, but not a demand for quota hiring.  In any event, the record reflects no demand for quota hiring by the pickets, either by utterance or by placard. The signs they carried read: “End Discrimination,” “Don’t Fire, Just Hire,” “Not More, Not Less, But Equal,” “Give Us a Chance to Learn in Your Training Program,” and “Countthe Results! S.D. Gas & Elec. Co. is an Equal Opportunity Employer ? ’ ’
Viewing the facts most favorably to plaintiff (Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, Inc. v. Lee, supra), we find no evidence that defendants expressed any demands or made any statements prohibited by law; hence that portion of the preliminary injunction limiting defendants’ right to express their grievances must fall.
Defendants attack the injunction in its entirety, asserting that plaintiff failed to exhaust its administrative remedies by filing a complaint and requesting an investigation by the Fair Employment Practices Commission. However, this argument is not applicable to defendants’ unlawful interference with plaintiff’s use of its property.  The Fair Employment Practices Act is of legislative origin, and the right to file a complaint with the commission and the manner of filing are *409controlled by statute. Provision is made for complaint by both employer and employee against unfair employment practices, but the act does not preempt the jurisdiction of the courts over trespass or unlawful interference with the use of property.  The record discloses that plaintiff had no justifiable complaint against defendants’ activities other than unlawful interference, as there is no evidence that defendants demanded quota hiring. No employee of plaintiff took part in the picketing and none made complaint to plaintiff about defendants’ activities. It follows that since neither defendants nor any of plaintiff’s employees violated plaintiff’s rights under the Fair Employment Practices Act, plaintiff was not required to file a complaint with the commission before resorting to the court for relief.
The order is modified by striking therefrom the restriction upon the language defendants may use on signs, posters, placards or slogans. As so modified, the order is affirmed. Each party shall bear its own costs.
Assigned by the Chairman of the Judicial Council.

=== CASE 9737458 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:25:43.616448+00 ===

COUGHLIN, J.
I concur, but deem it advisable to note that the modification of the injunction deleting therefrom restrictions upon the language defendants may use in picketing signs, posters, placards or slogans is not an authorization to use language the object of which is to effect quota hiring. Where the object of picketing is unlawful, the picketing is unlawful, and may be enjoined. (Northwestern Pac. R.R. Co. v. Lumber & Sawmill Workers’ Union, 31 Cal.2d 441, 445-446 [189 P.2d 277]; Park & Tilford Import Corp. v. International etc. of Teamsters, 27 Cal.2d 599, 603 [165 P.2d 891, 162 A.L.R. 1426].) Quota hiring based on race, creed or color is unlawful. (Hughes v. Superior Court, 32 Cal.2d 850 [198 P.2d 885].) An employer who is required to hire a designated percentage of his employees only because they are persons of a particular race, creed or color, and perforce is required to refuse to hire those of another race, creed or color in order that he may employ the former, is required to discriminate against those he refuses to employ because they are not of the race, creed or color included within the percentage hiring classification. However, an injunction directed to conduct which is neither active nor threatened is unauthorized (Crescent Feather Co. v. United Upholsterers Union, 153 Cal. 433, 437 [95 P. 871]; Champion Min. Co. v. Consolidated Wyo. Gold Min. Co., 75 Cal. 78, 85 [16 P. 513]; Early v. Santa Clara *410Broadcasting Co., 211 Cal.App.2d 367, 373 [27 Cal.Rptr. 212]; Granger v. Orange County Board of Supervisors, 168 Cal.App.2d 274, 276 [335 P.2d 748]; De Haviland v. Warner Bros. Pictures, Inc., 67 Cal.App.2d 225, 238 [153 P.2d 983]; Pezold v. Amalgamated etc. Workmen, 54 Cal.App.2d 120, 126, 127 [128 P.2d 611]; Chrisman v. Culinary Workers’ Local No. 62, 46 Cal.App.2d 129, 133-134 [115 P.2d 553]), and as the record here does not support the conclusion defendants were engaged in or threatened picketing for the purpose of effecting quota hiring, either directly or indirectly, that part of the order enjoining such is erroneous.
BROWN (Gerald), P. J.—I concur in the views expressed by Mr. Justice Stone and those expressed by Mr. Justice Coughlin.

=== CASE 9737459 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:25:43.876513+00 ===

OXBERGER, Chief Judge.
Bonnie and Donald Idso and Jerry Dan-bom owned Lakeside Lifts, a corporation which builds and sells boat hoists. In 1982 the Idsos sold their share of the business to the Rasmussens pursuant to a stock purchase agreement which contained a covenant prohibiting the Idsos from engaging *704in a business “similar to” Lakeside Lifts for a period of ten years. After the sale, the Idsos opened a welding shop near Lakeside Lifts. In 1986, the Idsos built a 4,000 pound boat hoist for Tom Clary, Danbom’s competitor. This hoist became a prototype for multiple hoists built by Idso for Clary in 1987 and 1988. The trial court found that Idso began actually manufacturing and selling new hoists in 1987. Lakeside Lifts and the Rasmussens sued the Idsos. The district court entered judgment against the Idsos and enjoined them from building hoists with a capacity in excess of 1,500 pounds. The Idsos appeal and Lakeside Lifts and the Rasmussens cross-appeal.
We reverse.
Jerry Danbom manufactured and sold boat hoists in the Iowa Great Lakes area. The business was known as Danbom Lakeside Engineering, Inc. Donald Idso began working for Danbom in 1975. In 1979 Dan-bom and the Idsos formed Lakeside Lifts, Inc. for the purpose of manufacturing and selling boat hoists. Lakeside Lifts purchased the hoist business from Danbom Lakeside Engineering. The Idsos owned 53.8% of the stock in Lakeside Lifts, and Danbom owned the remaining 46.2% of the stock. Danbom Lakeside Engineering signed a ten year noncompetitive agreement.
In 1982 the Idsos and Danbom were not getting along. Danbom proposed that the Idsos sell their interest in Lakeside Lifts to Bruce Rasmussen, Danbom’s brother-in-law. The Idsos sold their stock in Lakeside Lifts to Rasmussen Heating & Cooling, Inc., for $10,000, pursuant to a stock purchase agreement. The agreement contained a clause that prevented the Idsos from engaging in a business “similar to the Business hereby sold” in twelve listed states for a period of ten years.
The Idsos opened a welding shop a few blocks away from Lakeside Lifts. From 1982 to 1985, the Idsos did general welding work, including repairing and rebuilding boat hoists. In 1986, Tom Clary began ordering custom built boat hoists from the Idsos. Clary is a barge operator, installer and remover of boat hoists, and a direct competitor of Danbom’s Lakeside Engineering.
In 1987, Lakeside Lifts and the Rasmus-sens sued the Idsos for damages caused by the Idsos’ breach of the noncompetition covenant and for an injunction prohibiting the Idsos from engaging in building and selling boat hoists. Following a four-day bench trial, the district court entered judgment in favor of Lakeside Lifts for $3,439.51 plus interest. The court also enjoined the Idsos from manufacturing or fabricating new boat hoists of capacity in excess of 1,500 pounds, either for inventory or on a custom order. The Idsos appeal and Lakeside Lifts cross-appeals.
The Idsos contend that they did not violate the noncompetition covenant because they do not engage in a business similar to Lakeside Lifts. They contend that they only custom built boat hoists, unlike Lakeside Lifts which manufactures hoists for inventory and sale. The Idsos further claim that the covenant is unenforceable because its duration is unreasonable and it is not needed to protect Lakeside Lifts’ business. The Idsos also assert that Lakeside Lifts was not an intended beneficiary of the stock purchase agreement.
On cross-appeal, Lakeside Lifts requests this court expand the injunction to prohibit the Idsos from building hoists of capacity less than 1,500 pounds, repairing hoists, and rebuilding hoists. Lakeside Lifts also contends that it is entitled to a greater damage award, more trial attorney fees, and appellate attorney fees.
In this equity action, our review is de novo. Iowa R.App.P. 4. We give weight to the fact findings of the trial court, especially when considering the credibility of witnesses, but are not bound by them. Iowa R.App.P. 14(f)(7).
The Idsos contend, inter alia, that the covenant is unenforceable because the duration is unreasonable. We agree. An examination of recent Iowa cases reveals that our Supreme Court has not enforced a covenant that extended beyond five years. Typically, the duration of a disputed covenant ranges from two years to three years. *705See, Ehlers v. Iowa Warehouse Company, 188 N.W.2d 368 (Iowa 1971) (two years); Farm Bureau Service Co. of Maynard v. Kohls, 203 N.W.2d 209 (Iowa 1972) (two years); Tasco Inc. v. Winkel, 281 N.W.2d 280 (Iowa 1979) (one year); Iowa Glass Depot, Inc. v. Jindrich, 338 N.W.2d 376 (Iowa 1983) (three year covenant; court refused to enforce beyond eleven months); Ma & Pa Inc. v. Kelly, 342 N.W.2d 500 (Iowa 1984) (three years); Dain Bosworth Inc. v. Brandhorst, 356 N.W.2d 590 (Iowa App.1984) (ninety days); and Dental East, P.C. v. Westercamp, 423 N.W.2d 553 (Iowa App.1988) (two years).
The Idsos did not begin involvement in the production of boat hoists until five years after the sale of their interest in Lakeside Lifts. “(‘We start with the basic tenets that restraints on competition and trade are disfavored in the law.’)” Lamp v. American Prosthetics, Inc., 379 N.W.2d 909, 911 (Iowa 1986) “Covenants not to compete are unreasonably restrictive unless they are tightly limited as to both time and area.” Pathology Consultants v. Gratton, 343 N.W.2d 428, 434 (Iowa 1984). It must also be reasonably necessary for the protection of the business. Lamp, 379 N.W.2d at 910. A ten-year covenant is neither tightly time limited nor reasonably necessary for the protection of the business. The five years between the sale and Idsos present business activity allowed the Rasmussens ample time and opportunity to succeed. Any further restrictions would be unduly burdensome.
Since we have decided that the covenant not to compete was unduly burdensome, the Rasmussens’ cross-appeal requesting we further expand the trial court’s injunction to hoists of capacity less than 1,500 pounds, increase their damage award, and provide for attorney fees is denied.
REVERSED.
HAYDEN, J., concurs.
SACKETT, J., dissents.

=== CASE 2210606 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:55.642864+00 ===

711 N.E.2d 1124 (1999)
305 Ill. App.3d 283
238 Ill.Dec. 463
John H. LANG, Plaintiff-Appellant
v.
LAKE SHORE EXHIBITS, INC., and Larry Zuker, Defendants-Appellees.
No. 1-97-3792.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, Sixth Division.
March 31, 1999.
Rehearing Denied June 15, 1999.
Joseph R. Curio, Ltd., Chicago (Joseph R. Curcio and Lisa R. Curcio, of counsel), for Appellant.
*1125 Paulsen and Malec, Ltd., Chicago (Jon P. Malartsik and Harvey A. Paulsen, of counsel), for Appellees.
Presiding Justice CAMPBELL delivered the opinion of the court:
Plaintiff, John H. Lang (Lang), brought an action in negligence against defendants, Lake Shore Exhibits, Inc. and Larry Zuker, for injuries Lang sustained in an automobile accident with Zuker.[1] The jury returned a verdict in favor of Lang, and against Zuker, and awarded Lang $20,000. On appeal, Lang contends that: (1) the trial court erred in allowing evidence of collateral source payments of income in the form of disability payments by his employer; (2) the jury improperly ignored proven elements of damage in returning its verdict; and (3) the jury's verdict is against the manifest weight of the evidence. For the following reasons, we reverse and remand this matter to the circuit court for a new trial.
I. TRIAL
LANG'S INJURIES
The record reveals the following relevant facts. On August 29, 1992, Lang, a Chicago Police Officer, was on duty driving a police squad car when he was involved in an automobile accident with Zuker. Zuker's car collided with Lang's squad car, striking the right rear quarter panel. At trial, Lang testified that his squad car entered the intersection on a green light which changed to yellow when he reached the crosswalk, and Zuker testified that his car entered the intersection on a green light. There were no eye witnesses to the accident. After the collision, Zuker's vehicle came to a complete stop, while the squad car moved further down the street before finally stopping. Lang testified that after the squad car came to a stop, he tried to get out of the squad car, but was unable to do so. Lang was removed from the squad car by paramedics or ambulance personnel.
Lang was admitted to Swedish Covenant Hospital, complaining of pain in his neck and lower back. The evidence revealed that Lang had injured his back in two prior automobile accidents in 1985 and 1986. On both prior occasions, Lang was treated by Dr. Geline and took medical leave from work for two months and four months, respectively. Lang testified that the pain he experienced following the 1992 accident at issue in this case differed from the pain he experienced following the two prior accidents, in that after the prior accidents, Lang did not experience pain receding and radiating down his legs. X-rays taken of Lang's Lumber spine after the accident showed only Lang's prior condition of spondylolysis at L5 and spondylolisthesis at L5-S1.
After three days of hospitalization, Lang was discharged and referred to Dr. Whisler of Illinois Masonic Hospital by the Chicago Police Department medical section for followup treatment. Lang complained to Dr. Whisler of back pain and pain in both legs, and Dr. Whisler prescribed pain relievers. Lang received treatment from Dr. Whisler for ten weeks, during which time he did not return to work. On October 16, 1992, Lang underwent an MRI examination. Lang's MRI confirmed the findings of his prior X-rays, which showed only Lang's pre-existing conditions. Lang subsequently underwent two weeks of physical therapy. After three months, Dr. Whisler released Lang from his care, and told Lang he could return to work on a light-duty basis.
Between December 1992, and April 1993, Lang did not receive any medical care or treatment. In April 1993, Lang was treated by Dr. D'Silva for lower back pain and radiating pain in his legs. Dr. D'Silva referred Lang to Dr. Giri Gireesan, an orthopedic surgeon. Dr. Gireesan diagnosed an aggravation of Lang's pre-existing condition, and recommended surgery as an option to alleviate his continued pain.
On August 2, 1993, Lang underwent a laminectomy and fusion on his spine. During surgery, doctors discovered that Lang had spondylolysis, a fracture at L4, a condition that was never seen on any prior x-rays or MRI films. Both Dr. Gireesan and Dr. David L. Spencer testified that Lang suffered *1126 this new fracture some time between October 16, 1992 (the date of the MRI), and the date of Lang's surgery.
Dr. Gireesan testified that Lang's surgery was successful. After six months of post-operative physical therapy, Dr. Gireesan released Lang from his care on September 20, 1994. Dr. Gireesan told Lang that he could not expect to do excessive work, and that he needed to "baby" his spine. At that time, Dr. Gireesan gave Lang a prescription for pain killers, and Lang did not receive another prescription until November 1995.
Lang testified due to severe back pain since the accident, he has been able to perform daily living activities, but is unable to do any running, lifting or any activity involving prolonged sitting, like long-distance driving.
Lang submitted medical bills totalling $76,593.64,
DISABILITY AND LOSS OF EARNINGS
Lang was ordered off work until November 1992. When Lang returned to work, he was assigned to light duty status. After two weeks, Lang voluntarily took furlough time, and did not work for four and one-half weeks. During that time, however, Lang did not seek further medical treatment. Lang returned to work full time until April 1993, when he was treated by Dr. D'Silva. Lang continued to work until shortly before his surgery in August 1993.
Dr. Gireesan testified that when he was ready to release Lang from his care, he asked Lang if light duty work was available for him. Lang told Dr. Gireesan that no light duty work was available. Based upon this information, Dr. Gireesan concluded that Lang was unable to return to work as a police officer, and the Chicago Police Department (Department) granted Lang's request for a leave of absence.
Barb Hemmerling, the medical administrator of the Department's medical services section, testified that Lang could have returned to active duty in the Department at any time after September 1994, as there existed plenty of limited duty assignments. Lang, however, requested to return to work in some capacity other than police work, and he was refused. Hemmerling testified that the Department did not offer retraining to police officers.
In 1995, Jean Blake, also of the Department medical services section, recommended to the Police Retirement Board that Lang be granted a leave of absence and disability, and the Board approved his leave.
Lang testified that he moved his family to Colorado in 1995 for the improved climate. Lang stated that he does tasks around the house and tries to engage in activities with his children. However, he can only play ball with his son for 10 to 15 minutes.
Lang stated that at the time of the accident, he and his wife operated an electrical contracting business with a partner, and that Lang worked in the business as an electrician for 20 to 30 hours per week in addition to working as a police officer. After the surgery, Lang did estimates and billing for the business. Lang was not allowed by the Department to do the physical work of an electrician.
Lang testified that he tried to find work in Colorado as an electrician, and that he applied at the union hall for supervisory or estimator positions. Lang also applied for a job as a meter reader. At the time of his applications, Lang told prospective employers about his qualifications and his medical problems. At the time of trial, Lang was earning $3,527 per month.
Zuker produced surveillance tapes during trial showing Lang in and around his home in Colorado, lifting large pieces of plywood onto and off of a flatbed trailer. The tapes also showed Lang hitching and unhitching the trailer to his vehicle, and doing a substantial amount of work in his garage.
Following trial, the jury returned a verdict in favor of Lang and against Zuker in the total amount of $20,000, reflecting a reduction by 49% for contributory fault assessed against Lang. The damages included $15,000 for pain and suffering and $5,000 for medical expenses. The jury made no award for loss of normal life, future pain and suffering, future medical expenses, or past or future lost earnings.
*1127 The trial court entered judgment on the verdict on May 30, 1997, and denied Lang's post-trial motion on September 10, 1997. Lang's timely notice of appeal followed.
II. OPINION
On appeal, Lang contends that the trial court erred in allowing evidence of collateral source payments of income in the form of disability payments by the Chicago Police Department.
The record shows that prior to trial, Lang moved in limine to bar any evidence of collateral source payments at trial. Zuker objected. The trial court acknowledged that the collateral source rule applied in this case, but stated that Zuker would be allowed to put in evidence of collateral source payments in his case-in-chief if he could affirmatively show that Lang may be malingering.
On direct examination, Lang testified that he was physically unable to work as a police officer, or in any other job since the date of his surgery. Zuker represented that he would be able to present evidence that Lang could have returned to work through the testimony of the Chicago Police Department Medical Administrator, Barb Hemmerling.
However, rather then following the order of the trial court and presenting evidence of Lang's alleged malingering in his case-in-chief, defendant embarked on the following course of inquiry during cross-examination of Lang:
"Q: Excuse me. In the application in front of you, you put down your reasons for withdrawing from the union, did you not?
* * *
A: Yes sir.
* * *
Q: And you gave them your reasons for withdrawing from the union in Paragraph 7 of that exhibit, isn't that right?
A: Yes.
Q: You filled this out, you signed it, right?
A: Yes sir.
Q: And the reason you gave for withdrawing from the union is, quote, I am on disability with the Chicago Police Department because of a back injury on duty. I had an operation on my back to fuse my spine and am unable to work in the electrical field because I am drawing on disability work comp [sic] payments from the police department."
A sidebar commenced after plaintiff's objection to the above line of questioning. At that time, Zuker's counsel admitted that he had no doctor or expert witness who would testify that plaintiff was malingering. Zuker argued, however, that the following evidence revealed Lang's motivation not to work: (1) Lang's application for withdrawal from the electrician's union; (2) Lang's deposition testimony in which he admitted not returning to work for fear of losing his disability compensation; (3) testimony of witnesses stating that Lang is able to work; and (4) videotaped surveillance showing Lang engaged in activities despite his disability. The trial court ruled that Zuker had sufficient evidence to allow Zuker to inquire into Lang's disability payments and argue that Lang was motivated not to return to work.
In support, the trial court relied on cases outside of the Illinois jurisdiction cited in 47 A.L.R.3d 234. Included in the A.L.R. are citations to decisions which hold that a tortfeasor may not introduce evidence that the tort victim received payments of medical expenses or disability benefits from a collateral source unless there was other evidence establishing malingering. See, e.g., Burke Enterprises, Inc. v. Mitchell, 700 S.W.2d 789 (1985), Prod Liab. Rep. (CCH) para. 10780 (Ky.1985); Ridilla v. Kerns, 155 A.2d 517 (Mun.Ct.App.D. C.1959); Lewis v. Fidelity & Casualty Co., 230 So.2d 636 (La.App.1970); Wentworth v. Butler, 134 Minn. 382, 159 N.W. 828 (1916); Perry v. Public Service Coordinated Transport, 136 N.J.L. 398, 56 A.2d 617 (1948). The trial court read a special instruction to the jury to explain that the evidence of receipt of disability payments was to be used "solely on the issue as to whether plaintiff is motivated to extend his *1128 period of disability." and not to reduce Lang's compensable damages. The trial court read the instruction to the jury again prior to its deliberations.
The A.L.R. provides in pertinent part as follows:
"[M]ost courts have recognized that, insofar as it tends to establish a motivation for inactivity unrelated to physical incapacity, evidence of a personal injury plaintiff's receipt of collateral source benefits during the period of this alleged disability is relevant to the basic issue of the extent of his injuries. For a variety of reasons, however, it is usually acknowledged that the trial judge should exclude such evidence, or admit it only warily. Chief among theses reasons is the possible prejudice to the plaintiff which attends informing the jury that he has already received some form of compensation for the injuries complained of." 47 A.L.R.3d at 238, § 2(a).
The A.L.R. notes that in many jurisdictions (e.g., California, Kentucky, Oregon, Texas, Vermont) collateral source benefits can only be admitted by the trial judge if other evidence in the case (i.e., the nature of the plaintiff's injuries, length of his absence from work, extent of lost wages) indicates that plaintiff was motivated by the collateral source receipts in remaining inactive: "where the bare fact of the plaintiff's receipt of such collateral benefits constitutes the sole indicia of malingering, evidence thereof should be properly excluded." 47 A.L.R.3d at 249. The A.L.R. advises that there are a variety of other methods by which malingering can be established, including expert and not-expert witnesses and "secret motion pictures" taken of the plaintiff revealing activity inconsistent with his claim of disability. 47 A.L.R.3d at 243.
In Illinois, it is well established that evidence of benefits received by a plaintiff from collateral sources independent of the tortfeasor will not serve to diminish any damages otherwise recoverable. Natalino v. JMB Realty Corp., 277 Ill.App.3d 270, 213 Ill.Dec. 881, 660 N.E.2d 138 (1995), Brumley v. Federal Barge Lines, Inc. 78 Ill.App.3d 799, 33 Ill.Dec. 609, 396 N.E.2d 1333 (1979); Boden v. Crawford, 196 Ill.App.3d 71, 142 Ill.Dec. 546, 552 N.E.2d 1287 (1990). The theory behind this rule is to keep the jury from learning anything about collateral income which could influence the decision of the jury: "[a]llowance of any evidence regarding the benefits would render this long standing rule meaningless." Boden, 196 Ill. App.3d at 76, 142 Ill.Dec. 546, 552 N.E.2d 1287.
Illinois courts have not addressed an exception to the collateral source rule for motivation or malingering in a case with facts comparable to the present case. To this extent, this case presents a question of first impression. However, Brumley, a case decided under the federal Jones Act, is instructive. There, this court held that under federal law (Tipton v. Socony Mobil Oil Co., 375 U.S. 34, 84 S.Ct. 1, 11 L.Ed.2d 4 (1963) and Eichel v. New York Central R.R. Co., 375 U.S. 253, 84 S.Ct. 316, 11 L.Ed.2d 307 (1963)), evidence of benefits from collateral sources was inadmissible to show motivation:
"In our view the likelihood of misuse by the jury clearly outweighs the value of this evidence. Insofar as the evidence bears on the issue of malingering there will generally be other evidence having more probative value and involving less likelihood of prejudice than the receipt of a disability pension." Brumley, 78 Ill.App.3d at 807, 33 Ill.Dec. 609, 396 N.E.2d 1333 (quoting Eichel, 375 U.S. at 255, 84 S.Ct. 316).
The Brumley court further noted:
"Even if the collateral source doctrine were a question of state law as argued by defendant, we believe the result would be the same. The issue of the admissibility of social security, retirement and pension benefits, for the limited purpose of showing Brumley's motivation to retire from work would be one of first impression in this state. While defendant is correct in noting that several courts in other jurisdictions have allowed evidence of payments from a third party in non-Jones Act cases when relevant to the question of a plaintiffs motivation to continue working and the nature and extent of his injuries [citations omitted] we believe that our supreme court would adhere to the federal rule set forth in Tipton and Eichel in Jones Act *1129 cases." Brumley, 78 Ill.App.3d at 808, 33 Ill.Dec. 609, 396 N.E.2d 1333.
In the present case, in addition to the collateral source payments, Zuker presented videotapes of Lang taking out the garbage, loading and unloading his flatbed trailer with drywall and wood, and hitching and unhitching Lang's trailer to his Cadillac, without exhibiting signs of disability. In addition, Zuker presented testimony of physicians who stated that Lang was physically able to return to work at the Department for light duty, as well as the testimony of Barb Hemmerling who stated that Lang could have returned to police work at less than full duty given certain restrictions. Thus, Zuker had enough evidence to show the possibility of malingering on Lang's part without the improper introduction of collateral source evidence.
In addition, the limiting instruction given to the jury that evidence of the receipt of disability payments was to be used "solely on the issue as to whether plaintiff is motivated to extend his period of disability," and not to reduce Lang's compensable damages, is misleading. The jury award form includes a category of "loss of normal life resulting from the injury," which is commonly understood to mean compensable damages for disability.
Under the specific facts and circumstances of this case, we find that the trial court erred in allowing evidence of payments from a collateral source and therefore denied Lang a fair trial. As such, we vacate the judgment entered and remand this matter for a new trial. In light of our determination, we need not address the remaining issues raised by Lang on appeal.
Vacated and remanded.
BUCKLEY, J., and ZWICK, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Lake Shore Exhibits, Inc. was dismissed from the case prior to trial.

=== CASE 2211973 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:14.108804+00 ===

90 Ill. App.3d 700 (1980)
413 N.E.2d 497
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
ROMAN WEISSINGER, Defendant-Appellee.
No. 79-704.
Illinois Appellate Court  Second District.
Opinion filed November 26, 1980.
J. Michael Fitzsimmons, State's Attorney, of Wheaton (Edmund P. Bart and Robert L. Thompson, Assistant State's Attorneys, of counsel), for the People.
A.J. Marco, of Marco & Mannina, of Downers Grove, for appellee.
Judgment affirmed.
Mr. PRESIDING JUSTICE SEIDENFELD delivered the opinion of the court:
The State has appealed from a pretrial order which suppressed the analysis of blood taken from defendant without his consent following an accident which led to an indictment charging him with reckless homicide.
While a question had been raised whether the trial court suppressed the evidence on statutory or constitutional grounds, the distinction does not affect appealability pursuant to the recent Illinois Supreme Court case of People v. Young (1980), 82 Ill.2d 234.
The blood sample was taken on the initiative of a doctor at the hospital to which defendant was taken after the accident. There is no proof that the test was taken at the direction of police authorities, but it is conceded that defendant did not give his consent.
 1 Since there was no proof of improper State action, the taking of the sample did not violate any of defendant's constitutional rights. Schmerber v. California (1966), 384 U.S. 757, 771, 16 L.Ed.2d 908, 920, 86 S.Ct. 1826, 1836. See also People v. Todd (1975), 59 Ill.2d 534, 544-45.
*701  2 However, an issue remains as to the application of section 11-501(c)3 of the Illinois Vehicle Code which, as relevant, states:
"(c) Upon the trial of any action or proceeding arising out of the acts alleged to have been committed by any person while driving or in actual physical control of a vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor, evidence of the amount of alcohol in the person's blood at the time of the act alleged as shown by a chemical analysis of his breath, blood, urine, saliva or other bodily substance is admissible, * * *
* * *
3. * * * Evidence based upon a chemical analysis of blood, urine, breath or other bodily substance shall not be admitted unless such substance was procured and such analysis made with the consent of the person as provided by this Chapter, whose bodily substance was so analyzed." (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 95 1/2, par. 11-501(c)3.)
The quoted language is part of a comprehensive section which establishes the crime of driving under the influence, makes the results of blood tests admissible, spells out the presumptions and procedures applicable to the results of tests for alcohol content, establishes procedures in the event a person is unconscious and then gives the defendant certain rights which apply after he has submitted to a blood test. Reference to actions by law enforcement officers is found only in subsection (e), which gives such officers the right to take blood from an unconscious person.
In reviewing the legislative history of the act including its amendment in 1967 following the decision in Schmerber, the Illinois Supreme Court concluded "[i]n the face of this history, it would do violence to the legislative intent to read out of the statutes in question the consent requirement * * *" and further, "[o]ur analysis of the statutes leads us to the inevitable conclusion that consent must be obtained if evidence based on a blood or similar test is to be used in any trial arising out of acts supposedly committed by a person driving a vehicle while intoxicated." (People v. Todd (1975), 59 Ill.2d 534, 543-44.) In subsequent cases it has been held that the statute applies in the trial of any action and is not limited to the charge of driving while intoxicated (People v. Leffew (1975), 33 Ill. App.3d 700, 703); and that the statutory requirement of consent applies even though the driver has been killed in the accident. Smock v. Highway Commissioner (1978), 60 Ill. App.3d 201, 203.
The State argues that the statute was intended to apply only in the arrest and search situation of Schmerber; however, nothing in the language or legislative history of the act, nor in the various interpretations in the reported cases, so limits the statute. At no point in this statute is *702 there any mention of "arrest." Nor is the State helped by the argument that because there was no police action in this case, the State did nothing to violate defendant's rights. Under Schmerber, had the police themselves ordered the blood test, such State action would have violated none of the defendant's constitutional rights. But statutory intendment is to safeguard the rights of the defendant to preserve his bodily integrity and to be free of the need to give evidence against himself, to an extent greater than those rights are protected by the constitution. Such a protective statute should be read expansively to insure that the rights of the defendant are in fact protected.
Nor may the State rely on the implied consent provisions of section 11-501.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 95 1/2, par. 11-501.1.) This section permits a refusal to submit to a chemical analysis for intoxication and provides sanctions for such a refusal only in a proceeding to suspend driving privileges. This provision clearly was not intended to obviate the need for actual consent before evidence of a blood test can be used in a prosecution against a driver for acts allegedly committed while driving when intoxicated.
The statute prescribes that evidence of such a test "shall not be admitted" without consent. This protection for the defendant is absolute; it is not in any way conditioned upon participation by the State in the test procedures. Further, if we were to draw the distinction argued by the State there could be no assurance that the actions of medical personnel would be free of motivation to aid in law enforcement, which would result in the legislative requirement of consent becoming virtually meaningless. See Murray v. United States (D.C. App. 1976), 358 A.2d 314.
We therefore affirm the judgment suppressing the result of the blood test.
Affirmed.
WOODWARD and LINDBERG, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2211972 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:14.104292+00 ===

462 N.W.2d 649 (1990)
CITY OF FARGO, Plaintiff and Appellee,
v.
Kurtis Wade GUSTAFSON, Defendant and Appellant.
Cr. No. 900225.
Supreme Court of North Dakota.
November 13, 1990.
*650 Thomas J. Gaughan, City Atty., Fargo, for plaintiff and appellee. Submitted on brief.
Michael C. O'Neel, O'Neel Law Office, Fargo, for defendant and appellant. Submitted on brief.
MESCHKE, Justice.
Kurtis Wade Gustafson appealed a jury conviction of theft, challenging the sufficiency of the evidence. We affirm.
A security officer for the Target Store testified that, watching through "peg holes," she observed Gustafson select four Nintendo tapes from displays and place them in a shopping cart. Shortly, the security officer saw him, in another aisle and separated from his accompanying boy, pick two of the tapes from the cart and put them into his coat. Then, Gustafson went to the snack area, met his boy, and purchased a beverage. He left his cart, threw something into a garbage can, and exited through the front door with his boy. When the security officer went after him, she saw Gustafson running through the parking lot and across the street while his boy ran to a vehicle in the parking lot. The security officer brought the boy back into the store.
According to the security manager for the Target Store who was called to the scene, Gustafson soon returned and denied taking the tapes. Gustafson claimed that he'd gone to another store to find a better bargain. After discussion with security personnel, Gustafson offered to pay for the missing tapes because he "didn't need the hassle."
Gustafson testified that he had not taken the tapes and that the only two tapes that he had removed from displays were still in the cart when he returned to the store, as he showed the police and security officers. His eight-year-old boy testified too, corroborating some details of Gustafson's testimony.
In rebuttal, the security officer testified that when Gustafson and his boy got outside the store, they looked back and saw her approaching. Gustafson was 20 to 25 yards ahead of her, and both he and his son started running. She testified that Gustafson saw her running after them. In surrebuttal, Gustafson testified that he had not looked back nor had he seen the security officer after him, but that he and his boy often raced.
The jury found Gustafson guilty of theft of the two tapes valued at $89.98. Appealing, Gustafson recognizes that the verdict was largely based on credibility, but argues that there was "grossly insufficient evidence." Gustafson argues that the evidence was particularly lacking because the security officer was uncorroborated, because the garbage can that Gustafson passed had not been checked, and "because the supposedly stolen cartridges were never retrieved."
The City answers that the question of the sufficiency of the evidence cannot be reviewed on appeal because Gustafson failed to move for a judgment of acquittal pursuant to NDRCrimP 29(a).[1] Gustafson replies that we have not explicitly ruled *651 that a motion for acquittal was necessary at trial in order to question the evidence on appeal, and that we should not do so because the rule authorizes the trial court to enter a judgment of acquittal "of its own motion."
We have recently repeated:
We have previously ruled that a motion for judgment of acquittal at the close of the prosecution's case in chief preserves the issue of insufficiency of evidence for appellate review, even without a renewal of the motion at the close of all the evidence.
State v. Schaeffer, 450 N.W.2d 754, 756 (N.D.1990) (citations omitted). Implicitly, this statement expresses the settled position that, for review on appeal, a question must be "appropriately raised in the trial court so that the trial court can intelligently rule on it." State v. Allen, 237 N.W.2d 154, 157 (N.D.1975), quoting from State v. Haakenson, 213 N.W.2d 394, 399 (N.D. 1973). The trial court did not act, on its own motion, to acquit Gustafson. Since Gustafson did not ask the trial court to rule on the sufficiency of the evidence, that question has not been saved for appellate review.
Our criminal rule on a motion for acquittal is largely derived from the comparable federal rule. See Explanatory Note, NDRCrimP 29 and FRCrimP 29. Differences in wording between our rule and its federal counterpart make it clear, however, that a motion for acquittal is not authorized in North Dakota practice if it is not made during the trial. Compare NDRCrimP 29(c) with FRCrimP 29(c). "The North Dakota rule does not permit a motion for judgment of acquittal after the jury returns a verdict of guilty." Explanatory Note, NDRCrimP 29. The text of our rule clearly precludes questioning the sufficiency of the evidence for the first time on appeal.
Even under the broader phrasing of the federal rule that allows a motion for acquittal to be made to the trial court after a jury verdict, federal decisions hold that appellate review of the sufficiency of evidence is waived and unavailable unless a motion for acquittal has been made to the trial court. 9 Fed.Proc., L.Ed. § 22:828 (1982). See, as examples, United States v. Clark, 646 F.2d 1259, 1267 (8th Cir.1981); United States v. Wright-Barker, 784 F.2d 161, 170 (3rd Cir.1986); and United States v. Moya-Gomez, 860 F.2d 706, 745 n. 33 (7th Cir.1988). The text of NDRCrimP 29, its explanation, its derivation, and our course of decisions all instruct that a motion for acquittal must be made during the trial in order to obtain review of the sufficiency of the evidence for a conviction. The question whether the evidence was sufficient to convict Gustafson was not saved for our review.
Gustafson urges that the criminal rules allow review of obvious errors and defects affecting substantial rights "although they were not brought to the attention of the [trial] court." NDRCrimP 52(b). We are not persuaded that Gustafson's substantial rights were transgressed.
On appellate review of a criminal conviction, we determine only whether there was competent evidence for the jury to reasonably infer guilt and to fairly convict. State v. Jacobson, 419 N.W.2d 899, 901 (N.D.1988); State v. Carson, 453 N.W.2d 485 (N.D.1990). We give due regard to the opportunity of the jury to weigh the credibility of the witnesses. Applying these standards, we believe that there was sufficient evidence to convict Gustafson of theft and that there was no obvious error.
We affirm.
ERICKSTAD, C.J., and LEVINE, VANDE WALLE and GIERKE, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  NDRCrimP 29(a) says:
Motion Before Submission to Jury. The court on motion of a defendant or of its own motion shall order the entry of judgment of acquittal of one or more offenses charged in the indictment, information, or complaint after the evidence on either side is closed if the evidence is insufficient to sustain a conviction of such offense or offenses. If a defendant's motion for judgment of acquittal at the close of the evidence offered by the prosecution is not granted, the defendant may offer evidence without having reserved the right.