=== CASE 2210548 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:54.88168+00 ===

93 N.Y.2d 891 (1999)
711 N.E.2d 964
689 N.Y.S.2d 686
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, Respondent,
v.
OSCAR PAGAN, Appellant.
Court of Appeals of the State of New York.
Argued March 24, 1999.
Decided April 29, 1999.
*892 Abigail Everett, New York City, and Robert S. Dean for appellant.
Robert T. Johnson, District Attorney of Bronx County, Bronx (Karen Swiger and Joseph N. Ferdenzi of counsel), for respondent.
Before: Chief Judge KAYE and Judges BELLACOSA, SMITH, LEVINE, CIPARICK, WESLEY and ROSENBLATT concur.
OPINION OF THE COURT
MEMORANDUM.
The order of the Appellate Division should be affirmed.
Defendant was convicted after a jury trial of three counts of murder, one count of attempted murder, and robbery. The Appellate Division affirmed, and a Judge of this Court granted defendant leave to appeal.
We conclude that defendant failed to preserve the issues he now presses before this Court. He argues that he was entitled to be present when, with all counsel present in Chambers, the trial court interviewed the surviving fourth victim, as to his identification testimony in connection with defendant's motion for a mistrial. Similarly, he contends that he had a right to be present when the court, after denying the mistrial and agreeing to defense counsel's request only for cautionary instructions, conducted inquiries of each individual juror to satisfy itself that none of the jurors was disqualified by the preceding developments.
Preservation of these claims is required, since judicial precautions in this case did not constitute material stages of the trial, and defendant's presence would not have had a substantial effect on his ability to defend against the charges (see, People v Spotford, 85 NY2d 593, 596; People v Torres, 80 NY2d 944, 945; People v Ferguson, 67 NY2d 383, 390).
Order affirmed in a memorandum.

=== CASE 2210561 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:55.03278+00 ===

93 N.Y.2d 889 (1999)
711 N.E.2d 965
689 N.Y.S.2d 687
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, Appellant,
v.
KATHLEEN HOLMES, Respondent.
Court of Appeals of the State of New York.
Argued March 25, 1999.
Decided April 29, 1999.
*890 Denis Dillon, District Attorney of Nassau County, Mineola (Daniel T. Butler and Peter A. Weinstein of counsel), for appellant.
Charles M. Newell, Quogue, for respondent.
Before: Chief Judge KAYE and Judges BELLACOSA, SMITH, LEVINE, CIPARICK, WESLEY and ROSENBLATT concur.
OPINION OF THE COURT
MEMORANDUM.
The order of the Appellate Term should be reversed and the matter remitted to that court for determination of the facts (CPL 470.25 [2] [d]; 470.40 [2] [b]).
Charged with petit larceny for shoplifting in a department store, defendant was arraigned on an information verified by complainant, the store detective who apprehended her. The accusatory part of the information begins with complainant's name ("being duly sworn, deposes and says"), describes the acts constituting a violation of Penal Law § 155.25, and closes with a printed jurat reading "Subscribed and sworn to before me this 25 day of May, 1994." The instrument was signed by complainant and the jurat was signed by a police sergeant. At trial, complainant testified that he had signed the information but had not "sworn" to the truth of its contents, and defendant moved to dismiss the accusatory instrument, alleging improper verification.
After a verdict of guilt, the court held a hearing regarding the validity of the verification. Complainant testified that what he had meant in his trial testimony was that he "did not raise [his] hand and swear." He explained that while before a police officer, he had read and signed the information, knowing that it was a legal document and that he could be subject to the penalty of perjury for any false statements. The trial court denied defendant's dismissal motion, but the Appellate Term reversed.
*891 An information may be verified if "sworn to before a desk officer in charge at a police station or police headquarters or any of his superior officers" (CPL 100.30 [1] [b]). There is no additional requirement that complainant raise his hand and orally recite an oath. It was sufficient for him to read and sign the instrument in front of the officer, appreciating the significance of his actions. Thus, complainant properly verified the accusatory instrument (see, People v Stewart, 92 NY2d 965; see also, CPL 100.40 [1]; 100.15; Matter of Edward B., 80 NY2d 458).
Order reversed and case remitted to the Appellate Term, Ninth and Tenth Judicial Districts, for further proceedings in accordance with the memorandum herein.

=== CASE 3027308 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2015-10-13 22:37:56.876043+00 ===

United States Court of Appeals
FOR THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT
___________
No. 01-1419
___________
United States of America,                 *
*
Appellee,             * Appeal from the United States
* District Court for the Western
v.                                  * District of Missouri.
*
Maher Khatib,                             *     [UNPUBLISHED]
*
Appellant.            *
___________
Submitted: August 7, 2001
Filed: August 17, 2001
___________
Before BOWMAN, FAGG, and HANSEN, Circuit Judges.
___________
PER CURIAM.
The district court* committed Maher Khatib to the Attorney General’s custody
under 18 U.S.C. § 4246(d), finding clear and convincing evidence that due to a mental
disease or defect, Khatib posed a substantial risk of bodily injury to another or serious
damage to the property of another if released, and no suitable state placement was
available. Khatib appeals, challenging the sufficiency of the evidence and the district
*
The Honorable Gary A. Fenner, United States District Judge for the Western
District of Missouri, adopting the recommendation of the Honorable James C. England,
United States Magistrate Judge for the Western District of Missouri.
court’s application of § 4246(d). Having reviewed the record, we conclude the district
court’s findings are not clearly erroneous. See United States v. S.A., 129 F.3d 995,
1000 (8th Cir. 1997).
Khatib concedes he has schizoaffective disorder (a mental disease that includes
disturbances of both thought and mood) and does not dispute either his dangerousness
or the lack of available state placement; thus his challenge is limited to whether he
presents a risk of dangerous behavior because of his mental disease. See id. Despite
Khatib’s numerous criticisms, we cannot conclude the district court erroneously
credited the testimony of Khatib’s treating psychiatrist that Khatib’s risk of dangerous
behavior was the result of the combination of schizoaffective disorder and antisocial
personality disorder (a character disorder marked by pervasive disregard for and
violation of the rights of others). Although the opposing expert disagreed, the expert’s
opinion was based solely on a review of Khatib’s records rather than an evaluation of
Khatib himself because Khatib refused to cooperate. See, e.g., United States v. Ecker,
30 F.3d 966, 970 (8th Cir. 1994) (finding evidence sufficient to commit prisoner
despite differences in expert opinions).
We reject Khatib’s assertion that differences in two risk assessment reports
completed at the Federal Medical Center in Springfield, Missouri, are inherently
contradictory. Although the initial report concluded there was insufficient evidence of
overt violence to find Khatib dangerous, the second report reflected additional
information gained through frustrated discharge planning efforts; thus the second report
was not inconsistent in concluding Khatib posed a risk of dangerous behavior because
of his grandiose, unrealistic thinking. Besides, overt acts of violence are not required
to prove dangerousness. Id. In addition, the second report clearly explains that
Khatib’s distorted thinking provides the link between his mental illness and his risk of
dangerous behavior, thus Khatib’s contention there was no evidence of this connection
is without merit. Finally, we conclude the expert testimony that Khatib’s risk of
dangerous behavior is the result of both schizoaffective disorder and antisocial
-2-
personality disorder satisfies the plain language of § 4246(d). See S.A., 129 F.3d at
1001; United States v. Evanoff, 10 F.3d 559, 562 (8th Cir. 1993).
Finding no error, we thus affirm. See 8th Cir. R. 47B.
A true copy.
Attest:
CLERK, U.S. COURT OF APPEALS, EIGHTH CIRCUIT.
-3-

=== CASE 9817032 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-09-01 03:51:03.178468+00 ===

BYE, Circuit Judge.
Devils Lake is a large, freshwater lake in northeastern North Dakota. The, lake has no natural outlets, so its water level and size fluctuate considerably in response to changing climatic conditions. In the recent past, increased rainfall has slowly raised the water level and expanded the shores of the lake. The incremental expansion has swallowed whole towns, farms, and roads producing breathtaking results. The significant hydrological phenomenon at Devils Lake forms the backdrop for an equally momentous legal event — a long-simmering dispute concerning ownership of the lake itself.
The Spirit Lake Tribe resides on land that abuts the lake. The Tribe contends that an 1867 treaty gave it title to the lakebed, to be held in trust by the federal government. The Tribe filed the present *736lawsuit in 1986 seeking to declare its rights to the lake, to enjoin multiple defendants from using the lake, and to recover damages for various wrongful uses of the lake. The district court granted summary judgment in favor of all defendants, and the Tribe instituted the present appeal. We affirm the judgment of the district court with one exception. We vacate the portion of the summary judgment pertaining to the federal government, and remand the action to the district court to dismiss the government for lack of subject matter jurisdiction.
I
We recounted the factual underpinnings of this action in an earlier appeal. Devils Lake Sioux Tribe v. State of N.D., 917 F.2d 1049, 1050-51 (8th Cir.1990) (Devils Lake II). A brief overview of the facts at this juncture will serve to frame our discussion.
In an 1867 treaty, ancestors of the modern-day Tribe received vast lands in the Dakotas and Minnesota as a reward for their loyalty to the government during the Sioux Uprising of 1862. Article IV of that treaty established the Fort Totten Reservation for the use of the Tribe.
Article IV described the northern boundary of the Reservation as follows: “Beginning at the most easterly point of Devil’s Lake; thence along the waters of said Lake to the most westerly point of the same .... ” The phrase “thence along the waters” has been interpreted by various parties (at various points in time) to refer to the northern shore of the lake, the southern shore of the lake, and even a variety of lines drawn across the middle of Devils Lake. The proper interpretation is critical. For example, if the boundary is the northern shore, then the Reservation includes Devils Lake. Conversely, if the southern shore forms the boundary, then the lake lies outside the Reservation. See Devils Lake II, 917 F.2d at 1051.
On June 9, 1986, the Tribe filed this action to quiet title to Devils Lake. The Tribe named the federal government, the State of North Dakota, the Garrison Division Conservancy District (an arm of the State), and numerous private landowners as defendants. The Tribe contends that the 1867 treaty established the northern shore of Devils Lake as the northern boundary of its reservation, and that the government has held title to Devils Lake in trust for the Tribe for more than a century. At worst, the Tribe argues, the 1867 treaty is ambiguous. The Tribe points out that courts traditionally resolve ambiguities in treaties in favor of Indian tribes. Under either approach, the Tribe asserts entitlement to Devils Lake.
The federal government disputes the Tribe’s claim to the lake. The government claims that Devils Lake was not included in the 1867 treaty that formed the reservation. The government asserts that it continued to hold title to Devils Lake until 1889, when it conveyed the lake to the State of North Dakota at its statehood under the “equal footing” doctrine. See Shively v. Bowlby, 152 U.S. 1, 49-50, 14 S.Ct. 548, 38 L.Ed. 331 (1894) (explaining that the government cedes navigable waterways to States when they join the Union). According to the government, the State held complete title to Devils Lake until 1971. In 1971, the State quitclaimed title to a portion of the lake to the government to permit construction of a massive public works project called the Garrison Diversion Unit.
In 1989, the district court granted the federal government’s motion for summary judgment. Devils Lake Sioux Tribe v. State of N .D., 714 F.Supp. 1019 (D.N.D.1989) (Devils Lake I). The district court held that the Tribe had already resolved *737its claim to Devils Lake as part of a 1977 Indian Claims Commission (ICC) settlement. Id. at 1022-26. The Tribe appealed, and we reversed the district court’s decision. Devils Lake II, 917 F.2d at 1056-67. We discerned factual disputes regarding the precise issues resolved in the 1977 ICC proceeding, and held that “[t]he record does not support a summary-judgment on a theory that the 1977 settlement disposes of the. Tribe’s alleged rights.... [T]his issue requires further development on the merits.” Id. at 1056.
The parties returned to the district court. They spent several years attempting to settle the case, but settlement talks failed to bear fruit. In 1998, the parties revived their case before the district court. After revival, court and counsel agreed to bifurcate proceedings. In the first phase, the federal government and the State would raise preliminary procedural and jurisdictional defenses. If the Tribe prevailed, the parties would then try the case on the merits and resolve the question of ownership.
The district court entertained the defendants’ motions for summary judgment on the phase-one preliminary questions and heard extended argument. On January 24, 2000, the court issued a 17-page opinion granting summary judgment. The court held that the Tribe’s suit against the federal government was time-barred. In addition, the court held that “issue preclusion” 1 prevented the Tribe from litigating the ownership of Devils Lake because the Tribe could have raised that issue (but did not) in a 1951 ICC suit. After dismissing the federal government, the court determined that the government was an indispensable party to the proceedings, and that the Tribe’s suit against the State and the other defendants could not continue absent the government. See Fed.R.Civ.P. 19(b). Accordingly, the court entered a final judgment adverse to the Tribe.
II
The Quiet Title Act of 1972(QTA), Pub.L. No. 92-562, 86 Stat. 1176, authorizes lawsuits against the federal government “to adjudicate a disputed title to real property in which the United States claims an interest.” 28 U.S.C. § 2409a(a). “Congress intended the QTA to provide the exclusive means by which adverse claimants could challenge the United States’ title to real property.” Block v. North Dakota ex rel. Bd. of Univ. & Sch. Lands, 461 U.S. 273, 286, 103 S.Ct. 1811, 75 L.Ed.2d 840 (1983) (Block I). The Supreme Court has held that the QTA provides the only basis for an Indian plaintiffs quiet title action against the federal government. United States v. Mottaz, 476 U.S. 834, 841-44, 106 S.Ct. 2224, 90 L.Ed.2d 841 (1986).
The Tribe’s suit against the federal government relies upon the QTA. We conclude, however, that QTA relief is not available because the Tribe failed to comply with the pertinent statute of limitations.
A
The QTA contains a generous 12-year statute of limitations, which provides that an “action shall be deemed to have accrued on the date the' plaintiff or his predecessor in interest knew or should have known of the claim of the United States.” 28 U.S.C. § 2409a(g). Because the QTA waives the government’s sovereign immunity from suit, Block I, 461 U.S. at 280, 103 S.Ct. 1811, a plaintiff must *738comply with the limitations period to effectuate that waiver. Hence the QTA statute of limitations acts as a jurisdictional bar unlike most statutes of limitations, which are affirmative defenses. See State of N.D. ex rel. Bd. of Univ. & Sch. Lands v. Block, 789 F.2d 1308, 1310 (8th Cir.1986) (Block II).
The 12-year limitations period begins when a plaintiff knows or should know of the government’s adverse land claim. 28 U.S.C. § 2409a(g). This standard does not require the government to provide explicit notice of its claim. The government’s claim need not be “clear and unambiguous.” Block II, 789 F.2d at 1313. “Knowledge of the claim’s full contours is not required. All that is necessary is a reasonable awareness that the Government claims some interest adverse to the plaintiffs.” Id. (quoting Knapp v. United States, 636 F.2d 279, 283 (10th Cir.1980)).
Further, the government’s interest “need not amount to full legal title .... As long as the interest claimed is a ‘cloud on title,’ or a reasonable claim with a substantial basis, it constitutes a ‘claim’ for purposes of triggering the twelve-year statute of limitations.” Richmond, Fredericksburg & Potomac R.R. Co. v. United States, 945 F.2d 765, 769 (4th Cir.1991). Even invalid government claims trigger the QTA limitations period. See id. Simply put, the limitations period is triggered when a landowner has reason to know that the government claims some type of adverse interest in that land. See Patterson v. Buffalo Nat’l River, 76 F.3d 221, 224 (8th Cir.1996).
B
The government argues that the Tribe “knew or should have known” of its claim to Devils Lake by at least July 7, 1971.2 On that date, the federal government acquired more than 62,000 acres of the lake from the State. The State deeded this sizeable chunk of Devils Lake to the government via quitclaim deed to assist the government in building the Garrison Diversion Project. The Project was managed by the federal Bureau of Reclamation, and was designed to divert water from the Missouri River to irrigate arid lands, and stock municipal water supplies, in central and eastern North Dakota.
The government’s 1971 land acquisition was widely reported by local media outlets, such as the Devils Lake Journal and the Benton County Farmers Press, and by larger organizations as well. The Tribe apparently knew of the government’s land acquisition because a 1970 tribal resolution expressed concern about land ownership in view of “the coming Garrison Diversion Project.” State App. 23-24. The Project itself was the single most important, visible public works project in North Dakota in the last half of the 20th century. The Tribe could hardly have turned a blind eye to its major details. See generally In re Garrison Diversion Conservancy Dist., 144 N.W.2d 82, 88 (N.D.1966) (describing newspaper coverage of public hearings held in major cities in eastern North Dakota to discuss the contract and deed between the State and the government). Thus we have little doubt that the Tribe was aware of the Garrison Diversion Project generally, and the government’s acquisition of a portion of the lake specifically.
Even if the Tribe did not actually know that the government acquired title to a portion of the lake in 1971, the Tribe certainly should have known. As a matter of law, a quitclaim deed disgorging title to the United States places a landowner on *739notice and triggers the QTA statute of limitations. State of Cal. ex rel. State Land Comm’n v. Yuba Goldfields, Inc., 752 F.2d 393, 397 (9th Cir.1985). The quitclaim deed, coupled with evidence that the Tribe likely knew about the extent of the Garrison Diversion Projéct, convinces us that, in 1971, the Tribe “knew or should have known,” 28 U.S.C. § 2409a(g), that the government claimed Devils Lake.
Because the Tribe learned of the federal government’s claim to Devils Lake in 1971, the Tribe was required to file a QTA suit by 1983 to preserve the government’s waiver of sovereign immunity. The Tribe actually filed its complaint in this action in June 1986, so the action is ostensibly barred by the 12-year statute of limitations.
C
In an effort to forestall the operation of the statute of limitations, the Tribe raises three counter-arguments. We discuss each in turn.
1
Assuming that its QTA claim accrued in 1971, the Tribe contends that the government abandoned its claim to Devils Lake in 1976. The Tribe believes that the government later reversed course in 1981, when it reasserted its prior interest in the lake. The Tribe says that the government’s 1981 claim was a new claim, which set in motion a new QTA statute of limitations. Thus the Tribe argues that its 1986 lawsuit is timely because the operative 12-year clock began in 1981.
We have little disagreement with the Tribe’s presentation of the governing legal framework. Like any private citizen or corporate entity, the government may abandon its interest in land. If the government clearly and unequivocally abandons its interest, a district court loses jurisdiction over a pending QTA action. See 28 U.S.C. § 2409a(e). We believe that the principle espoused in § 2409a(e) applies, by analogy, to situations in which a plaintiff has not yet filed a QTA suit (though the limitations period has been triggered by adverse government conduct). In those situations, the government’s outright abandonment effectively removes the cloud on a plaintiffs title and extinguishes his obligation to file a quiet title action within 12 years. If the government later reasserts an adverse claim, the reasserted claim is properly regarded as a new claim and a new 12-year period begins in which a plaintiff may file his QTA action against the government. See Michel v. United States, 65 F.3d 130, 132-33 (9th Cir.1995) (per curiam).
Applying these principles to the present case, the Tribe argues that a 1976 memorandum authored by Reid Peyton Chambers abandoned the government’s interest in Devils Lake. Chambers served as the Associate Solicitor for the Division of Indian Affairs within the Department of the Interior in 1976. The Tribe’s argument requires us to review the circumstances that gave rise to Chambers’s memo in considerable detail.
As we have explained, see supra at 736, the State believes it acquired title to Devils Lake at statehood, in 1889, under the equal footing doctrine. At some point in the mid-1970s, the North Dakota Attorney General sought to establish the exact amount of territory in Devils Lake that the State had acquired in 1889. The North Dakota Attorney General requested an opinion on the matter from the Interior Department.
The North Dakota Attorney General’s request was assigned to the Office of the Solicitor. The Solicitor’s Office was (and still is) comprised of several divisions. Each division bore responsibility for varying aspects of the Department’s broad *740mandate over domestic matters. Cf. Federal Indian Law 263 (U.S. Gov’t Printing Office 1972). The Solicitor apparently directed the North Dakota Attorney General’s request to a deputy in charge of one of the divisions — the Associate Solicitor for the Division of Energy & Resources.
The Associate Solicitor for the Division of Energy & Resources recognized that the North Dakota Attorney General’s request implicated significant questions of tribal land ownership. Accordingly, he asked for assistance from his counterpart, Chambers, who then served as the Associate Solicitor for the Division of Indian Affairs. On June 21, 1976, Chambers responded. He addressed a reply memorandum to the Associate Solicitor for the Division of Energy & Resources in which he concluded that the State did not acquire Devils Lake in 1889 under the equal footing doctrine. Chambers wrote, “I am of the opinion that Devils Lake is ... wholly within [the Reservation’s] boundaries and the United States holds title to the lakebed in trust for the Devils Lake Sioux Tribe.” Tribe App. 74.
The Tribe argues that Chambers’s view represented the position of the government in 1976. To prove the point, the Tribe cites a 1981 memorandum from the Solicitor of the Interior Department repudiating Chambers’s conclusion. The 1981 memo advises the Assistant Attorney General of the United States that Chambers’s memo “should no longer be relied upon as stating the position of [the Interior Department] on the ownership of the lake-bed.” Tribe App. 222. In sum, the Tribe posits that Chambers’s memo abandoned the government’s claim to Devils Lake.
The Tribe’s argument suffers from six distinct flaws.
a
“In the first place, the Government cannot abandon property without congressional authorization.” Warren v. United States, 234 F.3d 1331, 1338 (D.C.Cir.2000) (rejecting a plaintiffs QTA claim as time-barred) (citing Supreme Court decisions). The Property Clause of the Constitution invests Congress with plenary power to dispose of real property belonging to the United States. See U.S. Const, art. IY, § 3, cl. 2. “Subordinate officers of the United States are without that power, save only as it has been conferred upon them by Act of Congress or is to be implied from other powers so granted.” Royal Indemnity Co. v. United States, 313 U.S. 289, 294-95, 61 S.Ct. 995, 85 L.Ed. 1361 (1941) (citations omitted).
It is undisputed that Congress never abandoned the government’s 1971 claim to Devils Lake. Likewise, Associate Solicitor Chambers was a “subordinate officer,” who lacked Congressional authorization to abandon a government land claim. See Op. Sol. M-35028, 60 I.D. 142, 147 (Mar. 4, 1948) (concluding that the Associate Solicitor for the Division of Indian Affairs “is not an ‘Officer of the United States’ in the Constitutional sense (Art. II, Sec. 2, Cl. 2), because he is not appointed through the procedure of nomination by the President and confirmation by the Senate.”).
Our review of Interior Department policy confirms that Chambers lacked the authority to bind the government. In 1976, the governing regulations of the Solicitor’s Office strictly forbade Associate Solicitors from signing documents involving “legal opinions of major importance.” Solicitor’s Regulation 1 § 1(a) (reproduced in Aff. of Terrance C. Wiles, Feb. 12, 1988, Ex. G). Section 1(b) excluded Associate Solicitors from conveying the government’s position “respecting legal questions” to persons outside the Department of Interior without first receiving approval from either the Solicitor or the Deputy Solicitor, Id. In addition, § 2(b)(2) of that same Regulation *741required an Associate Solicitor to obtain the concurrence of another Associate Solicitor when the matter in issue concerned two Divisions. See id.
These three regulations manifest Chambers’s inability to declare unilaterally that his 1976 view was the position of the government. On a question of significant legal importance, such as the ownership of Devils Lake, Chambers had no authority to sign off. In communications with persons outside the Department involving the government’s position, Chambers needed the approval of the Solicitor or the Deputy Solicitor. Nothing in the record demonstrates that the Solicitor or Deputy Solicitor ever approved Chambers’s conclusions or conveyed them to persons outside the Interior Department. Finally, Section 2(b)(2) applied to Chambers’s memo because it was addressed to the Associate Solicitor for the Division of Energy & Resources, the official who initially requested Chambers’s assistance. Chambers would have had to coordinate his views with those of the Associate Solicitor for the Division of Energy & Resources.
The Tribe was almost surely aware of the limitations on Chambers’s authority. Chambers left his government post and formed his own law firm at the close of the Ford Administration. Remarkably, as a private attorney, Chambers discussed his 1976 memo with representatives of the Tribe in Washington in February 1978. See ML of Carl McKay ¶ 6 (Dec. 9, 1986) (McKay served as Chairman of the Tribe from 1976 to 1980). At the 1978 meeting, Chambers was accompanied by his law partner, Marvin Sonosky. The two met with Tribal officials to discuss the meaning of the 1976 memo less than two years after Chambers authored that memo.3 Because Chambers is an accomplished attorney, we are confident that he understood the policies under which he operated while working in the Solicitor’s office, and that he would have conveyed the extent of his limited authority to Tribal leaders. Of primary importance, the Tribe would have learned these facts well within the QTA’s 12-year statute of limitations.
These points present insurmountable hurdles to the Tribe’s argument that Chambers abandoned the government’s ownership of Devils Lake in 1976.
b
Even if we assume for the sake of the Tribe’s argument that Chambers possessed the authority to bind the government, Chambers’s memo cannot be interpreted as an exercise of that authority. Chambers did not act in a manner that suggested he was establishing a position for the government, and thus we cannot accept the Tribe’s conclusion that Chambers abandoned the government’s claim to Devils Lake in these circumstances.
In the main, federal agencies bind the government in two ways. Agencies promulgate rules, subject to the notice-and-comment provisions of the Administrative Procedure Act. Agencies also adjudicate individual controversies, usually taking testimony and receiving evidence in the fashion of our courts. The Tribe has not attempted to argue that Chambers’s memo was tantamount to agency rule-making or adjudication, nor could it reasonably maintain that position.
Aside from making rules and adjudicating cases, federal agencies also issue an array of informal advice in opinion letters, manuals, enforcement guidelines, and so forth. Unlike rules and adjudications, however, these informal agency pronouncements “lack the force of law.” *742Christensen v. Harris County, 529 U.S. 576, 587, 120 S.Ct. 1655, 146 L.Ed.2d 621 (2000). Thus, even if Chambers’s memo were likened to an opinion letter, the memo would not be law. In other words, the 1976 memo did not bind the government, nor establish the government’s position, as to the ownership of Devils Lake.
Even if these types of informal agency pronouncements had legal force, the foregoing comparison between Chambers’s memo and an informal opinion letter fails. The Office of the Solicitor (within the Interior Department) regularly issues opinion letters that are routinely published in the Federal Register. Chambers’s memo bears no resemblance to such an opinion letter. Chambers’s memo has not been published; indeed, his 1976 memo was never formally issued to the parties whose land rights are affected by its conclusions. Viewed on its own terms, Chambers’s memo does not purport to establish a position binding the government. • Chambers phrased his conclusion that the Tribe owned the lake as if it were his personal opinion, not the government’s position. Had Chambers intended to expound the position of the government, he would likely have said so, rather than phrasing his conclusions in the fashion of a personal opinion. These factors strongly suggest that Chambers’s memo is undeserving of consideration as informal agency action.4
Because Chambers’s memo was neither formal nor informal agency action (in the senses we have described above), we conclude that Chambers’s memo could not have established the government’s position in 1976. Our conclusion comports with common sense: intra-office memoranda do not bind the government. Cf. Aulston v. United States, 915 F.2d 584, 595 & n. 16 (10th Cir.1990) (disregarding internal memoranda in determining the position of the Interior Department). Chambers’s 1976 memo quite simply lacked the legal force necessary to abandon the federal government’s prior claim to Devils Lake. Cf., e.g., Serono Labs., Inc. v. Shalala, 158 F.3d 1313, 1320-21 & n. 2 (D.C.Cir.1998) (“the views of FDA staff do not bind the agency’s final decisionmaker”).
c
Irrespective of Chambers’s authority to make government policy, the government never adopted Chambers’s views. The record in the present case does not reveal what use, if any, the Associate Solicitor for the Division of Energy & Resources made of Chambers’s memo. Nor does the record disclose whether the Associate Solicitor for the Division of Energy & Resources even agreed with Chambers’s views, or forwarded Chambers’s conclusions to superiors in the Interior. Department, or to the North Dakota Attorney General. The government never formally transmitted Chambers’s memo to the Tribe, though the Tribe later obtained a copy through other channels. In short, the evidence in this case suggests that the government never took an affirmative act consistent with the conclusions in Chambers’s memo.
Just as the dog’s failure to bark revealed to Sherlock Holmes that there had never been a midnight intruder, see Arthur Conan Doyle, The Adventure of Silver Blaze, The Strand Magazine, December 1892, at 656-57, the government’s failure to act emasculates the Tribe’s argument that Chambers’s memo had legal force. At oral argument, counsel for the government ex*743plained that the government would have notified the State of its change in legal position if it had agreed with Chambers’s conclusions. As part of their agreement, the State and the government adopted an accounting procedure by which to compensate the government in the event the Tribe was later deemed to own the lake. Under the terms of that procedure, the government would be entitled to seek compensation from the State for “losing” the portion of Devils Lake it believed it had acquired in 1971. See Supp. Agreement Between The United States and the Garrison Diversion Conservancy Dist., attached as exhibit to Deck of Darrell Krull (Oct. 20, 1986); cf. Devils Lake II, 917 F.2d at 1052 n. 5. It is undisputed that the government never sought compensation from the State. We find it highly implausible that the government would not have remedied its “loss” of Devils Lake under the terms of its express agreement with the State. We therefore conclude, like Holmes, that the government never changed its position, and never viewed Chambers’s memo as abandoning its rights to Devils Lake.
d
The Tribe also raises the specter of the law-of-the-case doctrine, whose application we reject.
The Tribe contends that we have already determined that Chambers’s memo represented the government’s position. In the first appeal of this action, in 1990, we asserted without explanation that Chambers’s memo was an “opinion” that represented the views of the Department of the Interior. Devils Lake II, 917 F.2d at 1052-53. Our assertion in the 1990 opinion was, however, immaterial to the resolution of the only issue presented in that appeal, which addressed the claim-preclusive effect of a 1977 ICC settlement. We are not obliged to accept our previous asseverations because the law-of-the-case doctrine does not extend to a prior opinion’s recitation of facts not material to the disposition of that appeal. See Dedham Water Co., Inc. v. Cumberland Farms Dairy, Inc., 972 F.2d 453, 462-63 (1st Cir.1992).
e
The Tribe also seeks to establish the government’s abandonment of Devils Lake in 1976 by reference to a 1981 memo. In 1981, the Solicitor’s Office of the Department of the Interior informed the Justice Department that “the June 21, 1976 memorandum of the Associate Solicitor, Indian Affairs, should no longer be relied upon as stating the position of this Department on the ownership of the lakebed.” Tribe App. 222. The Tribe ventures that the author’s use of the words “no longer” proves that, between 1976 and 1981, Chambers’s memo had in fact been relied upon to state the government’s position vis-a-vis Devils Lake.5 We disagree.
As we have explained in considerable detail above, Chambers’s memo did not abandon the government’s interest in Devils Lake. The Tribe is therefore left to argue that, in repudiating the 1976 memo, the 1981 memo retroactively revived the force of the 1976 memo. The Tribe says that the Solicitor’s 1981 memo somehow altered the past, though it had never been reasonable to rely on Chambers’s memo in the first place. The argument is plainly specious. The only reasonable interpretation of the 1981 memo is that the Solicitor sought to avoid any misunderstanding that Chambers’s memo might have created because it reached a wider audience than the *744Solicitor’s Regulations authorized. See Solicitor’s Regulation 1, supra, at 11.
As concerns the 1981 memo, the Tribe is not entitled to the benefit of every favorable inference because, strictly speaking, we are not reviewing the propriety of summary judgment. Our present inquiry is directed at the historical facts under-girding the exercise of the district court’s jurisdiction, in particular, whether the Tribe filed its QTA action within the governing 12-year statute of limitations. As to that jurisdictional inquiry, “no presumptive truthfulness attaches to the plaintiffs allegations,” Osborn v. United States, 918 F.2d 724, 730 (8th Cir.1990), and the Tribe, not the government, bears the burden of establishing the existence of subject matter jurisdiction, see id. We do not mean to suggest that we are presently engaged in fact-finding. The point is simply that we need not accept the force of the Tribe’s less reasonable inference when a more reasonable explanation is readily available.
f
Even if we credited all the Tribe’s arguments and inferences about the 1976 and 1981 memos, we could not conclude (as a legal matter) that the QTA statute of limitations stopped. As we explained above, the QTA limitations period begins to accrue when a plaintiff has reason to know of a cloud on his title. See Richmond, 945 F.2d at 769. The inescapable corollary to this principle .is that the QTA limitations period does not stop when government action simply compounds a preexisting cloud on title. Viewing the Tribe’s position charitably, the 1976 and 1981 memos did no more than confirm the “1971 cloud” that already existed on the Tribe’s putative title to Devils Lake.
We therefore conclude that the government did not abandon its interest in Devils Lake, nor concede the Tribe’s ownership thereof, in Chambers’s memorandum. The Tribe’s reliance upon Chambers’s memo as a reflection of change in the government’s position was wholly unreasonable and legally untenable. As a consequence, the Tribe’s 12-year QTA limitations period did not stop in 1976.
2
In its second counter-argument, the Tribe contends that the federal government has made different claims to different portions of Devils Lake at different points in time. The Tribe therefore urges us not to treat the lake as an indivisible whole, but rather to apply multiple 12-year statutes of limitations to the respective portions of Devils Lake claimed at different times by the government. We rejected this very argument in Block II, and we likewise reject it in this case as well.
In Block II, we repudiated a tract-by-tract analysis of a QTA statute of limitations issue. We determined that when ownership of a disputed property would be resolved based on a single legal theory, notice of the government’s claim to one. tract constituted notice as to other tracts. “[T]he assertion by the United States of its claim to the specific tracts put the state on constructive notice of the United States’ claim to the remainder of the riverbed tracts.” Block II, 789 F.2d at 1314. We expressed our view that “the district court’s refusal to extend the scope of the actual notice of the United States’ claim to the specific tracts to constitute notice regarding its claim to all of its riparian riverbed interests constituted too narrow a view of the reach of § 2409a[g].” Id. at 1313 (emphasis added).
The Tribe’s complaint avers that the government holds title to all of Devils Lake in trust for the Tribe: “This is an action brought by the Devils Lake Sioux Tribe ... to establish that it is the benefi*745cial owner of the bed of Devils Lake.” Complaint ¶ 1. The parties dicker over the proper interpretation of a single sentence in an 1867 treaty. But all sides agree that this case presents the question of ownership of Devils Lake, not ownership of discrete tracts of Devils Lake. Because a single legal dispute animates this case, Block II disposes of the Tribe’s multiple-tract argument. Block II compels the conclusion that notice to the Tribe in 1971 that the government acquired a sizeable portion of Devils Lake via quitclaim deed constructively informed the Tribe of the government’s adverse claim to the entire lake. 789 F.2d at 1313-14. We reject out of hand the Tribe’s feeble efforts to distinguish Block II.
3
Finally, the Tribe compares the present title dispute to private trust law. The Tribe argues that it lacked notice of the government’s adverse interest in Devils Lake in 1971 because it presumed that the government, as trustee, was acting in its best interests. The Tribe relies heavily upon Loudner v. United States, in which we held that an Indian beneficiary’s duty to discover claims against the government qua trustee was “somewhat lessened,” or “diminished,” because the beneficiary was entitled to rely upon the good faith and expertise of the government. 108 F.3d 896, 901 (8th Cir.1997).
Loudner did not involve a QTA claim, and, in our view, Loudner does not apply to QTA suits. We must construe the QTA’s waiver of sovereign immunity strictly. See Block I, 461 U.S. at 287, 103 S.Ct. 1811. Obviously, the principle of strict construction applies with full force to the elements of § 2409a(g), timeliness and accrual. We believe that a strict construction of the QTA is largely at odds with Loudner’s rule that an Indian plaintiff has a reduced responsibility to discover adverse government conduct. Furthermore, we note that in Mottaz, a QTA action involving an Indian plaintiff, the Supreme Court made no mention of, or allusion to, the sort of reduced responsibility rule the Tribe advocates in the present case. 476 U.S. at 842-44, 106 S.Ct. 2224. Because a strict reading of the QTA would not entitle the Tribe to benefit from Loudner’s guidance, we find Loudner to be an unreliable guide in this case.
D
We agree with the district court that the Tribe exceeded the QTA statute of limitations. We part company with the district court only so far as the form of relief is concerned. Facing a time-barred claim, the district court entered summary judgment in favor of the government. We believe that the court’s entry of summary judgment was improper because the QTA statute of limitations has a jurisdictional flavor. Plainly put, a district court lacks power and authority to entertain a time-barred QTA suit. The district court in this instance ought to have dismissed the government for lack of jurisdiction, rather than entering judgment in the government’s favor.
Though we agree with the district court as to the ultimate resolution of the Tribe’s claims against the government, we are obliged to vacate its judgment in part, and to remand the matter so that the court may properly dismiss the claims against the government for lack of jurisdiction.
There is no small difference between a dismissal and a summary judgment in this context. Under the terms of the district court’s final judgment, the Tribe’s claim to the lake has been litigated and lost on the merits. The government would own Devils Lake. By instructing the district court to dismiss the Tribe’s complaint for lack of jurisdiction, however, the ownership of *746Devils Lake remains an open question. “A dismissal pursuant to § 2409a[g] does not quiet title to the property in the United States. The title dispute remains unresolved. Nothing prevents the claimant from continuing to assert his title, in hope of inducing the United States to file its own quiet title suit, in which the matter would finally be put to rest on the merits.” Block I, 461 U.S. at 291-92, 103 S.Ct. 1811. The present controversy must await future legislative, or perhaps judicial, consideration.
Ill
We turn now to the Tribe’s remaining claims against the State and various private parties who purport to own land along the shore of Devils Lake.
Unlike its claim against the federal government, the Tribe’s remaining claims do not falter for lack of jurisdiction. Section 1362 of Title 28 provides an independent basis for federal jurisdiction over the Tribe’s claims against the State and private landowners. That section provides that “[t]he district courts shall have original jurisdiction of all civil actions, brought by any Indian tribe ..., wherein the matter in controversy arises under the Constitution, laws, or treaties of the United States.” 28 U.S.C. § 1362. We believe that the Tribe’s claims against the State and the private landowners “arise under” federal law. The Tribe’s claims against the State derive from the interpretation of the 1867 treaty and the equal footing doctrine. The State believes that it owns the portion of Devils Lake that it did not deed to the federal government in 1971. The claims against the private landowners derive from federal land patents that the government may, or may not, have been empowered to issue. Hence § 1362 establishes a jurisdictional foothold for the Tribe’s claims against the State and the private landowners.
The district court dismissed the Tribe’s claims against the State and the private landowners after concluding that the federal government was an “indispensable” party in whose absence the action should not be maintained. See Fed. R.Civ.P. 19(b). Because the government was absent for jurisdictional reasons, the court dismissed the Tribe’s suit due to its inability to join an indispensable party. See Fed.R.Civ.P. 12(h)(2).
Rule 19(b) authorizes a district court to exercise its equitable powers to dismiss an action if a party regarded as “indispensable” cannot be joined. “Whether a person is ‘indispensable,’ that is, whether a particular lawsuit must be dismissed in the absence of that person, can only be determined in the context of particular litigation.” Provident Tradesmens Bank & Trust Co. v. Patterson, 390 U.S. 102, 118, 88 S.Ct. 733, 19 L.Ed.2d 936 (1968). We therefore review a district court’s decision to dismiss an action for failure to join an indispensable party under the highly deferential abuse-of-discretion standard. United States ex rel. Steele v. Turn Key Gaming, Inc., 135 F.3d 1249, 1251 (8th Cir.1998).
The question posed in the present.case is whether the government’s absence would render a judgment infirm, defective, or unfairly prejudicial in some fashion. We must emphasize, at the outset, that the federal government and the Tribe possess the primary claims to Devils Lake in this litigation. Neither the State nor the private landowners can be expected to articulate the government’s position on its behalf in its absence, so the prejudice to the government is obvious. If the Tribe were to prevail, and gain title to Devils Lake, the government’s claim would be extinguished before it had ever raised its arguments on the merits. Moreover, the district court could not possibly craft an *747effective judgment in favor of the Tribe if the government would not be bound by that judgment due to its non-joinder.
Although a determination of indispensability in one case will seldom be completely dispositive in another,6 our consideration of similar cases buttresses our view that the district court properly dismissed the Tribe’s remaining claims. We note in particular two cases involving similar land claims brought by Indians against the federal government.
In Manypenny v. United States, thirty-five enrolled members of the White Earth Band of Chippewa sued the federal government (including the Department of Interior and several of its employees), the State of Minnesota and its agents, three Minnesota counties, and an array of private landowners seeking to quiet title to several properties. 948 F.2d 1057 (8th Cir.1991). The district court dismissed the federal government because it had not waived its sovereign immunity. The court also dismissed the State after applying principles of Eleventh Amendment immunity. Finally, in the absence of the federal government, the court dismissed the remaining counties and private landowners under Rule 19(b). Id. at 1059. On appeal, we affirmed the district court’s judgment that the members’ inability to join the federal government was fatal to the maintenance of their quiet title action against other parties. Id. at 1067.
Another case presents a more striking analogy to the situation we face in the present case. In Navajo Tribe of Indians v. State of N.M., the Navajo Tribe sued the federal government, the State of New Mexico, and various private landowners seeking to quiet title to thousands of acres allocated to the Navajo Tribe in a 1907 Executive Order. 809 F.2d 1455, 1462 (10th Cir.1987). A year after the Executive Order issued, the President issued a superseding Executive Order that appeared to revoke the 1907 grant. The Navajo Tribe challenged the validity of the superseding Executive Order in its 1982 lawsuit. The district court held that the federal government was immune from suit because the Tribe’s claim fell within the exclusive jurisdiction of the ICC. The court then determined that the government was an indispensable party to the Navajo Tribe’s suit, and the court dismissed the remaining defendants under Rule 19(b). See id. at 1471-73. On appeal, the Tenth Circuit affirmed, reasoning that the government is an indispensable party when its own interest in land is plainly adverse to the interests of an Indian tribe. Id. at 1473.
Manypenny and Navajo Tribe illustrate that when the government claims an interest in land that squarely conflicts with the interest of a Tribe, the government’s presence in litigation is nearly always required to assure the proper and effective adjudication of the dispute. We find that rationale to be persuasive in this case. As we explained above, the government and the Spirit Lake Tribe have articulated competing claims to Devils Lake. We therefore hold that the district court *748did not abuse its ample discretion in dismissing the Tribe’s claims against the State and various private landowners due to its inability to join the federal government.
IV
For the reasons expressed above, we vacate the portion of the district court’s judgment resolving the Tribe’s claim against the United States. We remand the matter to enable the district court to dismiss the government as a defendant for lack of subject matter jurisdiction. In all other respects, we affirm the judgment of the district court.
. It appears that the district court intended claim preclusion to serve as the basis for its conclusion. See New Hampshire v. Maine, 532 U.S. 742, 121 S.Ct. 1808, 1814, 149 L.Ed.2d 968 (2001) (distinguishing claim preclusion and issue preclusion).
. The government also contends that a series of late 19th and early 20th century events notified the Tribe of its claim. We need not address that contention.
. The Tribe retained Chambers's law firm, and the firm eventually filed the 1986 complaint. The firm continued to represent the Tribe in this action until the late 1990s.
. We have cause to doubt that Chambers was well informed about the Devils Lake ownership controversy. It is remarkable that his memo — written just five years after the government purported to acquire a portion of the lake from the State — fails to mention, or even recognize the existence of, the 1971 quitclaim deed.
. The Tribe also relies on statements made by the government in the context of unrelated litigation in 1980 and 1981. These state-merits equivocate about ownership of the lake, and therefore cannot be interpreted to abandon the government’s interest.
. We reject the notion that the United States is an indispensable party to every case involving a dispute over Indian lands. See Carlson v. Tulalip Tribes of Wash., 510 F.2d 1337, 1339 (9th Cir.1975) (noting that "the United States is a necessary party to any action in which the relief sought might interfere with its obligation to protect Indian lands against alienation.”). Disputes over Indian lands arise in many forms (and can be initiated by many parties), and hence it is impossible to declare a per se rule that deems the government's joinder necessary in all such cases. See, e.g., Sokaogon Chippewa Cmty. v. State of Wis., 879 F.2d 300, 304-305 (7th Cir.1989); Puyallup Indian Tribe v. Port of Tacoma, 717 F.2d 1251, 1254-55 & n. 1 (9th Cir.1983).

=== CASE 2210575 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:55.216266+00 ===

711 N.E.2d 1223 (1999)
305 Ill. App.3d 355
238 Ill.Dec. 562
Katherine FEDOREV, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
Lynn Q. DOHERTY, Director of the Department of Employment Security, et al., Defendants-Appellees.
No. 2-98-0911.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Second District.
June 4, 1999.
*1224 Darlene D. Soderberg, Harold L. Turner, Harold L. Turner & Associates, P.C., Rockford, for Katherine Fedorev.
James E. Ryan, Attorney General, Barbara A. Preiner, Diane M. Buschmann, Assistant Attorney General, Chicago, for Lynn Q. Doherty.
Ellen B. Lynch, Joseph J. Perkoski, Hinshaw & Culbertson, Rockford, for Esterline Technologies, W.A. Whitney Co.
Justice GEIGER delivered the opinion of the court:
The plaintiff, Katherine Fedorev, appeals the June 12, 1998, order of the circuit court of Boone County denying her motion to reconsider the dismissal of her complaint for administrative review. The trial court dismissed the complaint on the basis that the plaintiff failed to name the Board of Review of the Illinois Department of Employment Security as a defendant. On appeal, the plaintiff argues that, by naming the director of the Illinois Department of Employment Security (IDES) as a defendant, her complaint should be deemed to have included the Board of Review as a defendant pursuant to section 3-107(a) of the Administrative Review Law (Review Law). 735 ILCS 5/3-107(a) (West 1996). We affirm the trial court's dismissal.
The following facts are taken from the record. From August 4, 1986, to February 10, 1997, the plaintiff worked for defendant W.A. Whitney Company (Whitney) as a secretary. In November 1995, the plaintiff filed a workers' compensation claim against Whitney, alleging that she had developed bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome. Between December 30, 1996, and February 10, 1997, the plaintiff engaged in settlement negotiations regarding her claim.
On February 10, 1997, Whitney terminated the plaintiff's employment because she had allegedly used confidential information regarding another employee's worker's compensation settlement to procure a larger settlement for herself. The plaintiff subsequently applied for unemployment insurance benefits. However, Whitney filed a complaint with the IDES, arguing that the plaintiff was ineligible to receive such benefits as she had been terminated for misconduct.
On March 8, 1997, following a hearing, a representative of the IDES determined that the plaintiff was disqualified from receiving unemployment compensation benefits as she had been terminated for committing a breach of confidentiality. On April 16, 1997, a referee from the appellate division of the IDES affirmed the March 8, 1997, determination. On May 19, 1997, the plaintiff filed an appeal with the Board of Review (the Board).
On July 16, 1997, the Board affirmed the referee's decision, finding the plaintiff ineligible to receive unemployment insurance benefits. On August 20, 1997, the plaintiff filed a complaint for administrative review of the Board's determination. The plaintiff named Whitney and IDES Director Lynn Q. Doherty as defendants.
On September 25, 1997, defendant Doherty filed a motion to dismiss for lack of subject matter jurisdiction. On January 29, 1998, following a hearing, the trial court granted Doherty's motion and dismissed the complaint with prejudice. The trial court explained its ruling as follows:
"The Court finds that the Director of the [IDES] does not head, direct, supervise nor [sic] control the Board of Review of the [IDES].
* * *
Therefore, naming the Director of the [IDES], is deemed to include only the [IDES] and not the Board of Review of the [IDES]."
The plaintiff subsequently filed a motion for reconsideration and a motion for leave to file an amended complaint. On June 12, 1998, following oral argument, the trial court denied both motions. On July 10, 1998, the plaintiff filed a timely notice of appeal.
The issue before us is whether the plaintiff's failure to name and serve the Board of Review in her complaint deprived *1225 the trial court of subject matter jurisdiction. The plaintiff contends that the trial court erred in dismissing her complaint. She notes that section 3-107(a) of the Review Law (735 ILCS 5/3-107(a) (West 1996)) provides that naming the director of the administrative agency that issued the final decision will be deemed to include the administrative agency that the named defendant directs or heads. She further notes that section 1100 of the Unemployment Insurance Act (820 ILCS 405/1100 (West 1996)) provides as follows:
"Any decision of the Board of Review * * * shall be reviewable only under and in accordance with the provisions of the [Review Law] * * *. The Director shall be deemed to have been a party to any administrative proceeding before the Board of Review and shall be represented by the Attorney General in any judicial action involving any such decision."
Based upon the language of these statutes, the plaintiff argues that the Board was included as a defendant in her complaint, as she named the IDES Director as a defendant.
The defendants contend that the trial court properly dismissed the plaintiff's complaint, as Doherty was neither the head nor the director of the Board. Doherty notes that the following individuals were members of the Board when it issued its July 16, 1997, determination: Rolland Lewis, John Cashman, Stanley Mucha, and Jon Walker. On that date, Lewis served as the chairman of the Board. Doherty contends that, if the plaintiff had named Lewis as a defendant, only then would the Board have been deemed to be included as a defendant under the Review Law. In support of their contention, the defendants cite section 44a of the Civil Administrative Code of Illinois (the Code) (20 ILCS 1005/44a (West 1996)). Section 44a provides in pertinent part:
"The Board of Review in the [IDES] shall exercise all powers and be subject to all duties conferred or imposed upon said Board by the provisions of the Unemployment Compensation Act * * * without any direction, supervision, or control by the Director of Employment Security." (Emphasis added.) 20 ILCS 1005/44a (West 1996).
The defendants argue that, because Doherty is the director of an administrative entity that is separate from the Board, the trial court properly dismissed the plaintiff's complaint for failing to name the proper party.
Generally, in unemployment compensation cases, the function of the appellate court is to determine whether the Board's findings of fact are supported by the manifest weight of the evidence. Hawkins v. Department of Employment Security, 268 Ill.App.3d 927, 930, 206 Ill.Dec. 423, 645 N.E.2d 428 (1994). However, where a question of law arises, as is the case here, a de novo standard of review shall apply. Bill v. Education Officers Electoral Board of Community Consolidated School District No. 181, 299 Ill.App.3d 548, 551, 233 Ill.Dec. 619, 701 N.E.2d 262 (1998).
The primary rule of statutory construction is to ascertain and give effect to the legislative intent. Nottage v. Jeka, 172 Ill.2d 386, 392, 217 Ill.Dec. 298, 667 N.E.2d 91 (1996). To determine that intent, we must first look to the language of the statute, which is given its plain and ordinary meaning. In re R.L., 282 Ill.App.3d 839, 847, 217 Ill.Dec. 885, 668 N.E.2d 70 (1996). We must also consider all parts of the statute together and give every word or phrase some reasonable meaning. Thomas Hake Enterprises, Inc. v. Betke, 301 Ill.App.3d 176, 185, 234 Ill.Dec. 502, 703 N.E.2d 114 (1998).
Section 1100 of the Unemployment Insurance Act states unambiguously that the Board's determinations shall be reviewable only under and in accordance with the Review Law. 820 ILCS 405/1100 (West 1996). The Review Law is a departure from the common law, and parties seeking its application must adhere strictly to its procedures. Central States Trucking Co. v. Department of Employment Security, 248 Ill.App.3d 86, 88, 187 Ill.Dec. 839, 618 N.E.2d 430 (1993).
Section 3-107(a) of the Review Law provides in pertinent part:
"(a) Except as provided in subsection (b), in any action to review any final decision of an administrative agency, the administrative *1226 agency and all persons, other than the plaintiff, who were parties of record to the proceedings before the administrative agency shall be made defendants. * * * Naming the director or agency head, in his or her official capacity, shall be deemed to include as defendant the administrative agency, board, committee, or government entity that the named defendants direct or head. No action for administrative review shall be dismissed for lack of jurisdiction based upon the failure to name an administrative agency, board, committee, or government entity, where the director or agency head, in his or her official capacity, has been named as a defendant as provided in this Section." (Emphasis added.) 735 ILCS 5/3-107(a) (West 1996).
In the case at bar, we believe that the trial court properly dismissed the plaintiff's complaint. Our supreme court has held that, while the Board may be a division or arm of the IDES that operates under the superintendence of a director, "it is the Board which act[s] as the administrative agency and enter[s] the administrative decision." Cuny v. Annunzio, 411 Ill. 613, 617, 104 N.E.2d 780 (1952); Stanley v. Department of Employment Security, 235 Ill.App.3d 992, 995, 176 Ill.Dec. 766, 602 N.E.2d 73 (1992). Therefore, when a claimant seeks administrative review of the denial of unemployment compensation, the Board is the "administrative agency" from which the plaintiff must seek administrative review. See Cuny, 411 Ill. at 616, 104 N.E.2d 780. Although section 3-107 of the Review Law was amended following the supreme court's ruling in Cuny, we note that the Board continues to be the final decision-making agency on questions of unemployment benefit eligibility. See 820 ILCS 405/803 (West 1996).
The plaintiff's complaint specifically sought review of the Board's determination. However, the plaintiff did not name the Board or its members as defendants. Instead, the plaintiff named Whitney and the IDES Director as defendants. The plain language of section 3-107(a) provides that the naming of the director or agency head shall be deemed to include as defendant the administrative agency that the named defendant directs or heads. See 735 ILCS 5/3-107(a) (West 1996).
The question becomes whether Doherty "directs or heads" the Board of Review. Although Doherty is the director of the IDES, section 44a of the Code provides that the Board shall exercise all powers and be subject to all duties conferred upon it by the provisions of the Unemployment Compensation Act "without any direction, supervision, or control by the Director of Employment Security" (emphasis added) (20 ILCS 1005/44a (West 1996)). The plain language of section 44a of the Code indicates that, although Doherty is the Director of the IDES, Doherty does not direct the Board.
Notwithstanding the plain language of section 44a, the plaintiff contends that Doherty is still the "head" of the Board, even though she does not direct, supervise, or control the Board. We disagree. The Board issued its July 16, 1997, determination without any direction, control, or supervision by Doherty. The only signatures that appeared on the July 16, 1997, determination by the Board belonged to chairman Lewis, and members Cashman, Mucha, and Walker. Although the Director is deemed a party to the administrative proceeding before the Board (820 ILCS 405/1100 (West 1996)), the Board is the administrative agency from which the plaintiff must seek administrative review. See Cuny, 411 Ill. at 616, 104 N.E.2d 780. While Doherty may act as the "head" of the IDES (see 20 ILCS 5/4 (West 1996)), we do not believe that Doherty is the "head" of the Board. We therefore conclude that naming the Director of the IDES does not deem the Board to be included as a defendant under section 3-107(a) of the Review Law.
For her final argument, the plaintiff contends that the trial court's order dismissing her complaint contravenes the legislative intent of section 3-107(a) of the Review Law. In support of her contention, the plaintiff cites Bunnell v. Civil Service Comm'n of Waukegan, 295 Ill.App.3d 97, 229 Ill.Dec. 611, 692 N.E.2d 384, (1998), wherein this court provided in pertinent part:
"We believe that the obvious intent of the legislative amendment [to section 3-107] *1227 is to reduce the possibility of error in naming and serving individuals who are acting in their official capacities as employees, agents, or members of the administrative agency or governmental entity and to avoid the harsh result of dismissing the complaint where the agency or entity has been named and served. The implication of the amendment is that naming and serving the agency or entity constitutes the joinder of and service on its individual agents, employees, or members." Bunnell, 295 Ill.App.3d at 101, 229 Ill.Dec. 611, 692 N.E.2d 384.
In addition, the plaintiff cites Lacny v. Police Board, 291 Ill.App.3d 397, 225 Ill.Dec. 602, 683 N.E.2d 1265 (1997), to support her contention that the trial court's decision prevents those plaintiffs who have been "aggrieved" by decisions of the Board from taking advantage of the provisions of the Review Law.
However, we find Bunnell and Lacny distinguishable from the case at bar. In Bunnell, the trial court dismissed a patrolman's complaint for administrative review of a decision by the Civil Service Commission of Waukegan because the patrolman failed to name the individual members of the commission. Bunnell, 295 Ill.App.3d at 98, 229 Ill. Dec. 611, 692 N.E.2d 384. However, unlike the instant case where the plaintiff failed to name either the Board or its members, the patrolman in Bunnell named the commission as a defendant. Bunnell, 295 Ill.App.3d at 98, 229 Ill.Dec. 611, 692 N.E.2d 384. In Lacny, the reviewing court did not address the issues raised by the plaintiff herein. Instead, the reviewing court in Lacny held that a different section of the Review Law violated the constitutional proscription against special legislation and denied the plaintiff equal protection of the law. Lacny, 291 Ill. App.3d at 409, 225 Ill.Dec. 602, 683 N.E.2d 1265. Specifically, the Lacny court determined that section 3-103 of the Review Law denies plaintiffs who file complaints in Chicago the privilege of amending their timely filed complaints. Lacny, 291 Ill.App.3d at 408, 225 Ill.Dec. 602, 683 N.E.2d 1265. As Bunnell and Lacny are distinguishable from the case at bar, we reject the plaintiff's argument.
For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the circuit court of Boone County is affirmed.
Affirmed.
INGLIS and RAPP, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2210583 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:55.324698+00 ===

463 N.W.2d 903 (1990)
STATE of Minnesota, Respondent,
v.
Charles Norman BELSSNER, Appellant.
No. C6-90-120.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
December 18, 1990.
Review Denied February 20, 1991.
Hubert H. Humphrey, III, Atty. Gen., St. Paul, Thomas L. Johnson, Hennepin County *904 Atty., Linda K. Jenny, Asst. County Atty., Minneapolis, for respondent.
John M. Stuart, State Public Defender, Lawrence W. Pry, Asst. Public Defender, St. Paul, for appellant.
Considered and decided by FORSBERG, P.J., and RANDALL, and FLEMING, JJ.[*]
OPINION
RANDALL, Judge.
Charles Norman Belssner appeals his conviction for aggravated forgery. He contends he was denied a fair trial where the court ruled on the admissibility of Spreigl evidence by adopting the order (allowing it in) of the trial court in a previous forgery prosecution in which he was also the defendant. Belssner also alleges that the evidence of other crimes was not relevant, and, if it was, he alleges prejudice from the evidence far outweighed its probative value. We affirm.
FACTS
Appellant was having mortgage problems in the fall of 1987. Federated Financial Corporation (FFC), the mortgage holder, through its agent, Minnesota Foreclosure Service (MFS), initiated foreclosure procedures in August 1987.
A sheriff's sale had been scheduled for December 30, 1987. An attorney for appellant contacted the law firm of Kampmeyer & O'Connor, MFS' attorneys, inquiring as to the amount necessary to reinstate the mortgage. Appellant's attorney was informed that the mortgage could be reinstated for $17,257.30.
Friday, December 4, 1987, Mary Hauser, office manager for Kampmeyer & O'Connor, discovered a man back in the firm's secretarial area around 6:00 p.m.. The man identified himself as "Jim Keifer" from American Financial Printing. He claimed to be picking up a print request for one of the firm's attorneys named Krohnschnabel. No order could be found, and when Krohnschnabel's secretary was called, she knew nothing about any print order. Mary Hauser was suspicious of "Jim". "Jim" left a phone number, and Mary Hauser indicated someone would get back to him about the print order.
Monday, December 7, 1987, Laura Bonne, a Kampmeyer & O'Connor secretary, discovered the "date received" stamp and David O'Connor's signature stamp out of place on her desk. Krohnschnabel's secretary tried to call "Jim," but the phone number he had left belonged to the Wall Street Journal. She also called American Financial Printing and learned that they had no employee named "Jim Keifer." Mary Hauser later identified appellant, at trial, as the man who called himself "Jim Keifer."
The sheriff's sale on appellant's home proceeded on December 30, 1987. After the sale had already started, appellant arrived and demanded the sale be halted. Appellant produced a letter purporting to be a receipt for $17,257.30. The letter was dated December 8, 1987, and written on Kampmeyer & O'Connor stationery. The letter was addressed to appellant and purported to bear the signature of David O'Connor. The letter stated:
In Mr. Krohnschnabel [sic] absence, on behalf of Kampmeyer And [sic] O'Connor this will serve as a cash receipt in the amount of $17,257.30. In accordance with information provided you by Mr. Krohnschnabel this will bring you up to date on your mortgage requirements with Federated Financial Corporation.
MFS' representative, suspicious of the letter, tried to call O'Connor to verify the letter. Appellant left before O'Connor was reached. O'Connor denied having any knowledge of the letter, denied receiving any payment from appellant, and in fact, O'Connor was in Europe from November 20 to December 15, 1987.
In late November 1987, appellant had contacted Betty Knapp to sell his home. A purchaser was found and the closing was set for March 15, 1988. In the intervening time, Knapp had learned of the arrearages *905 on appellant's mortgage, and she told him to bring $30,000 to the closing.
At the closing, appellant produced the same December 8, 1987, letter as evidence that he had satisfied the arrearages on the house. The closing agent was not satisfied with the December 8, 1987, letter, and she cancelled the closing.
On June 28, 1988, an attorney representing appellant contacted Krohnschnabel at Kampmeyer & O'Connor. Krohnschnabel was informed that appellant had filed a notice of Lis Pendens and was seeking to void the foreclosure sale. A copy of the December 8, 1987, letter was attached to the complaint.
A complaint charging appellant with one count of aggravated forgery (making or altering a writing) in violation of Minn.Stat. § 609.625, subd. 1(1) (1986) was filed in Hennepin County District Court on August 18, 1988. The State filed an amended complaint on January 3, 1989, in Hennepin County District Court charging appellant with a second count of aggravated forgery (uttering) in violation of Minn.Stat. § 609.625, subd. 3 (1986).
The appellant's defense at trial was that he had paid Kampmeyer & O'Connor in cash, and that the firm lacked adequate cash control procedures. Appellant claimed the firm was seeking to blame him rather than absorb the loss for mishandling his cash payment. Appellant claimed to have received the December 8, 1987, letter from someone at the firm named "Linda," and claims he had enough cash reserves to pay the arrearages at that time.
At trial, the state offered Spreigl evidence of four other alleged forgeries committed by appellant. The first Spreigl incident offered by the state was evidence from the "Lindstrom" case. The appellant had previously forged a Lindstrom Cleaning and Construction, Inc. billing statement to show payment of $4,066.55 in cash in January 1987. The forgery purportedly showed that payment was acknowledged by the the signature of a Mark Bielke. Bielke denied receiving any payment or signing such a statement, and a handwriting expert testified the signature was not Bielke's. Appellant was convicted of forgery on these facts at an earlier trial conducted before a Judge D.H.
The second Spreigl incident offered by the state showed appellant forged endorsements on two checks issued by State Farm Fire and Casualty Co.. The two checks were jointly payable to appellant and Federated Financial Corp.(FFC). The endorsement on both checks read:
Transferred and payable to Charles Belssner due to overpayment and interest on mortgage at 8022 Sheridan. Federated Financial Corp. to pay insurance claim to Linstrom [sic] Construction and issue further refund of principal.
The checks also bore the signatures of appellant and Matthew Hyman.
Matthew Hyman testified that he neither typed the endorsement nor signed the checks over to appellant. Paula Bella, a FFC vice-president, testified FFC never received the checks, and that she and the company president are the only two persons authorized to endorse checks which neither did in this instance.
The third Spreigl incident involved the "Viking" case. Appellant owed a debt to Norwest Bank-Des Moines, and the debt had been turned over to Viking Collection Service in November 1986. On January 13, 1988, Viking's attorney, Paul Marso, obtained a default judgment against appellant.
Marso testified that appellant contacted him on January 29, 1988 claiming he had paid the debt in full. Marso received from appellant a copy of a Viking Collection Service "direct payment memo." The memo form had been filled in to show payment of $9,858.50 by appellant on January 29, 1987. The memo had been "date stamped" January 29, 1987, as well as stamped "paid" and "settled in full." Marso and Don Corll, Viking's vice-president, testified the memo was a forgery and testified the debt had never been paid.
The final Spreigl evidence involved a cash receipt which showed payment of $1,760.19 to the law firm of Levin, Roers, Quigley and Aspnes. Appellant had defaulted *906 on a charge card, and a partner in the firm had obtained a default judgment. The cash receipt was purportedly in full settlement of the litigation. The firm denied the receipt was genuine, and they denied receiving any payment from appellant.
Prior to trial, appellant had twice requested an individual hearing on the admissibility of the state's Spreigl evidence. At a Rasmussen hearing on June 8, 1989, Judge P.F. ruled the same Spreigl evidence admissible in the present case as was allowed in by Judge D.H. in the previous case, the so-called "Lindstrom" case. The record does not show Judge P.F. independently reviewed the transcript of Judge D.H.'s order before making his ruling.
Immediately prior to the trial of the present case, on September 11, 1989, appellant renewed his request for an individual Spreigl hearing. The trial judge, now a Judge K.G., again listened to arguments of both counsel. However, this time, a transcript of Judge D.H.'s order was available for review. Judge K.G. also affirmed Judge D.H.'s previous order on the admissibility of the evidence, but, in so doing, he made an independent review.
Appellant denied all the Spreigl allegations. He claimed to have paid all of these debts in cash. Appellant produced witnesses to testify to his habit of paying bills in cash.
Prior to the testimony of most of the Spreigl witnesses, the trial court issued a cautionary instruction, consistent with 10 Minnesota Practice, CRIM. JIG 3.16, to the jury. However, the trial court did not give a cautionary instruction prior to the testimony of two of the witnesses. In the final charge, the court issued a cautionary instruction to the jury referring to all the Spreigl evidence, but left out the name of one of the Spreigl witnesses. The appellant made no objections to the cautionary instructions throughout the trial.
The jury began deliberations on September 26, 1989, and returned a verdict finding appellant guilty of a violation of Minn.Stat. § 609.625, subd. 1(1) forgery: making or altering a writing) and of a violation of Minn.Stat. § 609.625, subd. 3 (aggravated forgery: uttering).
ISSUES
1. Did the trial court commit reversible error when it ruled Spreigl evidence admissible simply affirming an order from a prior forgery prosecution of appellant which found the same Spreigl evidence admissible in a prior independent prosecution of appellant?
2. Was the Spreigl evidence in the present case irrelevant as to any permissible purpose or use consistent with Minn.R. Evid. 404(b)?
3. Did the prejudicial effect of the Spreigl evidence, in the present case, outweigh its probative value?
4. Were the limiting instructions given by the trial court in regard to the Spreigl evidence inadequate?
ANALYSIS
I.
The Spreigl Hearing
Appellant contends that the Spreigl procedures set out in State v. Billstrom, 276 Minn. 174, 149 N.W.2d 281 (1967) and its progeny were not complied with in his trial below, and therefore, he was denied a fair trial. Appellant first argues that the Rasmussen hearing judge committed reversible error by adopting the order of Judge D.H., from the "Lindstrom" trial, ruling the state's Spreigl evidence admissible. Appellant argues that since Judge P.F. did not consider the transcript of Judge D.H.'s earlier order it was not possible for him to find that, in the present case, the state's Spreigl evidence was: clear and convincing, relevant and material to the state's case, and that its probative value was not outweighed by any unfair prejudice. See State v. Dupay, 405 N.W.2d 444, 449 (Minn.App.1987) (citing State v. Doughman, 384 N.W.2d 450, 453-54 (Minn.1986)). Appellant's argument focuses only on the Rasmussen hearing.
If the Rasmussen hearing were the only time, prior to presentation of the evidence *907 to the jury, that the admissibility of the state's Spreigl evidence was considered, appellant's argument would be persuasive. Judge P.F. erred when he did not make an independent review of the State's Spreigl evidence.
Judge P.F. should have reviewed the transcript of Judge D.H.'s earlier ruling on the same evidence just as if the transcript were an offer of proof by the State. Judge P.F. should have then considered the State's offered Spreigl evidence in the context of the present case. He then should have made independent findings that proof of the Spreigl incidents would be clear and convincing, relevant and material to the present case, and that its probative value outweighed any unfair prejudice.
This independent review is necessary simply because in each felony charged against appellant, the facts were different. The offered Spreigl was the same, but that is not the point. The offered Spreigl evidence must be relevant to the felony case at trial, and here, each felony case was different. Appellant was entitled to an independent review by the trial judge every time he faced a new felony charge as to whether, under the particular facts then before the court, the offered Spreigl evidence fit the needed threshold for such evidence. The previous ruling on admissibility cannot be res judicata. Each of appellant's separate felony trials were charged out on completely different facts. Spreigl has to fit the case at trial, and that fit has to be determined by an independent review each time the facts of the underlying charge change. A determination that the same Spreigl evidence previously fit a different set of facts "might" be helpful but cannot be determinative.
However, Judge P.F.'s error was rendered harmless by subsequent proceedings in the case. Prior to jury selection on September 11, 1989, appellant renewed his request for a review of the admissibility of the state's Spreigl evidence. The trial judge, Judge K.G., heard appellant's motion and listened to arguments of both counsel. The transcript of this September 11, 1989 hearing indicates that Judge K.G. had access to more information than Judge P.F.
When appellant's trial counsel argued for re-opening the Spreigl issue, he told the court he had reviewed the transcript from Judge D.H.'s order in the "Lindstrom" case, and due to the transcripts complexity, he urged that the Spreigl evidence be reviewed in detail by the trial court to decide whether there should be any changes as to which Spreigl offenses should be admissible at trial. The prosecutor in turn informed Judge K.G. that the transcript of Judge D.H.'s order included his specific findings, and it was made clear to the trial court that a copy of the transcript was available for its review. The arguments of counsel also brought out for Judge K.G. what constituted the Spreigl evidence.
At the conclusion of arguments the following exchange took place:
THE COURT: I'd like to see both Counsel in chambers if I might. Do you have a transcript of that other hearing?
MR. REDDING: Yes.
THE COURT: Would you both come in my chambers, please.
(Off-the-record discussion in chambers between Court and Counsel.)
THE COURT: After considering the arguments of both Counsel and the authority cited, at this time I am * * * going to affirm the decisions of the Trial Court on the Lindstrom matter with regard to the Spreigl matters arising from the case.
I'm going to affirm Judge [D.H.'s] rulings in this matter which also, as a matter of fact, would affirm Judge [P.F.'s].
(emphasis added).
In light of Judge K.G.'s being urged to review the "Lindstrom" transcript by appellant's trial counsel; his specific request for the transcript prior to issuing his ruling; and his ruling specifically affirming the decisions of the "Lindstrom" court (and only as an aside, affirming Judge P.F.), appellant cannot now argue the trial court acted blindly on the Spreigl question in this latest case. It seems clear Judge *908 K.G. independently reviewed the "Lindstrom" transcript containing the earlier order by Judge D.H.
A trial court has the responsibility of determining the admissibility of Spreigl evidence, and in doing so must determine that the other offenses offered as evidence are proven by clear and convincing evidence, that the offenses are relevant and material to the state's case, and that the probative value outweighs the potential for unfair prejudice. Dupay, 405 N.W.2d at 449.
In both Judge K.G.'s present case and the "Lindstrom" case, the only available evidence for the state was circumstantial evidence. The issues and defenses which the jury would consider were the same, and the state's Spreigl evidence would be the same offenses. Therefore, within the context of the facts of this case now pending, it was not an abuse of discretion for Judge K.G. to affirm Judge D.H.'s decisions on the Spreigl evidence as he made enough of an independent review.
A review of the "Lindstrom" transcript shows that Judge K.G. affirmed the finding that the forged endorsements on the State Farm checks were proven by clear and convincing evidence, were relevant and material to the issues and defenses in the case, and that their probative value was not outweighed by the possibility of unfair prejudice. Judge K.G. affirmed the finding that the forged direct payment memo of the "Viking" case was proven by clear and convincing evidence, was relevant and material to the issues in the case, showing common plan and scheme, intent, and absence of mistake, and that the probative value was not outweighed by the possibility of unfair prejudice. Judge K.G. also affirmed the finding that the forged cash receipt regarding the charge card litigation was relevant and material to show identity, modus operandi, common plan and scheme, intent, absence of mistake and preparation, was proven by clear and convincing evidence, and its probative value was not outweighed by the possibility of unfair prejudice.
Judge K.G. made his affirmation (which amounted to a ruling of admissibility for use of the Spreigl evidence in the present case) of Judge D.H.'s order within the context of the present case then pending before him. Therefore, Judge K.G. did make the necessary findings of clear and convincing proof, relevance and materiality, and significant probative value.
Was it allowable for Judge K.G. to consider the earlier order and transcript of Judge D.H. in making his Spreigl ruling? "[T]he trial court has broad discretion in determining whether or not to require the state to call the Spreigl witnesses at the hearing to determine the admissibility of the Spreigl evidence." State v. Kasper, 409 N.W.2d 846, 847 (Minn.1987).
[M]ost trial judges generally use the offer of proof procedure at the Spreigl hearing. [The Court sees] nothing wrong with this or any reason for requiring a mini-trial on the issue.
Id. At the September 11, 1989, hearing, the prosecutor described what the Spreigl offenses would show. The content of the prosecutor's statement would not have been appreciably different had it been labeled as an "offer of proof." Judge K.G. could have exercised his discretion and based his ruling on what the prosecutor said the evidence would show. Use of a verbatim transcript from a prior Spreigl hearing fairly approximates a trial court's use of an offer of proof on which to base a Spreigl ruling.
Appellant next argues that the Spreigl procedures were not complied with because the state failed to specify the particular exception to the general exclusionary rule for other crimes which would make the evidence admissible. See Billstrom, 276 Minn. at 176, 149 N.W.2d at 284. Appellant contends the state did not identify the particular exceptions at either the Rasmussen hearing or when the evidence was offered at trial. The notice provisions set out in State v. Spreigl, 272 Minn. 488, 497, 139 N.W.2d 167, 173 (1965) and Billstrom, 276 Minn. at 178, 149 N.W.2d at 284-85, are premised on the idea that a defendant should be protected from the surprise introduction of other crimes evidence and allowed time to prepare to *909 defend against that evidence. In this present case, there was no surprise.
At the June 8, 1989, Rasmussen hearing, appellant, having already received the state's written Spreigl notice, was again put on notice that the state wanted to use the same Spreigl evidence and for the same purposes as Judge D.H. had ruled admissible in the "Lindstrom" trial. Appellant knew what that evidence was, his counsel obtained a copy of the transcript of Judge D.H.'s findings and order, and appellant had three months to prepare to defend against that evidence. The goals of Spreigl and Billstrom were preserved.
Further, throughout the Rasmussen hearing, the September 11, 1989 pre-trial hearing, as well as while the Spreigl evidence was being introduced during the trial, the appellant was silent and never raised any objection as to the lack of specificity by the state as to under which exception the Spreigl evidence was being offered. The state had provided written notice of its intent to offer the Spreigl evidence, and consequently "the other Spreigl-Billstrom procedures became mandatory only upon the defendant's objection and/or request." State v. Forsman, 260 N.W.2d 160, 169 (Minn.1977). Since appellant raised no objections, nor made any requests inquiring under which exceptions the Spreigl evidence was being offered, the failure of the state to so specify is not reversible error. The record does not disclose prejudice to appellant. This is particularly so in the present case where the "Lindstrom" transcript indicated for what purposes the evidence would be admissible, and the evidence was presented at trial consistent with the representations made in the transcript.
II.
The Relevance and Materiality of the Spreigl Evidence
Appellant next contends that the Spreigl evidence admitted during trial was not relevant for any purpose set out in Minn.R.Evid. 404(b). In order to be admissible, Spreigl evidence must be relevant to one of many purposes other than to show an accused acted in conformity with his character. Minn.R.Evid. 404(b).
The state has the burden of proving each and every element of an offense beyond a reasonable doubt. The intent to defraud is an essential element of both Minn.Stat. § 609.625, subd. 1(1) (making or altering) and Minn.Stat. § 609.625, subd. 3 (uttering).
The state had to prove that appellant not only forged and uttered the O'Connor letter, but it had to prove in each instance appellant did the acts with the intent to defraud. The "Lindstrom" billing statement forgery, the forged endorsements on the two State Farm claim checks, the forged "Viking" direct payment memo, and the forged cash receipt in the charge card litigation are relevant to the accused's intent when producing and using the O'Connor letter. In determining the relevance of Spreigl evidence, "there must be some similarity  either in time, location or technique  between the Spreigl offense and the offenses charged." State v. Anderson, 396 N.W.2d 566, 568 (Minn.1986) (emphasis added). Furthermore, the Court "has adopted a flexible approach in determining the relevancy of Spreigl evidence and will defer to the trial court's decision." Id.
In the present case, the similarities between the Spreigl evidence and the charged offenses are numerous and significant. In each Spreigl incident a document was forged by appellant either in its creation or by endorsement to reflect a liability having been satisfied by the payment of cash. In each instance, the evidence indicates that appellant used the forms of his creditors and either altered them by stamping "paid" or fraudulently endorsing them as having been paid or satisfied in full. These Spreigl incidents were done by appellant for the purpose of avoiding his legal liabilities.
The O'Connor letter was sufficiently similar in that Kampmeyer & O'Connor received no payment from appellant, the letter was produced when appellant's mortgage default was threatening his home, the letter was produced on Kampmeyer & *910 O'Connor stationery, O'Connor's signature was clearly forged since he was out of the country on December 8, 1987, and the very text of the forged letter purports to satisfy appellant's legal liability to Federated Financial Corp.. Where so many significant similarities exist between the Spreigl evidence and the charged offenses, the evidence is probative as bearing on the appellant's intent in forging the O'Connor letter. See Anderson, 396 N.W.2d at 568-699.
The Spreigl evidence was also relevant to showing the O'Connor letter was part of a common plan or scheme. Appellant argued that the Spreigl evidence was not shown to be preplanned steps in a larger scheme of which the alleged forgery of the O'Connor letter was another step. Appellant relies on Forsman, 260 N.W.2d 160, for this proposition. However, the case actually stands against appellant's argument. The pertinent paragraph on which appellant relies reads as follows:
We have no difficulty in finding evidence of the * * * incident admissible under the "common scheme or plan" exception. This exception was originally reserved for those offenses which could be described as preplanned steps in a larger scheme of which the charged offense was another step. * * * This exception has evolved to embrace evidence of offenses which, because of their marked similarity in modus operandi to the charged offense, tend to corroborate evidence of the latter. * * *
Forsman, 260 N.W.2d at 167 (emphasis added) (citations omitted).
Appellant argued that there are substantial differences between all the offenses at issue. Appellant contends that because each of the forgeries purporting to relieve him of legal liabilities was on a different type of paper and because each of the creditors arose from a different transaction that there was no significant similarity between the offenses. The differences appellant points out are superficial. It is obvious each receipt would be on a different piece of paper. Each time the forger would find paper relevant to the specific liability he was trying to avoid. It is not necessary that a common plan or scheme have the same victim for each offense. See, e.g., State v. Crocker, 409 N.W.2d 840 (Minn.1987); Dupay, 405 N.W.2d 444.
The Spreigl evidence admitted at the trial below was relevant to the state's case. It was probative of at least intent and common plan or scheme. See Minn.R.Evid. 404(b).
III.
Probative Value vs. Unfair Prejudice
Appellant next contends that the Spreigl evidence should have been excluded because its relevance was substantially outweighed by its prejudicial value. Appellant's only support for this position is his assertion that the Spreigl evidence was excessively voluminous. Volume is an argument but is not, without more, determinative. The test is to balance the state's need against the defendant's right to a fair trial. State v. Halverson, 381 N.W.2d 40, 43 (Minn.App.1986), pet. for rev. denied (Minn. Mar. 21, 1986).
The number of Spreigl offenses is not determinative of unfair prejudice. See, e.g., Dupay, 405 N.W.2d at 449 (three Spreigl offenses admitted without error to show a common plan or scheme). In the present case, the state's evidence was purely circumstantial and the Spreigl evidence was not only relevant to show appellant's intent to defraud and common plan and scheme, but the similarity of the modus operandi of the Spreigl offenses to that of the charged offense is relevant to establish appellant's identity as the maker of the O'Connor letter. See, e.g., Halverson, 381 N.W.2d at 43 (Spreigl evidence of common plan and scheme of defendant to harrass ex-wife was relevant to issue of identity of defendant as the source of threat to ex-wife's boy friend).
The trial court did not abuse its discretion in finding the Spreigl evidence relevant and its probative value outweighing unfair prejudice.
IV.
Spreigl Evidence Limiting Instructions
Appellant lastly contends that the cautionary instructions given regarding the *911 Spreigl evidence, both during trial and in the final charge, were inadequate.
Appellant's claim of error is untimely. No objections or requests for instructions were ever made by the appellant during the trial, and therefore, the objection is waived. State v. Bellcourt, 305 N.W.2d 340, 342 (Minn.1981); State v. Berge, 288 N.W.2d 687, 689 (Minn.1979); Forsman, 260 N.W.2d at 169. Also, it is clear the thrust of the trial court's charge to the jury on the limited use of Spreigl evidence was fair and should have conveyed to the jury the importance of limiting the use of Spreigl evidence.
DECISION
Appellant was entitled to an independent review of the admissibility of the same Spreigl evidence each time it was offered in a new felony trial. Appellant received a fair review from Judge K.G. The Spreigl evidence was relevant and material, and its probative value was not outweighed by unfair prejudice. Any defects in the cautionary instructions regarding the Spreigl evidence were waived by appellant's failure to request instructions or object at trial to the instructions as given.
Affirmed.
NOTES
[*]  Acting as judge of the Court of Appeals by appointment pursuant to Minn.Const. art. VI, § 2.

=== CASE 9737463 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:26:01.534724+00 ===

SULLIVAN, P. J.
This is an appeal from a judgment entered in an action for declaratory relief determining that certain unpaid subcontractors and materialmen were not entitled to the unexpended balance of a construction loan held by a lender savings and loan association.
In the main, the facts are undisputed. Plaintiffs Robert L. Dodge and Walker Vaughn, partners, doing business under the name of Surrey Farm Developers, OAvned a certain lot in a tract in Santa Clara County. On March 21, 1961 they entered into an agreement with defendants Arthur P. Petersen and Dorothy Petersen to sell the lot to the latter for $7,500. Plaintiffs received a down payment of $100 and a promissory note for the balance secured by a deed of trust on the property. According to the agreement, the sale was subject to the buyers obtaining a construction loan and the sellers were to subordinate their purchase money deed of trust to any such loan. On April 30,1961, plaintiffs received a payment of $900.
Mr. and Mrs. Petersen obtained a $19,000 construction loan from defendant Santa Clara Savings and Loan Association (Santa Clara Savings). This loan was evidenced by a promissory note executed by them in favor of Santa Clara Savings, secured by a deed of trust. Both of the aforementioned deeds of trust wer» recorded on March 30, 1961, the instrument securing Santa Clara Savings’ loan being placed of record first in accordance with the subordination agreement and thereby becoming the senior encumbrance on the property.
The Petersens commenced construction of a home on the property according to plans approved by both plaintiffs and Santa Clara Savings. To this end they contracted with defendants and appellants John C. McBain, a plastering contractor, L. D. Gray, a concrete contractor, and Doud Lumber Company, Inc. and with defendant Williams & Russo, a masonry contractor.
Pursuant to the loan agreement entered into between them, Santa Clara Savings in April and May 1961 disbursed to the *833Petersens from the loan proceeds three progress payments of $3,800 each, the last of these being made on May 11, 1961. In addition, several smaller disbursements were made from the loan fund. The parties before us agree that all disbursements totalled $12,051.56,1 leaving a balance in the loan account of $6,948.44.
After receiving the third progress payment, the Petersens performed no additional work on the property and eventually abandoned the construction, defaulting on their purchase money note to plaintiffs. The latter thereupon caused the property to be sold under the power conferred in the purchase money (second) deed of trust and at such sale in October 1961 purchased the property themselves for $5,000 subject to the first deed of trust in favor of Santa Clara Savings.
When the construction of the building was abandoned, the four subcontractors abovementioned had unpaid bills against the Petersens for labor or materials totalling $4,311.59.2 Each of them thereupon filed a mechanic’s lien against the property and an action to foreclose the same. In addition, defendant and appellant McBain gave a stop notice to Santa Clara Savings (Code Civ. Proe., § 1190.1, subd. (h)), which notice was not accompanied by any bond.
Having purchased the subject property at the trustee’s sale, plaintiffs Dodge and Vaughn on December 20, 1961 commenced the instant action for declaratory relief seeking a determination of the respective rights of the parties in the real property and in the undisbursed loan funds in the hands of Santa Clara Savings. Named as defendants, inter alios, were Mr. and Mrs. Petersen, Santa Clara Savings and the four lien claimants mentioned above. As disclosed by the pretrial conference order, plaintiffs took the position that the sale under the second deed of trust had eliminated the liens of the above four lien claimants; that none of the defendants except Santa Clara Savings had a valid lien on the property or claim to the unexpended loan funds; that if the court should declare that *834Santa Clara Savings’ lien was only for the amount actually disbursed from the loan fund ($12,051.56), plaintiffs would make no claim to the unexpended loan funds; but that, if the court should declare that plaintiffs held their title subject to a lien in favor of the lender for the full amount of the loan, these plaintiffs were claiming all of the unexpended loan funds ($6,948.44) to complete the construction of the house. Defendant lien claimants, appellants3 herein, contended not only that their mechanics’ liens constituted valid liens against the property because construction had commenced prior to the recordation of plaintiffs’ purchase money deed of trust but also that they had an equitable lien against the unexpended loan funds in the hands of Santa Clara Savings.
The cause proceeded to trial4 and ou August 1, 1962, after two days of testimony, was taken under submission. On September 5, 1962, the court filed its memorandum decision in which it concluded: that the lien of Santa Clara Savings was for the full amount of the loan ($19,000) plus interest accrued thereon; that the lien claimants failed to establish that the work of construction as a whole was started prior to the recordation of the two deeds of trust on March 30, 1961 • that the “foreclosure of the purchase money [second] deed of trust wiped out mechanic’s liens upon the property itselfv- and that such “foreclosure” by plaintiffs cut off all their rights in the loan fund, thereby precluding them from asserting any claim to the unexpended balance in the hands of the lender. The decision concluded: “It is the conclusion of the Court, therefore, that the Defendant Santa Clara Savings & Loan Association has a lien on the property in the full amount of the construction loan; that to satisfy it, it must first exhaust its security, that is, by foreclosure of its deed of trust. If upon exhaustion of the security a deficiency remains, the Association may then apply the unexpended balance it has on hand to the satisfaction of that deficiency. If after this is done any unexpended balance still remains in the hands of the Association, it is subject to equitable liens on behalf of the four lien claimants mentioned above. If any balance should then remain, it would be payable to the Petersens. ’ ’ (Italics added.)
Presumably in accordance with the foregoing suggestion made in the court’s memorandum decision, Santa Clara Savings caused the property to be sold under the power conferred *835in the first deed of trust and at the trustee’s sale held on November 8, 1962 bought in the property itself for $14,600. The record reflects expenses of sale and accrued and unpaid interest due from the Petersens to the lender in the sum of $1,777.08.5
On February 18, 1964 the court filed findings of fact and conclusions of law which were generally in accord with its memorandum decision of September 5, 1962. So far as is here pertinent, it found that the lien of Santa Clara Savings was for the full amount of $19,000 plus accrued interest of $1,777.08; that the mechanics’ liens of the four lien claimants did not take precedence over either the purchase money deed of trust or the construction loan deed of trust; that the work of construction was not commenced prior to the recordation of the two deeds of trust; that “the foreclosure of the purchase money deed of trust wiped out the mechanic’s liens”; that the suhcontractors and materialmen had valid and unpaid claims against the Petersens in amounts as previously noted herein (see fn. 2, ante) ; that the property had been sold under the first deed of trust as we have set forth supra and that there were expenses in regard to said sale totalling $871.36; and that after said sale for $14,600 and the application of $6,948.44 undisbursed loan funds to the debt owing from the Petersens to Santa Clara Savings “there remained no ‘excess’ for distribution to Defendant lien claimants.”6 Judgment was entered accordingly. This appeal followed.7
We reject as without merit appellants’ initial contention that the work of construction was commenced prior to the recordation of the deeds of trust, thus establishing valid mechanics’ liens against the property. Appellants urge this point upon us, seemingly oblivious of the settled principles requiring us to view the evidence in the light most favorable to respondent (see Marshall v. Marshall (1965) 232 Cal.App.2d 232, 236 [42 Cal.Rptr. 686] and cases there cited) and to uphold the finding under attack if any substantial evidence contradicted or uncontradicted supports it. (See Marshall v. Marshall, supra, at p. 246 and cases there cited.)  Our *836examination of the evidence pertinent to the issue, which we deem unnecessary to set forth in detail, satisfies us that it was in conflict, as indeed counsel for appellants conceded at oral argument. The resolution of this conflict was for the trial court. Its determination that the work of construction was not commenced prior to the recordation of the deeds of trust and that the mechanics’ liens therefore were not to take precedence over the latter (Code Civ. Proc., § 1188.1) but in fact were extinguished by the trustee’s sale under the second deed of trust (Rheem Mfg. Co. v. United States (1962) 57 Cal.2d 621, 625 [21 Cal.Rptr. 802, 371 P.2d 578]) must be upheld.
We reach the main issue on this appeal: whether appellants are entitled to payment from the unexpended balance of the loan funds upon a theory of equitable lien.  As was said in A-1 Door & Materials Co. v. Fresno Guar. Sav. & Loan Assn. (1964) 61 Cal.2d 728, 732 [40 Cal.Rptr. 85, 394 P.2d 829]: “An equitable lien may be imposed on a construction-loan fund only if it is established that the borrower or lender induced the supplier of labor or materials to rely on the fund for payment. [Citations.] ” (Italics added.) (Smith v. Anglo-California Trust Co. (1928) 205 Cal. 496, 501-504 [271 P. 898]; Pacific Ready Cut Homes, Inc. v. Title Ins. & Trust Co. (1932) 216 Cal. 447, 450-452 [14 P.2d 510]; Miller v. Mountain View Sav. & Loan Assn. (1965) 238 Cal.App.2d 644, 660-662 [48 Cal.Rptr. 278].)  The rationale of the rule permitting recovery on a theory of equitable lien is essentially this: that it would be inequitable and unjust to withhold from those persons who have by their labor and materials enhanced the value of the property the loan fund which constituted a material inducement to them in supplying such labor and materials and upon which they relied for reimbursement. (Smith v. Anglo-California Trust Co., supra; Pacific Ready Cut Homes, Inc. v. Title Ins. & Trust Co., supra; Miller v. Mountain View Sav. & Loan Assn., supra, at pp. 661-662; see Ogden’s Cal. Real Property Law, p. 619.) We recently said in Miller, supra: “Where the lender has received the benefit of the claimant’s performance, and therefore a more valuable security for its note, it is not justified in withholding or appropriating to any other use money originally intended to be used to pay for such performance and relied upon by the claimant in rendering its performance. [Citations.] ” (238 Cal.App.2d at pp. 661-662.)  However, the right of subcontractors or materialmen to an equitable lien is not established merely by filing a mechanic’s lien *837claim. (A-1 Door & Materials Co. v. Fresno Guar. Sav. & Loan Assn., supra; Miller v. Mountain View Sav. & L. Assn., supra. at p. 663.)
In the instant case, appellants contend that “there was substantial uncontradicted evidence that each one of the lien claimants did in fact rely upon the borrowers’ representation that they would be paid from the construction loan funds and that they supplied their labor and/or materials based upon this representation.” Before turning to an analysis of the merits of such contention, we set forth the pertinent evidence and proceedings in the court below. ■
McBain, the plastering contractor, testified that he had a conversation with Petersen before commencing work and that Petersen was “in a great hurry to get his lath. . . . He [Petersen] claimed that he was getting a good—well, it is from the construction loan.” McBain stated that he didn’t “know what it was, who it was from at the time,” but that Petersen was getting a substantial payment and that he (McBain) was to be paid therefrom. On cross-examination McBain admitted that he did not run a credit check on Petersen, that he did not know either the amount of the construction loan or the installment payments and that he was not aware of the identity of the lender.
Gray’s testimony as to his knowledge and reliance on the fund was only that Petersen told Gray that he was to be paid for Ms services “75 percent out of the first . . . progress payment” and the balance on the fourth progress payment.
The sole evidence as to Bond’s reliance on the fund was introduced by way of stipulation between Boud’s counsel (Mr. Keough) and plaintiffs’ counsel (Mr. Panelli). It was stipulated that if Mr. Bond were called as a witness he would testify that the Bond executives were “aware of the fact that there was a construction loan at the Santa Clara Savings & Loan and they were going to contact Mr. Zane or Mr. Maloney at . . . Santa Clara . . . with regard to payment. And we have already stipulated as to the amount of the bill.” The court then inquired as to whether it was Mr. Boud’s testimony that “he was both aware and relied on it, or simply he was aware of it?” Counsel for Bond replied: “Aware and relied. He has it entered on the ledger card, your Honor. I could call him to identify this.” Counsel for plaintiffs then stated: “I would stipulate he relied on it.”
At this point we dispose of a subsidiary issue raised by respondent. The record shows that all during the above eolio*838quy concerning the stipulation nothing was said by counsel for Santa Clara Savings. Said respondent now claims that it is not bound by the stipulation since its counsel did not enter into it.  “A stipulation is an agreement between counsel respecting business before the court . . . , and like any other agreement or contract, it is essential that the parties or their counsel agree to its terms.” (Palmer v. City of Long Beach (1948) 33 Cal.2d 134, 142 [199 P.2d 952]; see generally 46 Cal.Jur.2d p. 23; 50 Am.Jur. p. 611; 83 C.J.S., pp. 32-35.)  However, assent to a stipulation need not be made in a formal manner and under the particular circumstances of a case, where a party’s counsel remains silent and makes no objection to the stipulation, his passive acquiescence may constitute an assent to it. (Palmer v. City of Long Beach, supra; 46 Cal.Jur.2d, pp. 23-24; see Wilson v. Mattei (1927) 84 Cal.App. 567, 571 [258 P. 453].)
The record in the instant matter reflects that except for a few comments on McBain’s stop notice, respondent withdrew to the sidelines and permitted plaintiffs to carry the fight with appellants. Plaintiffs in their prayer for declaratory relief sought a declaration that all of the defendants except respondent Santa Clara Savings had no valid lien or claim against either the real property or the undisbursed loan funds. Santa Clara’s answer consisted of a short general denial on information and belief with a prayer for judgment “declaring the respective rights of the parties as prayed for by Plaintiff, or as the Court may deem just.” Respondent’s position below as disclosed by the pretrial conference order and indeed by the general tenor of the record was “that either someone owes them $13,000.00 or someone o'Wes them $19,000.00. . . .” At the start of the trial the court and all counsel convened in chambers at which time the court took up the claims of defendant lien claimants seriatim, inquiring whether there was any issue as to the filing, sufficiency or amount of the liens. As a result these matters were all stipulated to. This was effectuated in a colloquy between the court, ■ counsel for plaintiffs (Mr. Panelli) and the respective counsel for the lien claimants, during which counsel for respondent was silent. At another point, the latter indicated that he would raise a question as to the timely service of the stop notice and “I will not stipulate as to its validity insofar as time is concerned.” He also made a short comment on the purchase money deed of trust and stated that respondent’s records of the transaction would be available. Our examination of these preliminary pro*839ceedings satisfies us that under the circumstances respondent’s counsel assented to the stipulations which were more formally articulated by plaintiffs’ counsel. It is noteworthy that respondent does not now claim otherwise. During the ensuing testimony witnesses were called by plaintiffs and the respective lien claimant defendants. Although the record may reflect random remarks by said counsel, it clearly shows that he 'did not conduct an examination or cross-examination of any of such witnesses and that the cross-examination of the lien claimants’ witnesses was conducted by plaintiffs’ counsel (Mr. Panelli).
At the conclusion of the testimony of appellant Gray, called on his own behalf, and cross-examined by plaintiffs’ counsel (Mr. Panelli) and by appellant McBain’s counsel (Mr. Mazzetti) but not questioned at all by respondent’s counsel, the court inquired whether any other witness would be called. After a response by respondent’s counsel (Mr. Christy),8 there occurred the colloquy between the court, counsel for plaintiffs and counsel for Doud Lumber Company which resulted in the stipulation now challenged. Under all the circumstances of the ease we are satisfied that the continued silence of Mr. Christy constituted an assent to the stipulation. Indeed, the present objection to the stipulation, seen in the perspective of the proceedings below, appears specious.
Respondent argues that the foregoing evidence as to reliance is of no avail to appellants anyhow, since the trial court found on substantial evidence that appellants were not induced to rely on the loan fund. There is no specific finding in so many words that appellants did or did not supply the labor and materials in reliance upon the loan fund.9 As we have previously pointed out, the court in its memorandum decision determined that respondent Santa Clara Savings had a lien for the full amount of the construction loan ($19,000) and after first exhausting the security therefor could apply the unexpended balance to the debt, stating: “If after this is done any unexpended balance still remains in the hand of [respondent], it is subject to equitable liens on behalf of the four lien claimants mentioned above.” (Italics added.) In its findings *840of fact (finding 12), after finding that such sale under the deed of trust and such application of the undisbursed loan funds had occurred, the court found that “there remained no ‘excess’ for distribution to Defendant lien claimants.”10 It will be recalled that the court found that defendants ’ mechanics’ liens had been extinguished by the sale under the purchase money (second) deed of trust. A comparison of the parallel language in the findings of fact and conclusions of law on the one hand and in the memorandum decision on the other makes it clear that in the former the court was referring to the equitable liens of defendants and that it in effect found that there were equitable liens but no excess of funds out of which they could be satisfied.  While the opinion of the trial court cannot be used to impeach findings, it can be used to explain them (People v. One 1951 Ford Sedan (1954) 122 Cal.App.2d 680, 683 [265 P.2d 176]; Oldis v. La Societe Francaise (1955) 130 Cal.App.2d 461, 471-476 [279 P.2d 184]) and as an aid to interpreting the findings where they are unclear. (Frustuck v. City of Fairfax (1963) 212 Cal.App.2d 345, 366 [28 Cal.Rptr. 357].) We conclude that the trial court found there were equitable liens and by implication that appellants had supplied the labor and materials in reliance upon the construction loan. Contrary to respondent's claim, we are not impelled to a contrary view by finding 8 which reads: 11 Except as hereinabove specially stated, the allegations of . . . Defendants are untrue. ’ ’ The allegations contained in the pleadings of the various defendants make no mention of equitable liens; as pointed out above this theory of recovery seems to have been first mentioned at the pretrial conference.
We are therefore of the view that the court’s implied finding of reliance is supported by the evidence heretofore summarized by us and we find merit in appellants’ claim, referred to above, that in supplying labor and materials they relied upon the borrower’s representation that they would be paid from the loan funds. Under the stipulation Doud was aware of the loan and relied upon it. Under the remaining evidence both McBain and Gray were told they would be paid from a construction loan, although neither of them had actual knowledge of the identity of the lender.  If the induee*841ment to the appellants is thus predicated upon the conduct of the borrower, it would seem immaterial that appellants lacked actual knowledge of the identity of the lender, however chargeable they may have been with knowledge of the lender’s identity which was ascertainable from the recorded first 'deed of trust. The main consideration is that appellants were induced by the borrower to rely on the loan fund for payment. Under the rule of the A-1 Door case, an equitable lien may be imposed on the fund if either the borrower or the lender induced persons in the position of appellants. (A-1 Door & Materials Co. v. Fresno Guar. Sav. & Loan Assn., supra, 61 Cal.2d 728, 732.)
To summarize, it would seem that the trial court decided that the four defendant lien claimants had equitable liens assertible against the loan fund but that such liens were junior to respondent Santa Clara Savings’ right to resort to the fund to satisfy any deficiency arising after a sale under its deed of trust. We therefore reach the crucial question whether this determination of priority should be upheld. We have concluded that it should not be.
We think that the equitable principles given recognition in Smith, Ready Cut Homes and A-1 Door justify the conclusion that, where suppliers of labor or materials have been induced to rely on the loan fund by either the borrower or the lender, their equitable liens on the fund should have priority over the claims of both of such last mentioned persons to the fund. Basically it is the fund itself and the arrangement for progress payments therefrom, created by the mutual agreement of the borrower and the lender, that constitutes the material inducement to the subcontractors and materialmen. (Smith v. Anglo-California Trust Co., supra, 205 Cal. 496, 503.) As the court said in Ready Cut Homes: “The essential basis of the opinion [in Smith] is the justifiable reliance on the fund by the lien claimants.” (Italics added.) (Pacific Ready Cut Homes, Inc. v. Title Ins. & Trust Co., supra, 216 Cal. 447, 450.)
Reliance on the fund having been established, we can find no equitable consideration compelling a preferential position for the fundholder such as respondent herein who conjointly with the borrower was responsible for the existence of the very arrangement which became a material inducement to the lien claimants. Respondent by its first (construction loan) deed of trust occupied the paramount position of senior encumbrancer. Junior to its encumbrance but senior to appellants’ liens was *842the second (purchase money) deed of trust, of which respondent lender was fully aware. Appellants, therefore, faced the precarious situation of contributing labor and materials to property heavily encumbered by two loans and the dim prospect of asserting claims of mechanics’ liens clearly subordinate to both. On the evidence before us they were told by the borrower that they would be paid from the loan funds. Clearly, every consideration based on equity and good conscience precluded the borrower from claiming priority over them. What equitable consideration dictated a more favorable treatment for the lender ? The lender had already protected itself with a first priority encumbrance on the property. Indeed it was because of such preferred positions of both lender and sellers that the remedy of equitable lien was judicially created for the protection of subcontractors and materialmen in this type of situation. Respondent not only occupied this favored position but under the terms of the loan agreement had full control of the loan funds and of the progress payments to be disbursed therefrom. Respondent was therefore in a commanding position to employ well known and commonly accepted business and fiscal methods11 to prevent the diversion or dilution of the progress payments by the owners to the prejudice of appellants. Since the progress payments were in fact what they were denominated, that is payments as the work reached specified stages of completion, and since they were disbursed only after respondent was satisfied by an inspection of the property that such stages had been reached, it would be naive to speculate that respondent might be unaware of any reliance on the loan funds by persons contributing to the progress of the work. In the instant case, respondent Santa Clara Savings occupied a preferred and secure position by virtue of its first deed of trust and full control of the loan funds. It does not seem to us to be consonant with the philosophy expounded in Smith to grant still another prior lien on the loan funds themselves to such a lender-fund holder who despite its dominant position in the arrangements and its apparent sophistication in commercial financing had chosen not to protect its preferred position but would nevertheless claim the benefits that the labor and materials of others have contributed to the property. (Miller v. Mountain View Sav. & Loan Assn., supra, 238 Cal.App.2d 644, 658-659; see Rossman Mill & Lbr. Co. v. Fullerton Sav. & *843Loan Assn. (1963) 221 Cal.App.2d 705, 710 [34 Cal.Rptr. 644]; 12 U.C.L.A. L.Rev. 1246, 1252-1253; 1 Miller & Starr, Current Law of Cal. Real Estate (1965) pp. 614-615.)
Under the circumstances, therefore, we can find no transcendent equitable consideration favorable to respondent in the fact that the representations made to appellants as to the payment of their claims emanated from the borrower and not the lender or in the fact that respondent sat back in serene detachment awaiting the proper time for the disbursement of the funds. As we have said, although appellants ground their reliance on statements made by the owners, the significant circumstance is the reliance on the fund which existed by the joint acts and mutual agreement of both the owners and the lender.
In this connection, the following language from Smith is apposite: 11 That the lien claimants must have relied upon the fund to be advanced to Smith by the securities company, and not alone upon the individual capacity of Smith or their right to a last lien upon the premises, as a means of obtaining payment for their labor and materials, is supported by every reasonable inference deducible from the surrounding circumstances. Smith was engaged in building upon land for which he had not paid the purchase price and which was charged with and subject to the several deeds of trust executed and delivered to secure the entire purchase money. The incapacity of Smith to build without a prearranged loan was emphasized by the existence of these purchase-money encumbrances and attested by the agreement with the securities compan/y for a loan to be used expressly for building purposes. It is also reasonably apparent from the record herein that this loan could not have been obtained without giving the deed of trust for its security priority over the purchase-money deeds of trust. ... It requires very little showing, therefore, to produce the conclusion that without confidence in the payment to Smith of the full amount of the loan contracted for the lien claimants would not have extended credit for their labor and materials. The reasonableness of such expectations on the part of the lien claimants must, naturally, have suggested itself both to Smith and the securities company. They should have known that the consummated agreement for the money to be advanced to or on behalf of Smith as the buildings progressed, under a deed of trust taking priority over the statutory liens available to those contracting with him or the general contractor, would constitute a material inducement to them in *844supplying labor and materials. As if in express recognition of the reasonableness of these expectations, the practice was to make payments from, or withdrawals upon, the building loan account only as the work progressed and after the appraiser for the securities company had, in the line of his duty, reported progress warranting a payment. . . . Smith and the securities company by their conduct may be said to have induced, or contributed to induce, the lien claimants to enhance the value of the real property by their labors and materials, and it would be inequitable and unjtist, it seems to us, to permit Smith or his personal representative to withhold, at this time, any part of the fund upon which the lien claimants must surely have relied for reimbursement.” (Italics added.) (205 Cal. at pp. 502-504.)
The instant facts are strikingly similar. Here the Petersens made only a $100 down payment on the property and gave a deed of trust to secure payment of the balance of the purchase price. Here, too, obviously lacking finances to build the house, they obtained a construction loan from respondent, giving as security for such obligation a deed of trust with seniority over the purchase money deed of trust. As in Smith, with both deeds of trust having priority over statutory liens, both the borrower and lender should have realized that the resultant system of progress payments would constitute a material inducement to appellants in supplying labor and materials. As in Smith, arrangements in the instant ease called for the making of progress payments from the loan account only after respondent-lender had satisfied itself as to the progress of the work.12 Finally, it is undisputed that appellants enhanced the value of the property by their labors and materials.
*845Ready Cut Homes is also persuasive. There the plaintiff and others filed liens against the property and the defendant-lender pursuant to its loan agreement applied the unexpended balance in the loan account to reduce the balance of principal and interest due on the loan. Thereafter the borrowers (owners) defaulted and the lender elected to have the property sold under its deed of trust. Plaintiff, a materialman, sued to enjoin the trustees’ sale and to subject the unexpended balance of the loan to an equitable lien in its favor. Judgment denying recovery was reversed with directions that judgment be entered in the plaintiff’s favor. Rejecting the lender’s contention that the Smith ease was distinguishable since it involved a conflict between lien claimants and the borrower rather than between such claimants and the lender, the court said: “However, the equitable considerations are identical with those presented in the former case. The defendant mortgage company, having received the benefit of plaintiff’s performance in the form of a completed building and therefore a more valuable security for its note, is not justified in withholding or appropriating to any other use money originally intended to be used to pay for such performance, and relied upon by plaintiff in rendering its performance. The theory of equitable lien, as laid down in the Smith case, is quite broad (see 17 Cal.L.Rev. 411), and it is fully applicable to the instant case.’’ (216 Cal. at pp. 451-452.)
We conclude that where, as here, persons supplying labor and materials to the property have been induced by either the borrower or the lender to rely on construction loan funds for payment, it comports with justice and fair dealing that their equitable lien assertible against such funds should have priority over any claims of the borrower and the lender by whose joint agreement the construction financing was provided, implemented and carried out.
Respondent argues that both Smith and Ready Cut Homes are inapplicable herein because in each of those cases the building was completed. As we recently pointed out in Miller v. Mountain View Sav. & Loan Assn., supra, 238 Cal.App.2d 644, 664, the building involved in A-1 Door was not completed and the Supreme Court, although reversing as to the equitable liens, nevertheless “did not indicate that an equitable lien could not exist in the absence of a completed building.
*846“In Pacific Ready Cut Somes the lender was expressly 'denied the right to offset the balance held against the principal of the loan to the detriment of the lien claimant. It is no great step to conclude that such offset should not be allowed even though the building is not complete, as was done by the district court of appeal in A-1 Door ((Cal.App.) 36 Cal.Rptr. 576, 583). The reasoning behind Smith and Pacific Beady Gut Somes is as applicable to the claimant putting in the foundation, or the rough plumbing, as it is to the carpenter driving the last spike.  All other factors being equal the rights of one contributing to the construction should not depend on the state thereof at which his contribution was made.
“The fact that the charge-back was made before respondent gave his notice, filed his lien, or filed his action should not affect the matter; nor does the fact that appellant recorded notice of default and election to sell. Both of these events transpired in Pacific Ready Cut Homes before suit was filed.” (238 Cal.App.2d at p. 664.)
We hold that appellants McBain, Gray and Doud Lumber Co. had equitable liens against the $6,948.44 unexpended balance of the loan funds together with any accruals thereon (hereafter collectively referred to as “loan funds”) which liens had priority over any right of respondent Santa Clara Savings to apply said loan funds to the indebtedness of the Petersens owing and due to said respondent; and that said appellants are entitled to a judgment ordering payment from said loan funds in the amount of their respective claims, together with interest and costs. The judgment must therefore be reversed.
The judgment in favor of appellants shall provide for interest on the amounts of their claims computed at legal rates from the respective dates such obligations became due from the Petersens (Civ. Code, §§ 3287, 3302) or from the date of entry of any judgment heretofore obtained by appellants against the Petersens establishing their said claims, as the ease may be. The record now before us, while reflecting the commencement by appellants of actions to foreclose mechanics ’ liens, does not furnish us with sufficient information to specify herein the dates from which interest shall be computed. On remand, the court should determine such dates either from evidence already received or, if none, by the receipt of additional evidence or by proper judicial notice. In the event that the total of the amounts to which appellants are thus entitled exceeds such loan funds, the judgment ordered herein shall provide *847for the pro-ration thereof so that the total amount recoverable by appellants shall equal but not exceed said loan funds.
Notwithstanding the fact that appellants have appealed from the judgment “and from the whole thereof,” the nonappealing lien claimant is not entitled to derive any benefit from our reversal of the judgment. (Smith v. Anglo-California Trust Co., supra, 205 Cal. 496, 505.) As to such nonappealing defendant (Williams & Russo) and as to plaintiffs, the determination of priority by the trial court shall remain unaffected by the reversal.  Appellant McBain is entitled to no priority over the other appellants because of his having served an unbonded stop notice as previously noted. Nor is his right to recover as ordered herein predicated in any way on such stop notice. We reject McBain’s claims predicated thereon. Since he failed to file a bond with his stop notice, he is precluded from obtaining relief under the applicable statute. (Code Civ. Proc., § 1190.1, subd. (h); Miller v. Mountain View Sav. & Loan Assn., supra, 238 Cal.App.2d 644, 661.) His further claim that respondent voluntarily withheld the loan funds on his behalf pursuant to the stop notice is without any foundation in the record.
The judgment is reversed and the cause is remanded to the trial court with directions to amend its findings of fact and conclusions of law and to enter judgment in favor of appellants in conformity with the views herein expressed. Appellants shall recover costs on appeal.
Molinari, J., concurred.
We will accept this total as agreed upon by the parties, although the items of disbursement appearing in the record total only $11,735.14.
These were; John G. McBain..................$ 616.00 L. D. Gray...................... 1,038.00 Doud Lumber. Co................. 2,121.91 Williams & Busso................. 535.68 $4,311.59 The foregoing amounts do not include interest or costs.
That is, McBain, Gray and Bond Lumber Co., hereafter referred to as appellants.
Defendants Petersen were apparently in default and did not participate in the trial.
The court set aside the submission of the ease and received the foregoing evidence pursuant to written stipulations entered into by the parties and filed in the proceedings on January 17, 1963, and January 30, 1964. After the initial submission of the case on August 1, 1962 no further testimony was taken.
The court also found that only defendant McBain served a stop notice on Santa Clara Savings and none of the lien claimants filed a bond as provided by Code of Civil Procedure, section 1190.1.
As previously noted, lien claimant Williams & Busso did not appeal.
"Mr. Christy : X don’t plan to call Mr. Zane of the Savings & Loan, your Honor, hut I think there are some counsel who want to ask questions of him. I would like to get him on and out. ’ ’
Cf. Miller v. Mountain View Sav. & Loan Assn., supra, 238 Cal.App.2d 644, 663, where the trial court “found as a fact that respondent did the work ‘in reliance upon the building and loan fund’ and incorporated a similar conclusion of law.’’ (Fn. omitted.)
The conclusions of law were to the same general effect: that respondent “then properly applied the total unexpended balance it had on hand to the satisfaction of that deficiency, leaving no excess to be distributed to defendant lien claimants. In doing so, the Association was exercising its 1 bankers lien ’ against the unexpended balance. ’ ’
In this connection see opinion of this court in Miller v. Mountain View Sav. & Loan Assn., supra, 238 Cal.App.2d 644, 658-659.
The record establishes not only a loan agreement between the Peter-sens and respondent but also pursuant thereto written instructions by the former to the latter covering disbursements to be made under the construction loan. At the time respondent set up the loan on its books, it made up two ledger cards—one, a "Loan Account Ledger’ ’ on which were to be recorded payments by the borrowers (Petersens) ; and the other 11 an incomplete loan ledger card, which is made up for the disbursements. ’ ’ After the loan was made and the amount thereof entered on the loan account ledger, the borrowers could not withdraw the funds until they had performed the various stages of construction. The amount of the loan ($19,000) was "set aside in the incomplete loan account’’ over which respondent had complete control and from which it was obligated to make progress payments as the work was completed. As we have said, under this arrangement three progress payments were made by respondent to the Petersens as the building reached various stages of completion, the lender in each instance satisfying itself by an inspection of the premises that the proper amount of work had been done. N.B. This and other evidence referred to was introduced through the witness Zane, an employee of respondent who handled the entire'transae*845tion. Apropos our previous remarks on respondent’s passive position at the trial, it is noteworthy that Zane was called by plaintiffs and recalled by the court but never called by respondent itself.

=== CASE 9737464 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:26:01.540274+00 ===

SIMS, J.
I dissent. This case involves the question of an equitable lien against a loan account created by the lender. There are on the one hand equitable rights against the borrower which the claimants may assert against funds which the lender acknowledges, or which in fact, are held for the borrower ’s account. (Smith v. Anglo-California Trust Co., 205 Cal. 496, 502 [271 P. 898].) There also may be equitable rights against the lender which are created by his express or implied representations that the funds will be paid or applied for the account of the claimants. In Pacific Ready Cut Homes, Inc. v. Title Ins. & Trust Co., the court held that the uncontradicted evidence compelled such a conclusion (216 Cal. 447, 451); and in Miller v. Mountain View Sav. & Loan Assn. it was noted: “In setting up this system of making payments appellant [lender] can be charged with inducing reliance on the payments it would make, and respondent can be said to have *848relied on the payments to be made to its escrow agent by a financial institution, even though he did not then know its identity. The evidence is sufficient to sustain the findings and conclusions of the trial court.” (238 Cal.App.2d 644, 663.)
Here the evidence set forth in the majority opinion justifies, if not compels, a finding that the claimants have equities superior to the borrower in respect of any loan funds that would be available to him (Smith v. Anglo-California Trust Co., supra). One searches in vain, however, for any evidence which would support, much less compel, findings contrary to those implied from the decision of the trial court, to wit: that the lender had done nothing to indicate that he would do other than pay the loan funds out to the borrower-builder in accordance with the stages of progress of the work, and that all progress payments so ‘due had been paid.
The policy reasons for making the lender an insurer of payment to lien claimants are persuasive and attractive. The Legislature, however, by acting to create a system wherein a claimant may protect himself by giving a stop notice, has halted short of adopting this concept. The courts have been vigilant to protect the claimants where the lender has in any manner led them to expect payment from him, but this ease would plow fields heretofore left uncultivated. Since the lender must generally look to the land and improvements for rapayment of his original advance and any amounts he is compelled to pay out to equitable lienholders, the effect of the decision is to give a mechanic’s lien claimant a priority over the lender with the first deed of trust, whenever he can show that the borrower—not necessarily the lender—induced him to rely on the loan fund.
In the absence of some estoppel or unjust enrichment that can be asserted against the lender, existing law does not require him to advance funds on terms to which he never agreed. I would affirm the findings and judgment of the lower court which are sustained by the record.
Respondent’s petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied June 29, 1966.

=== CASE 2210588 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:55.406011+00 ===

241 Cal.App.2d 283 (1966)
EVELYN BOWLES et al., Plaintiffs and Respondents,
v.
ANDREW R. ANTONETTI et al., Defendants and Appellants.
Civ. No. 22723.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. Three.
Mar. 31, 1966.
Donald O. May, Murphy & Adams, Landels, Ripley, Gregory & Diamond and Edward D. Landels for Defendants and Appellants.
Wool, Richardson & Colbert and James R. Sherman for Plaintiffs and Respondents.
SALSMAN, J.
The superior court entered judgment directing that a writ of mandate issue to compel the city council of the City of Capitola to annul a resolution adopted by it vacating a 10-foot strip of a public street known as Grand Avenue. The city appeals.
Grand Avenue is a public street in the City of Capitola, running generally in an east-west direction. Respondents own property on the north side of Grand Avenue, between Central and Cliff Avenues. Mr. and Mrs. Kaufmann own property on the south side of Grand Avenue between Central and Cliff. Grand Avenue was originally 60 feet in width. Some time prior to April 15, 1964, the Kaufmanns requested the city planning commission of Capitola to consider abandoning 20 feet on the southerly side of Grand Avenue because they intended to build an apartment house on their property. The city engineer reported to the planning commission that a 50-foot *285 right of way along Grand Avenue was all that was required for street purposes. The planning commission then recommended to the council that "... ten (10) feet of the Grand Avenue right of way be reconveyed to the Kaufmanns." The report of the planning commission was discussed by the council, but the council continued the matter until its next meeting. Before the next meeting, the councilmen studied the problem, and some of them visited and inspected the area proposed to be abandoned. At the following meeting of the council there was public discussion of the question, after which the council decided to take the necessary steps to abandon a portion of Grand Avenue along its southerly line. The proper resolutions were adopted, and a time and place fixed for a public hearing. Thereafter a public hearing was held, at which time the council was advised by the city engineer that a 50-foot right of way along Grand Avenue was sufficient to carry the traffic in that area. He further advised the council that the 10 feet proposed to be abandoned should run along the south side of Grand Avenue because the property along that side was subject to considerable erosion along the entire length of the street. Council minutes reflect the comment of one councilman to the effect that, if the city did not need the wider street, abandonment of a portion would reduce the city's expense of upkeep. At the conclusion of the public hearing the council adopted a resolution ordering vacation of a 10-foot strip of Grand Avenue along its southerly line, and directing the mayor and city clerk to execute and record the order of vacation. Thereupon respondents began this action, seeking mandate to compel the city council to rescind its resolution.
The superior court found that "... in adopting said ordinance and said order, [the city council] acted arbitrarily, capriciously, and in abuse of their discretion and wholly and solely for the purpose and with the result of benefitting Mr. and Mrs. Royce S. Kauffman and not in the interest or convenience of the public." The court then directed the issuance of a writ of mandate "... commanding respondents to annul their Resolution No. 666 abandoning and declaring vacant and no longer a public street ..." the 10-foot strip along the southerly line of Grand Avenue, and further commanding respondents "... to annul the order of vacation. ..." theretofore executed by the mayor and the city clerk.
Several contentions are made on appeal, among them that the trial court had no jurisdiction to issue the writ of mandate *286 in the form in which it was issued, and that the evidence does not support the findings or the judgment. These contentions have merit. Appellants also urge that necessary and indispensable parties were not before the court, but because we have concluded that the judgment must be reversed on the grounds stated, we need not consider the claim that indispensable parties have been omitted from the proceedings.
The writ of mandamus may be issued "... to compel the performance of an act which the law specifically enjoins, as a duty resulting from an office, trust, or station; ..." (Code Civ. Proc.,  1085.) [1] While the writ does not lie to control discretion conferred upon a public officer or agency (Lindell Co. v. Board of Permit Appeals, 23 Cal.2d 303, 315 [144 P.2d 4]; Faulkner v. California Toll Bridge Authority, 40 Cal.2d 317 [253 P.2d 659]), it will issue upon a showing of fraud, arbitrary action or an abuse of discretion. (Baldwin-Lima-Hamilton Corp. v. Superior Court, 208 Cal.App.2d 803, 823 [25 Cal.Rptr. 798].) [2] It is also recognized that vacating a street or a portion of a street is a legislative act (Beals v. City of Los Angeles, 23 Cal.2d 381 [144 P.2d 839]; People v. City of San Rafael, 95 Cal.App. 733, 739 [273 P. 138]), and that the act of a city council in vacating a street may not be set aside save where the city council has acted fraudulently, arbitrarily, or in abuse of its discretion. Where such is the case, in a proper proceeding, the act of the city council may be declared void. (See People v. City of Los Angeles, 62 Cal.App. 781 [218 P. 63].) In City Council v. Superior Court, 179 Cal.App.2d 389 [3 Cal.Rptr. 796], the court noted that where the action taken by a legislative body, such as a city council, is fraudulent, or unreasonable and arbitrary so as to constitute an abuse of discretion, a court may interfere with legislative action, but only in a fashion which is directed towards undoing what the legislative body has done, "... not toward directing it to perform an act which is prospective in operation." (Id p. 394.) Undoing what the legislative body has done may be accomplished by a judgment declaring the legislative act void, as was done in People v. Los Angeles, supra, 62 Cal.App. 781. But here the court did not enter a judgment declaring appellants' resolution vacating the street void. It issued mandate to compel the city council to annul its resolution. The only way in which respondents can comply with the trial court's order is by the performance of other legislative acts, namely, to pass resolutions annulling its previous resolution and setting aside the mayor's act in executing *287 the order of vacation. Thus the writ would command the city council to perform legislative acts in a particular manner. [3] It is a widely accepted rule that the writ of mandamus may not be employed to achieve this result. (See Lindell Co. v. Board of Permit Appeals, supra; Redding v. City of Los Angeles, 81 Cal.App.2d 888, 894 [185 P.2d 430]; Tandy v. City of Oakland, 208 Cal.App.2d 609 [25 Cal.Rptr. 429]; Johanson v. City Council, 222 Cal.App.2d 68, 72 [34 Cal.Rptr. 798].) We therefore conclude that the trial court did not have jurisdiction to issue the writ of mandate.
[4a] As we have noted, the trial court found that respondents, in enacting the resolution vacating a portion of the street, acted arbitrarily, capriciously and in abuse of their discretion, and wholly for the benefit of the Kaufmanns. Appellants contend that the evidence before the trial court does not support this finding. We agree.
[5] It must be remembered that, in reviewing the acts of the city council, and considering their propriety, the trial court was limited to a review of the evidence before the council. A trial de novo was not warranted. The court had no authority to weigh the evidence and to make its own independent findings and conclusions concerning its sufficiency. Its power of review was limited to determining whether there was substantial evidence before the city council to support its decision. (Albonico v. Madera Irr. Dist., 53 Cal.2d 735, 739 [3 Cal.Rptr. 343, 350 P.2d 95]; Thompson v. City of Long Beach, 41 Cal.2d 235, 239-240 [259 P.2d 649]; Dumas v. City of Sunnyvale, 231 Cal.App.2d 796, 800 [42 Cal.Rptr. 302].)
[4b] The issue before the city council when it adopted its resolution abandoning a portion of the public street was simply whether the portion abandoned was "... unnecessary for present or prospective public street purposes. ..." (Sts. & Hy. Code,  8323.) If it was unnecessary for such purposes, then the council had authority to abandon it. (People v. City of San Rafael, supra, 95 Cal.App. 733, 738-739.) The evidence we have heretofore recited, all of which was before the city council and the trial court, clearly discloses substantial evidence sufficient to justify the council in vacating a portion of the street. We have reviewed the record in its entirety, and find no evidence whatsoever of fraud or any conduct on the part of the city council that can reasonably be designated as arbitrary or capricious.
[6] Respondents contend, as they did in the trial court, that *288 the council's abandonment of a portion of the public street was solely for the benefit of the Kaufmanns, and they point to the evidence which persuaded the trial court to agree with them. Respondents cite and strongly rely upon People v. City of Los Angeles, supra, 62 Cal.App. 781. That case, however, is readily distinguishable from the one we now consider. There the city council acted contrary to the advice of the city engineer, who had reported that the street proposed to be vacated was extensively used by the public. The court concluded that the city council had in effect sold the entire public street to a private property owner. But here the issue before the city council was whether or not the portion of the street abandoned was "unnecessary for present or prospective public street purposes." In resolving this issue, the members of the council could take into consideration their own observations and knowledge of the area, derived from their personal inspection of it, as well as the opinion of the city engineer and the planning commission. They could also take into consideration, as one councilman remarked, that the city would be spared the expense of maintaining that portion of the street found unnecessary for street purposes. (See City of Los Angeles v. Superior Court, 51 Cal.2d 423, 437 [333 P.2d 745].) Of course, it is true that proceedings looking towards abandonment of a portion of the street were instituted by the Kaufmanns, and they will benefit by the council's action. But the mere fact that an adjoining property owner urges abandonment of a portion of a public street and stands to benefit if the abandonment is accomplished, is not evidence of fraud. Nor is the fact that such a request is granted evidence of arbitrary and capricious action on the part of the governing body having jurisdiction over the street. (See People v. City of Pomona, 88 Cal.App.2d 460, 462 [198 P.2d 959, 200 P.2d 176], and cases cited.) The issue of present and future necessity on the part of the public for use of the street proposed to be abandoned must be decided by the governing body on the basis of the evidence before it, and where the action is taken in good faith and without collusion between the governing body and the private landowner, the action is conclusive, and the courts are without power to interfere with it. (People v. City of Pomona, supra, 88 Cal.App.2d 460.) Here, as we have indicated, substantial evidence supports the action taken by the city council. In the absence, therefore, of an affirmative showing of fraud, or arbitrary and capricious action amounting to an abuse of discretion, its action must be upheld. *289
Since appellants have appealed from the judgment, their purported appeal from the order denying their motion to set aside the judgment is dismissed. Under circumstances here present, that order is not appealable.
The judgment is reversed. Appellants to recover costs on appeal.
Draper, P. J., and Devine, J., concurred.

=== CASE 2210594 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:55.500383+00 ===

463 N.W.2d 920 (1990)
CITY OF STANLEY, North Dakota, Plaintiff and Appellee,
v.
Monroe D. EARSLEY, Defendant and Appellant.
Cr. No. 900101.
Supreme Court of North Dakota.
December 17, 1990.
Jonathan R. Byers, Stanley, for plaintiff and appellee, submitted on brief.
Schoppert Law Firm, Minot, for defendant and appellant, argued by Thomas K. Schoppert.
GIERKE, Justice.
Monroe Earsley appeals from a County Court judgment of conviction for actual physical control with a blood alcohol content *921 of over .10%.[1] We affirm.
On December 19, 1988, Officer Allan Beehler received a radio dispatch indicating that there was a possible drunk driver traveling on U.S. Hwy. # 2 westbound from Blaisdell to Stanley and was given the license number of the vehicle. Officer Beehler saw the vehicle in the westbound lane, followed it and activated his red lights. The vehicle parked on an approach. When Officer Beehler approached the vehicle, he ascertained that the driver was Earsley, observed that the keys were in the ignition and he detected an odor of alcohol on Earsley's breath. Earsley failed oral sobriety tests and was arrested for actual physical control of a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor. Thereafter, he was transported to the Stanley Hospital for a blood test. The blood test result showed that Earsley had a blood alcohol content of .31% and was introduced into evidence.
On appeal, Earsley argues that the results of his blood test should not have been admitted into evidence because the State failed to show that the test was fairly administered and because the State allegedly used perjured testimony by way of affidavit to show compliance with the State Toxicologist's directions. He requests a new trial.
Blood sample test results are admissible under Section 39-20-07, N.D.C.C., only after the proponent establishes fair administration of the test. Fair administration may only be established through proof of compliance with the State Toxicologist's directions which go to the scientific accuracy of the test or through expert testimony establishing the scientific accuracy of the test. Schwind v. Department of Transportation, 462 N.W.2d 147, (N.D. 1990).
The State Toxicologist has drafted a 9-step process for collecting and submitting blood samples. State v. Schwalk, 430 N.W.2d 317, 322 (N.D.1988). As part of the 9-step process for blood sample collections, the State Toxicologist requires the use of a "non alcoholic, non volatile skin disinfectant". This requirement was explained in a memorandum issued by the State Toxicologist on July 25, 1988 to "Emergency Room Supervisors", which stated in relevant part:
"[O]ur recommendation was to use a `non alcoholic, non volatile skin disinfectant'. Aqueous solutions of chlorhexidine povidone iodine, quaternary ammonium compounds, germicidel soaps, etc. are quite satisfactory for this purpose and fit the description of `non alcoholic, non volatile skin disinfectant'. In fact, any disinfectant or antiseptic solution marketed for this purpose that does not contain low boiling alcohols like ethyl, methyl, propyl, isopropyl, etc. and volatile organic compounds like ether, chloroform, benzene, acetone, etc. is suitable."
David Schiele, the medical lab technician who collected Earsley's blood sample, stated in his affidavit dated December 6, 1989 that he scrupulously complied with the State Toxicologist's directives for blood sample collection by following these methods: "(c) that a non-alcoholic, non-volatile skin disinfectant known as Zephirin [sic] Chloride was used." This evidence goes to the State's showing that the blood test was fairly administered. Earsley failed to offer any evidence to contradict the evidence of fair administration of the test under Section 39-20-07, N.D. C.C. The trial court may properly refuse to allow evidence of a test report not "properly obtained and fairly administered" if there is evidence that establishes either defect. State v. Vetsch, 368 N.W.2d 547, 549 (N.D.1985). Compare, Glaspey v. Backes, 462 N.W.2d 635 (N.D.1990), where we reversed the judgment of the district court upholding the administrative suspension of Glaspey's drivers license.[2]
*922 Accordingly, the trial court properly admitted the test results into evidence. If Earsley wished to discredit the test results with evidence that the Zephiran Chloride contained alcohol, it was his responsibility to produce such evidence at the time of trial. See, Pladson v. Hjelle, 368 N.W.2d 508, 513 (N.D.1985). We conclude that the blood test was shown to be fairly administered and that the trial court, therefore, did not err in allowing the blood test result into evidence.
After the trial in this case, Earsley moved for a new trial, alleging that the prosecutor, Jonathan Byers, submitted perjured testimony and showed that in an earlier trial (State v. Wenker, Criminal # 6548) before the same trial judge, Rick Wanderi of the State Toxicologist's Office testified that the Zephiran Chloride solution contained alcohol. However, it contained a small quantity of alcohol which would not interfere with the test that is run in the State Toxicologist laboratory. He further testified that Zephiran Chloride is a form of benzalkonium chloride which is listed as a quaternary ammonium compound. The use of quaternary ammonium compounds is permitted according to the State Toxicologist's July 25, 1988 memorandum. The simple fact that the Zephiran Chloride solution used in State v. Wenker contained alcohol does not necessarily mean that the Zephiran Chloride solution in this case contained alcohol.
We conclude that Earsley has not shown that the prosecutor or the medical technician presented perjured testimony regarding the Zephiran Chloride solution used in this case.
Because Earsley was not foreclosed from showing scientific unreliability of the test report at the trial and because the trial court did not abuse its discretion in admitting the test results the judgment of conviction is affirmed.
ERICKSTAD, C.J., and VANDE WALLE, LEVINE and MESCHKE, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  The jury found Earsley guilty of actual physical control of a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor. The error in the notice of appeal is technical and does not affect its validity.
[2]  In Glaspey the medical lab technician acknowledged that she didn't know if the skin disinfectant used was non-alcoholic. We held that the State's failure to show that the blood sample was drawn in accordance with the State Toxicologist's directive for use of a non-alcoholic disinfectant rendered the test results inadmissible.

=== CASE 9737465 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:26:04.631918+00 ===

Per Curiam.
Defendant, Steave Baltimore, appeals a jury verdict finding him guilty of two counts of unlawful possession with intent to deliver a controlled substance, contrary to Neb. Rev. Stat. § 28-416 (Cum. Supp. 1988). One count was a Class III felony, the other a Class IV felony. The defendant was sentenced to two concurrent terms of imprisonment for 5 years.
Defendant assigns as error (1) the admission of evidence contrary to Neb. Rev. Stat. § 27-403 (Reissue 1989), (2) the sustaining of the State’s motion in limine regarding the introduction of alleged exculpatory evidence, (3) the allowing of a strike by the prosecutor of a black prospective juror from the jury panel, (4) the denying of defendant’s motion for a mistrial, and (5) the excessiveness of the sentences. We reverse.
Undercover Police Officer Kevan Barbour testified that on the evening of August 31, 1988, at approximately 9 o’clock, he was walking past a residence located at 2517 Burdette Street in Omaha. He stated that the defendant, who was sitting on the front porch, called him, Barbour, off the street. The defendant said to “come over to this side.” Barbour asked the defendant “if anything was happening,” at which time the defendant produced a rolled-up cigarette package and asked Barbour what he needed. Barbour replied that he wanted a 50-cent piece, street talk for a $50 “rock” of crack cocaine. The defendant put the cigarette package away and told Barbour that he did not sell crack.
Barbour then walked away, but knew that soon afterward members of the narcotics unit would execute a search warrant at this same residence. Later that evening, Barbour was directed by his commanding officer to conduct a “reverse sting operation” at that same residence. This is a procedure whereby undercover police officers locate themselves at an area where they believe parties are coming to buy illegal drugs and then the officers make the sales. Barbour returned to the Burdette Street *738residence, seated himself on the same porch, and at approximately 10:15 p.m. sold two Ritalin and two Tal win tablets, both controlled substances, to a third party, Eric McGee. The defendant was no longer at this location. This testimony was received over the objection of the defendant as to “relevancy, foundation, relief under 403.”
On cross-examination Barbour admitted that he did not know if the utilities at the residence were registered to the defendant, nor did he know who owned the particular property. There was no evidence that the defendant permanently resided at these premises.
On redirect examination Barbour was permitted to testify over objection that in street terms the phrase “Is anything happening?” as used by people in the drug culture means “are you — do you have any type of drugs for sale, or are you in pocket?” His testimony in this regard was based on his experience in police work for over 5 years, with participation in approximately 75 setup drug sales.
According to a stipulation between the parties, if a certain representative of the Omaha Public Power District were called to testify, that testimony would be that service was provided to this particular residence and billed to a party by the name of Lola Harris.
William Ihm, a chemist, identified certain pills or tablets contained in an envelope marked exhibit 5 as Ritalin and Talwin, both controlled substances.
Kurt Sorys, an Omaha police officer, testified that he was part of the team which executed a search warrant at 2517 Burdette Street on August 31, 1988. As Sorys approached the house, he saw the defendant and two women on the porch. He shined his flashlight at them and saw the defendant drop his right arm and with his hand make a “little kind of a toss or flicking action and an object left his hand.” Another officer, Dennis Clark, came to the scene in about 5 or 10 seconds and was told by Sorys about the incident. Clark went over to the area right below the porch and retrieved a cigarette package.
Officer Clark testified as to his involvement in the execution of the search warrant and how he searched for and found the cigarette package on the ground. He identified that cigarette *739package as the one placed in the envelope marked exhibit 5.
The defendant did not testify. He did call as a witness a physician, an internal specialist, Jack Lewis, who testified to the fact that from his examination of the defendant he would not have been able to “toss, flip or throw an object with his right hand.”
By way of rebuttal, Dora McDavis was called by the State and testified that she saw the defendant once a month. She did not testify as to what her occupation might be or what was the occasion of her meetings with the defendant. However, defense counsel moved for a mistrial on the theory that “the testimony of Mrs. McDavis is that he has now shown a pattern of reporting, which is a kissing cousin to a probation officer inquiry and regiment.” The motion was overruled. McDavis testified that she observed the defendant write and smoke with his right hand. She admitted on cross-examination that defendant’s fingers did not move the pen; rather, his hand moved the pen.
We deal first with the reverse sting operation. Defendant argues that evidence of such an operation was prohibited by § 27-403, which provides as follows: “Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of cumulative evidence.”
The responsibility for maintaining the balance between the probative and the prejudicial effect of evidence is largely within the discretion of the trial court. State v. Ryan, 233 Neb. 74, 444 N.W.2d 610 (1989). We have also said innumerable times that a trial court’s ruling on the relevancy of evidence will not be disturbed on appeal unless there has been an abuse of discretion. State v. Porter, 235 Neb. 476, 455 N.W.2d 787 (1990). We take this opportunity to amplify or clarify this rule to state that as to evidence which is relevant, the decision of the trial court as to whether “its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of cumulative *740evidence,” § 27-403, will not be disturbed on appeal unless there has been an abuse of discretion.
However, the issue in this instance is purely one of relevance within Neb. Rev. Stat. § 27-401 (Reissue 1989): “Relevant evidence means evidence having any tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to the determination of the action more probable or less probable than it would be without the evidence.”
The State contends that Officer Barbour’s testimony presented facts from which a logical inference could be drawn that defendant was in the business of selling drugs. Defendant was at a particular location, 2517 Burdette Street, and whether or not he lived there or had any substantial interest in the premises, it was obvious that he was operating from that location on that occasion. Whether a location is one where drugs may customarily be purchased may also be determined by way of inference from stated facts, according to the State’s argument. In this instance, the third party who purchased drugs from Officer Barbour voluntarily came over to the front porch of the house and engaged in a dialogue with Barbour which resulted in the purchase of drugs.
There are two components to relevant evidence: materiality and probative value. Materiality looks to the relation between the propositions for which the evidence is offered and the issues in the case. If the evidence is offered to help prove a proposition which is not a matter in issue, the evidence is immaterial. What is “in issue,” that is, within the range of the litigated controversy, is determined mainly by the pleadings, read in the light of the rules of pleading and controlled by the substantive law----
The second aspect of relevance is probative value, the tendency of evidence to establish the proposition that it is offered to prove____
McCormick on Evidence § 185 at 541 (E. Cleary 3d ed. 1984).
[T]he function of the doctrine of relevance is to require that there be some rational connection between the evidence offered by a litigant and the legal rule on which he claims a right to recover.... “Relevancy... exists only as a relation between an item of evidence and a matter *741properly provable in the case.”
22 C. Wright & K. Graham, Federal Practice and Procedure: Evidence § 5164 at 37 (1978) (quoting Notes of Advisory Committee on Proposed Rules, Fed. R. Evid. 401). To be relevant, evidence must be rationally related to an issue by a likelihood, not a mere possibility, of proving or disproving the issue to be decided. State v. Robertson, 219 Neb. 782, 366 N.W.2d 429 (1985).
Barbour’s testimony regarding the sale to McGee was neither material nor probative. By the charge against Baltimore, the issue was whether he possessed Ritalin and Talwin with intent to distribute, deliver, or dispense the controlled substances. The sting operation at the house to which Baltimore had no connection, other than his sitting on the porch, did not tend to prove the issues in the prosecution, namely, Baltimore’s unlawful possession of a controlled substance and intent to distribute the controlled substance, and supplied no rational connection to a violation of the criminal statute under which the State sought Baltimore’s conviction.
Besides being immaterial, evidence concerning the sting operation lacked probative value, the second inquiry involved in a relevance determination.
“Probative value is a relative concept; the probative value of a piece of evidence involves a measurement of the degree to which the evidence persuades the trier of fact that the particular fact exists and the distance of the particular fact from the ultimate issues of the case.”
State v. Bostwick, 222 Neb. 631, 639, 385 N.W.2d 906, 912 (1986) (quoting Dolan, Rule 403: The Prejudice Rule in Evidence, 49 S. Cal. L. Rev. 222 (1976)). Quite obviously, evidence of the sting operation was offered to prove Baltimore’s involvement in similar controlled substance transactions at the Burdette Street residence. However, evidence of a controlled substance sale to an individual who had no association with Baltimore did not tend to prove Baltimore’s involvement in other controlled substance transactions which may have occurred at the residence where Barbour encountered Baltimore. Evidence of the sting operation presented facts which were far removed from the ultimate issues in the charge *742against Baltimore, which evidence, lacking probative value, was, therefore, irrelevant. “In sum, relevant evidence is evidence that in some degree advances the inquiry.” McCormick on Evidence, supra at 544. Here, the evidence did not.
In State v. Robertson, supra at 791, 366 N.W.2d at 435, we stated: “Our system of criminal justice does not recognize mere association as a premise for guilt.” The evidence about the sting operation was erroneously admitted.
Assuming, without deciding, that there was sufficient evidence to convict Baltimore of possession with intent to distribute or deliver, without the evidence of the reverse sting, we cannot say that the admission of the evidence of the reverse sting was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt in view of the minimal quality of that remaining evidence bearing on defendant’s intent. Error in admitting evidence in a criminal case is prejudicial unless the State proves that the error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. State v. Donaldson, 234 Neb. 683, 452 N.W.2d 531 (1990); State v. Cox, 231 Neb. 495, 437 N.W.2d 134 (1989).
We sustain the first assignment of error, and because this requires a reversal and new trial, we need not consider the other assigned errors, as they may not be involved in a second trial.
Reversed and remanded for a new trial.

=== CASE 9737467 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:26:04.872079+00 ===

OPINION
STATON, Judge
Michael and Sandra Serviss appeal the trial court’s grant of summary judgment in favor of the State of Indiana and the Indiana Department of Natural Éesources (collectively, the “State”). The Servisses raise four issues on appeal. We address two disposi-tive issues:
I. Whether the trial court erred by concluding that the State was immune from liability because it -\yas performing a discretionary function.
II. Whether the trial court erred by concluding that any duty owed by the . State was owed to the public, instead of privately to the Servisses.
We reverse and remand.
The facts most favorable to the non-mov-ants reveal that Michael and Sandra Serviss went to Indiana Dunes State Park to go sledding. The Servisses paid a fee to enter the park and .were informed by a park employee that sledding was . permitted only at a hill known as Devil’s Slide. While Sandra was walking along a pedestrian walkway on the side of the hill, she was struck by a sled and injured. The Servisses filed a complaint against the State, arguing that its negligence caused Sandra’s injuries. The State sought summary júdgment, which the trial court granted. This appeal ensued.
Summary judgment is appropriate only when there is no genuine issue of material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Ind. Trial Rule 56(C). The burden is on the moving party to prove there are no genuine issues of material fact and he is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.' Once the movant has sustained this burden, the opponent must respond by setting forth specific facts showing a genuine issue for trial; he may not simply rest on the allegations of his pleadings. Stephenson v. Ledbetter, 596 N.E.2d 1369, 1371 (Ind.1992). - At the time of filing the motion or response, a party shall designate to the court all parts of pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, admissions, matters of judicial notice; and any other matters on *98which it relies for purposes of the motion. T.R. 56(C).
In this case, the trial court entered specific findings of fact and conclusions of law thereon. Specific findings and conclusions are neither required nor prohibited in the summary judgment context. Althaus v. Evansville Courier Co., 615 N.E.2d 441, 444 (Ind.Ct.App.1993), reh. denied. Although specific findings aid appellate review, they are not binding on this court. Id. Instead, when'reviewing an entry of summary judgment, we stand in the shoes of the trial court. We do not weigh evidence, but will consider the facts in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party. Reed v. Luzny, 627 N.E.2d 1362, 1363 (Ind.Ct.App.1994), reh. denied, trans. denied. We may sustain a summary judgment upon any theory supported by the designated materials. T.R. 56(C).
I.
Immunity
In granting the State summary judgment, the trial court concluded that the State was immune from liability because it had engaged in a discretionary function. The trial court concluded that the State was engaged in a discretionary function by allowing sledding on one hill in the park.
Governmental entities may be held liable for torts committed by their agencies or employees. Peavler v. Board of Comm’rs of Monroe County, 528 N.E.2d 40, 42 (Ind.1988). However, the Indiana Tort Claims Act (“ITCA”) protects governments from liability if a government’s conduct falls within certain statutorily-enumerated exceptions. Id.; Ind.Code § 34-4-16.5-3 (Supp.1997). IC 34-4-16.5-3(6) provides that a governmental entity is not liable for a loss that results from the performaneé of a discretionary function.
In determining whether governmental acts are discretionary, Indiana applies the “planning-operational” standard. Lake County Juvenile Court v. Swanson, 671 N.E.2d 429, 438 (Ind.Ct.App.1996), trans. denied, (citing Peavler, 528 N.E.2d at 46). Planning functions are discretionary and therefore shielded by immunity, while operational functions are not. Planning functions involve the formulation of basic policy characterized by official judgment, discretion, weighing of alternatives, and public policy choices. Id. Operational functions are characterized by the execution or implementation of previously formulated policy. Id.
A party seeking immunity has the burden of proving that its conduct falls within the exceptions set forth in the ITCA. Swanson, 671 N.E.2d at 438. In order to establish discretionary function immunity, the State is required to prove that “the challenged act or omission was a policy decision made by consciously balancing risks and benefits.” Id. at 439. This proof may come in the form of meeting minutes, testimony by the decision-makers regarding the process involved, or other documents showing that the governmental entity made an affirmative policy decision. Id.
In its motion for summary judgment, the State did not argue that it had discretionary function immunity. Accordingly, it designated no evidence regarding its decision to permit sledding at the park. There is simply no evidence in the record that the State made a policy decision by consciously balancing risks and benefits. Because the designated evidence does not reveal that the State made a policy decision, the trial court erred by concluding that the State was entitled to summary judgment based on discretionary function immunity.
II.
Duty
The Servisses’ claim against the State is based in negligence. In order to prevail, the Servisses must prove the elements of negligence, one of which is that the defendant owed the plaintiff a duty. Wickey v. Sparks, 642 N.E.2d 262, 265 (Ind.Ct.App.1994), trans. denied. The State argued in its motion for summary judgment that the Servisses cannot prevail because they cannot establish that the State owed them a private duty. The trial court agreed and granted the State *99summary judgment. The Servisses contend that the trial court erred.1
When a governmental entity is the defendant in a negligence action, a special consideration arises. If the governmental duty is one owed to the public at large, the plaintiff must prove that a special relationship exists between the parties in order to recover. Mullin v. Municipal City of South Bend, 639 N.E.2d 278, 283-84 (Ind.1994); Greathouse v. Armstrong, 616 N.E.2d 364, 368 (Ind.1993); Simpson’s Food Fair, Inc. v. City of Evansville, 149 Ind.App. 387, 272 N.E.2d 871, 873-74 (1971). In Mullin, the Indiana Supreme Court adopted a three-part test for determining whether this special relationship exists. Id. at 284.2 However, the three-part test does not apply where the plaintiff alleges that the governmental entity engaged in an affirmative act of negligence that created the plaintiffs perilous situation. Henshilwood v. Hendricks County, 653 N.E.2d 1062, 1067 (Ind.Ct.App.1995), trans. denied. In such a case, the affirmative act that creates the plaintiffs peril is sufficient to establish a private duty. Id. at 1068. Accordingly, there is no need to apply the Mullin test, which merely establishes whether an otherwise public duty, such as the duty to provide fire or police services, is converted into a private duty due to a special relationship between the parties.
The State contends that the trial court correctly applied the Mullin test to this case. We disagree. The Servisses allege that State employees failed to provide proper supervision of the sledding activities, that the State failed to warn pedestrians regarding the danger of sledding activities, and that the State failed to maintain a suitable walkway for pedestrians. The Servisses also allege that the State required them to sled on a particular hill, which was crowded with other people, and thereby increased the likelihood that they would be injured. Because the Servisses’ claim is based largely on the State’s failure to act, the State argues that the Servisses do not raise allegations of affirmative negligence.
In Henshilivood, we stated:
[T]he law recognizes a critical distinction between the failure to act, as in the failure to protect the welfare of citizens or to provide rescue services, and an affirmative act of negligence which in itself causes the plaintiffs harm. In the latter case, rather than a gratuitous undertaking to aid or alleviate the plaintiffs peril, the governmental entity has created the plaintiffs peril by some affirmative act.
Id. at 1068 (citations omitted). In deciding whether the Mullin test is applicable, the appropriate question to be asked is whether the plaintiffs complaint is based upon the governmental entity’s failure to act to alleviate the individual’s peril or whether it is based upon governmental action that caused the plaintiffs peril. If the plaintiff alleged the former, then the Mullin test must be applied to determine whether an otherwise public duty is converted into a private duty. However, if the plaintiff alleged the latter, then there is no need to apply the Mullin test because a private duty exists in the first instance.
Here, the Servisses allege that the State created their peril by requiring them to sled on a particular hill and by permitting sledding without taking adequate precautions, *100such as providing proper supervision, warnings, and an adequate pedestrian walkway. The fact that the Servisses couch their claim in terms of the State’s failure to act is of no moment. The Servisses do not claim that the State failed to adequately respond to Sandra’s peril after she was injured. Rather, they claim that the State’s own negligence caused Sandra to be injured in the first instance. This is an allegation of an affirmative act of negligence. See Henshilwood, 658 N.E.2d at 1068 (Mullin test inapplicable where alleged act of negligence was county’s failure to prevent ditch from overflowing and failure to warn property owners of high levels of E-Coli); Harkness v. Hall, 684 N.E.2d 1156, 1161 (Ind.Ct.App.1997) (Mullin test inapplicable where alleged act of negligence was county’s failure to maintain a roadway and bridge where an accident occurred); Kantz v. Elkhart County Highway Dep’t, 701 N.E.2d 608, 612 (Ind.Ct.App.1998), trans. denied (Mullin test inapplicable where alleged act of negligence was county’s failure to remove an obstruction that rendered a county road unsafe). But see, Aldridge v. Indiana Dep’t of Natural Resources, 694 N.E.2d 313, 316 (Ind.Ct.App.1998), trans. denied (Mullin test applies because campers alleged that the state negligently failed to trim a dead tree limb); McCormick v. State, 673 N.E.2d 829, 838 (Ind.Ct.App.1996) (Mullin test applies where plaintiff alleged that the state failed to provide adequate precautions to prevent boater from dying in an accident on public reservoir). Accordingly, the Mullin test is inapplicable because a public duty is not at issue. Under the facts of this case, we hold that the State owed the Servisses a private duty.
Reversed and remanded.
BAILEY, J., concurs.
FRIEDLANDER, J., dissents with separate opinion.
. The Servisses’ argument is contradictory. First, they state that "Sandra Serviss does not contend that the State of Indiana owes a private duty to her.” Appellant's Brief at 8. Then, they go on to argue that the three-part test established in Mullin v. Municipal City of South Bend, 639 N.E.2d 278, 284 (Ind.1994) for determining whether a duty is private or public does not apply to their case because the State committed an affirmative act of negligence. Id. at 8-9. As will be discussed, if the Mullin test is inapplicable, it necessarily follows that any duty owed by the government is private, not public. Despite this contradiction within the Servisses' argument, the Servisses have sufficiently raised the issue of whether the State owed them a private duty such that we will address it.
. The supreme court held that the following facts must exist for there to be a relationship that creates a private duty: "(1) an explicit assurance by the municipality, through promises or actions, that it would act on behalf of an injured party; (2) knowledge on the part of the municipality that inaction could lead to harm; and (3) justifiable and detrimental reliance by the injured party on the municipality's affirmative undertaking.” Id.

=== CASE 9737468 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:26:04.877986+00 ===

FRIEDLANDER, Judge,
dissenting
I believe the trial court was correct in granting summary judgment in favor of the Department of Natural Resources (the DNR) and therefore respectfully dissent from the majority’s conclusion that summary judgment should be reversed.
The majority concludes that the DNR committed an act of affirmative negligence when it allowed people to go sledding in the Indiana Dunes State Park. This conclusion is significant because of its implications on the question of duty. In order to recover in a negligence action against a governmental entity, the plaintiff must show more than a duty owed to the public as a whole. Greathouse v. Armstrong, 616 N.E.2d 364 (Ind.1993). In such cases, the plaintiff must establish the existence of a private duty owed to a particular individual. Id. According to Mullin v. Municipal City of South Bend, 639 N.E.2d 278 (Ind.1994), the following elements are prerequisites for imposing a private duty on governmental defendants:
(1) an explicit assurance by the municipality, through promises or actions, that it would act on behalf of the injured party;
(2) knowledge on the part of the municipality that inaction could lead to harm; and
(3) justifiable and detrimental reliance by the injured party on the municipality’s affirmative undertaking.
Id. at 284. The above public/private duty analysis, however, does not apply if the allegation against the governmental defendant is one of affirmative negligence. Henshilwood v. Hendricks County, 653 N.E.2d 1062 (Ind.Ct.App.1995), trans. denied. The Mullin test applies only in determining whether a duty is owed based upon a governmental entity’s alleged failure to act.
In their complaint, the Servisses alleged that the DNR was negligent in (1) failing to properly maintain, manage, and supervise the park property; (2) failing to properly supervise park rangers; (3) failing to warn park patrons of a dangerous condition; and (4)failing to construct or maintain a suitable walkway or construct a guard to protect pedestrians from sledders. In my view, all of these counts allege failures to act and not affirmative negligence. See McCormick v. State, Dep’t of Natural Resources, 673 N.E.2d 829 (Ind.Ct.App.1996) (plaintiffs decedent drowned; the complaint did not allege affirmative negligence when allegations in-*101eluded (1) failure to warn of dangers; (2) failure to patrol the premises; (3) failure to remedy a dangerous situation; (4) failure to take steps to prevent such incidents; and (5) failure to appropriately limit access to the spillway).
The Servisses responded to the DNR’s summary judgment motion with the allegation that the DNR committed affirmative negligence in requiring sledders to use one particular hill. Such an allegation could only emanate from Paragraph 10 of Count I of the Complaint for Damages, which states: “That IDNR authorized snow sledding on certain locations of the Dunes park grounds and owed a duty of reasonable care and supervision to those persons engaged in sledding activities on the park grounds.” Record at 4. In my view, Paragraph 10 does not contain an allegation that the DNR was negligent in designating a particular location for sledders to use. Therefore, such an allegation cannot serve as a basis for defeating summary judgment based upon the argument that it arguably constituted affirmative negligence. Moreover, even if Paragraph 10 could be understood to contain an allegation of negligence, it would not constitute an allegation of affirmative negligence. See Aldridge v. Indiana Dep’t of Natural Resources, 694 N.E.2d 313 (Ind.Ct.App.1998), trans. denied (otherwise general duty that exists when a governmental entity employs a lifeguard to monitor a public pool is not automatically transformed into a private duty merely because the governmental entity provides only one pool, thus dictating where each individual must swim).
Because, the Servisses’ complaint alleges a failure to act and not affirmative negligence, I would apply the Mullin test to determine whether the DNR owed the Servisses a private duty. The first element that the Ser-visses must prove to establish the existence of a private duty under Mullin is that the DNR issued an explicit assurance that it would act on Sandra’s behalf. The Servisses have presented no evidence that the DNR made such an assurance. “Without any such assurance, there can be no reliance.” McCormick v. State, Dep’t of Natural Resources, 673 N.E.2d at 838. Therefore, there is no evidence of a special duty of relationship between Sandra and the DNR. If the DNR owed any duty to Sandra, it was a duty to the general public and not to Sandra individually. Because no genuine issue of material fact exists on the issue of duty, I believe that the trial court properly granted summary judgment in favor of the DNR. I would affirm the trial court.

=== CASE 9817033 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-09-01 03:51:03.185494+00 ===

BRIGHT, Circuit Judge,
dissenting.
This case has been in litigation for fifteen years. In 1989, the district court rejected the Tribe’s claims on the merits, ruling that the government had paid for the lakebed. Devils Lake I, 714 F.Supp. 1019 (D.N.D.1989). We reversed, ruling that summary judgment was inappropriate since, as we stated, “The facts of the instant case suggest that the parties may have deliberately excluded the lakebed from the 1977 settlement because they considered it part of the Reservation. Admitting such a possibility, it would be counterintuitive to conclude as a matter of law that the parties intended the 1977 settlement to prevent the Tribe from asserting a subsequent claim to the lakebed.” Devils Lake II, 917 F.2d 1049, 1056 (8th Cir.1990). The opinions in Devils Lake I and Devils Lake II assumed jurisdiction rested with the court to decide the merits.
Since that time, the parties negotiated but have failed to reach a settlement. Now, after fifteen years, the majority, in effect, states that there is no decision here, and the title of the Devils Lake lakebed remains in limbo. It tells the parties that the federal courts will not decide the title dispute. To me, it is analogous to two boxers who have fought for fifteen rounds only to hear the judges say “we decline to decide who wins and we send the fighters to box in another ring.”
I respectfully dissent from the majority’s opinion. The issue is when did the Tribe know or when should it have known that the United States claimed the lakebed of Devils Lake. In my view, the Tribe did not know and would not have known of the government’s adverse claim until 1981, when the official position of the United States changed from its view that the Tribe owned the lakebed to a view of “no definite position” on title to the lakebed.
We commented on the official position of the United States in Devils Lake II, 917 F.2d 1049 (8th Cir.1990). This court determined that in 1976 the Department of the Interior issued an opinion, authored by an Associate Solicitor for Indian Affairs (Reid Peyton Chambers), which concluded that Devils Lake is wholly within the Reservation boundaries and the United States holds title to the lakebed in trust for the Tribe. Id. at 1052-53. The panel noted that the United States asserted this position in subsequent litigation, but ultimately abandoned it. Id. at 1053 n. 6. The panel concluded that the government’s opinion was communicated to the Tribe later in 1976, but, in 1981, the government withdrew support from its 1976 opinion. Id. at 1054.
Associate Solicitor Chambers’ letter stated as follows:
By Memorandum dated February 13, 1976, you requested my assistance in determining the status of the title to the bed of Devils Lake in North Dakota.... [T]he Attorney General [of North Dakota] also requested an opinion as to the location of the “lakeside boundary” of the Fort Totten Sioux Indian Reservation which, in the Attorney General’s view, is located “on the shore of Devils Lake.”
*749I am of the opinion that Devils Lake is not adjacent to the Fort Totten Sioux Indian Reservation but wholly within its boundaries and the United States holds title to the lakebed in trust for the Devils Lake Sioux Tribe.
Tribe App. at 74.
Therefore, the conveyance by the State of North Dakota in 1971 was a conveyance of whatever interest the State possessed in the lakebed. The State may have thought it possessed title to the lakebed but title never had been confirmed to the State. The 1971 quitclaim may have been a move to satisfy the paper requirements for the Garrison Diversion Project, but binding the Tribe to it is another question altogether.
Subsequently, in a 1981 letter, the Department of the Interior advised the Land and Natural Resources Division of the Department of Justice on the question of whether the State acquired the bed of West Bay, Devils Lake as an incident of statehood. The Department saw
no need to take a definitive position on the title to the entire lakebed at this time. If and when these issues arise in litigation of interest to the Tribe, they will be fully addressed by this Department. Meanwhile, the June 21, 1976 memorandum of the Associate Solicitor, Indian Affairs, should no longer be relied upon as stating the position of this Department on the ownership of the Lakebed.
Tribe App. at 222.
The State’s 1971 conveyance was not mentioned in the 1981 letter. Obviously, the federal government placed no importance upon this conveyance by North Dakota to the United States as shown by the utter lack of mention of the conveyance in the official correspondence regarding ownership of the lakebed.
In my judgment, upon review of these letters, it is clear the Tribe would not have received a definitive answer from the United States as to ownership of the lakebed if it had asked for direction in 1981. The United States did not know, nor had it determined, ownership of the lakebed. As a result, applying the statute of limitations at this late stage is wrong. In essence, the Tribe did not know and could not know of an adverse claim to the lakebed by the United States, at any time prior to at least 1981 or later.
My position is supported by the cases in the Ninth Circuit, Michel v. United States, 65 F.3d 130 (9th Cir.1995) (per curiam), and Shultz v. Department of Army, 886 F.2d 1157 (9th Cir.1989), which treat analogous situations. The majority cites Michel for the proposition that the governing legal framework for this case is that when the government abandons its interest in land, a new twelve-year period begins in which a plaintiff may file a Quiet Title Act action against the government once the government reasserts an adverse claim. See also Shultz, 886 F.2d at 1161 (“[i]f the government has apparently abandoned any claim it once asserted, and then it reasserts a claim, the later assertion is a new claim and the statute of limitations for an action based on that claim accrues when it is asserted.”) However, the majority’s assumption that the United States had property to abandon is misguided. The Tribe’s “treaty or aboriginal title” to the lakebed was conceded for purposes of the United States’ summary judgment motion, and the merits of that issue still have not yet been litigated. The majority does not reach the Tribe’s alternative theory that the Tribe retained aboriginal title to the submerged lands, which cannot be extinguished without explicit action by Congress. Oneida Indian Nation of N.Y. v. County of Oneida, 414 U.S. 661, 667-68, 94 S.Ct. 772, 39 L.Ed.2d 73 (1974).
*750Applying the Ninth Circuit cases, the Department of Interior’s 1981 letter reasserts a new status of the lakebed because it indicated the status quo for the government’s view of the ownership of the lake-bed had changed from conviction that the Tribe owned it to saying that the government took no definitive position, i.e., it did not know. The statute of limitations should have begun, at the earliest, in 1981 or later. The record does not show prior to the lawsuit why or when the United States claimed ownership of the lakebed. The issue is not abandonment of rights by the government, or whether its 1976 position binds the government, about which the majority engages in mere conjecture as there is simply no testimony in the record to support these assumptions. The government was not giving anything up in its 1981 letter; rather, its position was that it didn’t know. The United States, at no time prior to 1981, made any claim to the lakebed. Indeed, as we have observed, the United States recognized that the Tribe could claim ownership.
I reject a per se rule of nonjusticiability that fails »to consider adequately the Tribe’s history of reliance on the government, as trustee, acting in its interests. Nor would I give credence to the claim that, prior to 1971, the Tribe understood the adverse character of the federal government’s claim to Devils Lake.
An important question, as I see it, is whether there was any reason for the Tribe not to rely on its trust relationship with the federal government, when the State of North Dakota in 1971 quitclaimed more than 62,000 acres of the lake to the United States for the Garrison Diversion Project, and when interpreting the government’s 1976 and 1981 memos regarding the reservation boundaries.7 Further, it is well-documented that the Tribe historically relied on the federal government to manage day-to-day Reservation affairs, and the Tribe had a right to think that the government was not cheating it out of ownership of the lakebed but would protect the Tribe’s interests.
Where does this leave us? The undisputed facts show the Tribe filed its lawsuit in 1986, within twelve years of the government’s “I don’t know” pronouncement in 1981 that its 1976 memorandum “should no longer be relied upon as stating the position of this Department on the ownership of the lakebed.” Thus, the Tribe’s lawsuit is timely.
Unfortunately, as a result of the majority’s conclusion that the court may properly dismiss the claims against the government for lack of jurisdiction, the ownership of the Devils Lake lakebed remains in limbo. The State of North Dakota, for example, stands on uncertain ground now as to the parts of the lake it did not quitclaim to the United States in 1971, and, in that respect, the district court abused its discretion in dismissing all of the Tribe’s claims against the State because the federal government is not an indispensable party as to all parts.
The majority substitutes a judgment of dismissal, based on conjecture and ambiguity rather than on the merits, in place of this court’s duty to provide the parties *751their day in court. I respectfully dissent. Justice delayed is justice denied.
. The majority characterizes the dispute concerning ownership of the lakebed as "long-simmering.” To the contrary, I believe we should take judicial notice that ownership of the lakebed was insignificant until recently, when the level of water rose and Devils Lake became vastly more important for its recreational benefits. The majority’s unanchored interpretation of history ignores that all of this territory in what is now North Dakota belonged to native peoples before the arrival of white settlers. The majority implies that the Tribe's ancestors were getting more than they deserved in the 1867 Treaty because they were beneficiaries of the government’s largesse.

=== CASE 3027319 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2015-10-13 22:37:58.644536+00 ===

Opinions of the United
2007 Decisions                                                                                                             States Court of Appeals
for the Third Circuit
7-10-2007
Bucknor v. Atty Gen USA
Precedential or Non-Precedential: Non-Precedential
Docket No. 06-1624
Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.law.villanova.edu/thirdcircuit_2007
Recommended Citation
"Bucknor v. Atty Gen USA" (2007). 2007 Decisions. Paper 797.
http://digitalcommons.law.villanova.edu/thirdcircuit_2007/797
This decision is brought to you for free and open access by the Opinions of the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit at Villanova
University School of Law Digital Repository. It has been accepted for inclusion in 2007 Decisions by an authorized administrator of Villanova
University School of Law Digital Repository. For more information, please contact Benjamin.Carlson@law.villanova.edu.
NOT PRECEDENTIAL
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE THIRD CIRCUIT
No. 06-1624
DEVON A. BUCKNOR,
Petitioner
v.
ATTORNEY GENERAL OF THE UNITED STATES,
Respondent
On Petition for Review of an Order of the
United States Department of Justice
Board of Immigration Appeals
BIA No. A72-784-868
(Honorable Eugene Pugliese, Immigration Judge)
Submitted Pursuant to Third Circuit LAR 34.1(a)
March 13, 2007
Before: FUENTES, VAN ANTWERPEN, and SILER,* Circuit Judges.
(Filed July 10, 2007)
OPINION OF THE COURT
_____________
* The Honorable Eugene E. Siler, Jr., Senior United States Circuit Judge for the Sixth
Circuit, sitting by designation.
SILER, Circuit Judge.
Petitioner Devon A. Bucknor, a native and citizen of Jamaica, seeks review of the
January 26, 2006, Order of the Board of Immigration Appeals (“BIA”) that affirmed the
Immigration Judge’s (“IJ”) denial of Bucknor’s request for waiver of removal. We have
jurisdiction to review the petition pursuant to 8 U.S.C. § 1252(a), and for the reasons set
forth below, we will deny the petition.
I.
Because we write solely for the benefit of the parties, we will set forth only those
facts necessary to our analysis.
Bucknor entered the United States at an unknown place and time. On April 25,
2005, the government commenced removal proceedings against Bucknor on two grounds:
1) as an alien present in the United States without being admitted or paroled, 8 U.S.C. §
1182(a)(6)(A)(i); and 2) as an alien convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, 8
U.S.C. § 1182(a)(2)(A)(i)(I).1 Bucknor admitted alienage, contested removal and sought
a waiver of removal under 8 U.S.C. § 1182(h).2
1
On January 15, 2003, Bucknor was convicted of embezzling things of value of the
United States worth $165,286.63, 18 U.S.C. § 641. Bucknor does not contest the
conviction or that it constitutes a crime of “moral turpitude.”
2
Section 1182(h) provides, in relevant part:
The Attorney General may, in his discretion, waive the application of
subparagraphs . . . (a)(2) of this section . . . if . . . in the case of an
immigrant who is the spouse, parent, son, or daughter of a citizen of the
United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence, if it is
established to the satisfaction of the Attorney General that the alien’s denial
2
During the 2005 hearing, the IJ questioned whether Bucknor’s immigration status
could be adjusted even if Bucknor were granted a waiver of removal for the
embezzlement conviction. The IJ pointed out that Bucknor was still removable under §
1182(a)(6)(A)(i), which could not be waived under 8 U.S.C. § 1182(h). Bucknor
thereafter indicated that he had previously filed an application for adjustment of his
illegal status under the Legal Immigration Fairness and Equity (“LIFE”) Act, Pub. L. 106-
553, 114 Stat 2762 (2000), which was pending before United States Citizenship and
Immigration Services (“CIS”), in the Department of Homeland Security (“DHS”), at the
time of the hearing.3 Therefore, Bucknor averred that the IJ need only address the waiver
of removal issue. Although the status of Bucknor’s LIFE Act application before CIS was
uncertain at the time of the hearing, the IJ proceeded to address the merits of Bucknor’s
claim.
The IJ ruled that Bucknor’s application for adjustment of status under the LIFE
of admission would result in extreme hardship to the United States citizen
or lawfully resident spouse, parent, son, or daughter of such alien.
8 U.S.C. § 1182(h).
3
Under the LIFE Act, an eligible alien may adjust status to become a lawful
permanent resident if the following conditions have been met: 1) an application was filed
between June 1, 2001 and June 4, 2003; 2) the alien entered the United States before
January 1, 1982 and resided here continuously through May 4, 1988; 3) the alien was
continuously physically present in the United States between November 6, 1986 and May
4, 1988; and 4) the alien is not inadmissable under any of the provisions of the INA §
212(a), including not having been convicted of a felony. See 8 C.F.R. § 245a.11. An
alien who is prima facie qualified for adjustment of status under the LIFE Act may
request that any deportation or removal proceeding before the Immigration Court or BIA
be administratively closed or continued in order to allow the alien to pursue the LIFE Act
application. 8 C.F.R. § 245.a12(b)(1).
3
Act was of no utility to his § 1182(h) waiver application. This was because Bucknor’s
felony conviction for embezzlement rendered him ineligible for LIFE Act relief. See 8
U.S.C. § 1101(a)(43)(M)(i) (classifying fraud or deceit in which loss to the victim
exceeds $10,000 as an aggravated felony under the INA). Therefore, the IJ did not
consider Bucknor’s § 1182(h) waiver application and ordered Bucknor removed.
In 2006, the BIA dismissed Bucknor’s appeal. It stated that it would not consider
Bucknor’s request for remand as “a waiver will generally only be granted where the grant
would effect a complete disposition of the case.” Bucknor remained removable under §
1182(a)(6)(A)(i) even if the § 1182(h) waiver were granted for removal based on his
embezzlement conviction. Further, the BIA noted that Bucknor’s only possible relief for
removal based upon the § 1182(a)(6)(A)(i) ground was the LIFE Act, for which he was
ineligible. As a final matter, the BIA noted that to the extent the IJ exceeded his authority
by preterminating Bucknor’s LIFE Act application, any error was harmless as DHS was
not bound by the IJ’s decision on this matter.
II.
We review the BIA’s legal conclusions de novo, giving appropriate deference to
the agency’s interpretation of the underlying statute. Zheng v. Gonzales, 422 F.3d 98,
108 (3d Cir. 2005). Because the BIA adopted the IJ’s findings and discussed some of the
bases for the IJ’s decision, both the BIA’s and the IJ’s decisions are before us for review.
He Chun Chen v. Ashcroft, 376 F.3d 215, 222 (3d Cir. 2004).
4
III.
Bucknor contends that the IJ erred by not considering his § 1182(h) request for
waiver on the merits. However, as previously determined by the IJ and the BIA, §
1182(h) was of no use to Bucknor because even if removal for the embezzlement
conviction had been waived, Bucknor remained removable under § 1182(a)(6)(A)(i).
Therefore, the BIA’s decision not to remand the waiver issue to the IJ was correct
because Bucknor would have been removed regardless of the waiver. See, e.g., Matter of
Luis-Rodriguez, 22 I. & N. Dec. 747, 753 (BIA 1999) (“[T]his Board has reserved the
discretion to dismiss appeals and deny motions as moot as a discretionary matter of
prudence. . . . where a controversy has become so attenuated or where . . . an action by
one of the parties has deprived an appeal or motion of practical significance.”).
Bucknor also contends that the BIA’s prejudgment of the LIFE Act claim created
an inappropriate legal standard because adjustment of status under the LIFE Act is left to
the exclusive realm of DHS. However, where a petitioner cannot establish prima facie
eligibility for adjustment of status under the LIFE Act, the IJ is under no duty to grant a
continuance of removal proceedings pending resolution of the LIFE Act application. See
Khan v. Attorney General, 448 F.3d 226, 234-35 (3d Cir. 2006). Bucknor’s
embezzlement conviction clearly rendered him unable to make out a prima facie case for
LIFE Act relief. See 8 C.F.R. § 245a.18 (providing that felony convictions for crimes
involving moral turpitude render an applicant ineligible under the LIFE Act and may not
5
be waived). Accordingly, the BIA did not apply an incorrect legal standard in finding
Bucknor ineligible for adjustment of status.
Bucknor finally contends that had the IJ adjudicated his waiver request, his felony
embezzlement conviction would have no longer rendered him ineligible for adjustment of
status under the LIFE Act. However, waiver for purposes of § 1182 “does not preclude
the INS or courts from relying on the underlying offense to bar other forms of
immigration relief or benefits.” Chan v. Ganter, 464 F.3d 289, 295 (3d Cir. 2006).
Therefore, Bucknor’s contention does not persuade us that the BIA’s decision was
erroneous.
III.
We have considered all other arguments made by the parties on appeal and find
that no further discussion is necessary. For the foregoing reasons, we conclude that the
BIA did not apply an improper legal standard, and we will deny the petition for review.
6

=== CASE 3027322 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2015-10-13 22:37:59.046423+00 ===

Opinions of the United
2007 Decisions                                                                                                             States Court of Appeals
for the Third Circuit
7-9-2007
USA v. Rodriguez
Precedential or Non-Precedential: Non-Precedential
Docket No. 06-2482
Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.law.villanova.edu/thirdcircuit_2007
Recommended Citation
"USA v. Rodriguez" (2007). 2007 Decisions. Paper 801.
http://digitalcommons.law.villanova.edu/thirdcircuit_2007/801
This decision is brought to you for free and open access by the Opinions of the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit at Villanova
University School of Law Digital Repository. It has been accepted for inclusion in 2007 Decisions by an authorized administrator of Villanova
University School of Law Digital Repository. For more information, please contact Benjamin.Carlson@law.villanova.edu.
NOT PRECEDENTIAL
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE THIRD CIRCUIT
__________
No. 06-2482
__________
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
v.
PEDRO HERRERA RODRIGUEZ,
Appellant
__________
On Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Middle District of Pennsylvania
(D.C. Criminal No. 05-cr-00245)
District Judge: Honorable Sylvia H. Rambo
__________
Submitted Under Third Circuit LAR 34.1(a)
on July 9, 2007
Before: RENDELL and AMBRO, Circuit Judges
and SHAPIRO, District Judge.
(Filed: July 9, 2007)
__________
OPINION OF THE COURT
__________
__________________
* Honorable Norma L. Shapiro, Senior Judge of the United States District Court for
the Eastern District of Pennsylvania, sitting by designation.
RENDELL, Circuit Judge.
Defendant-Appellant Pedro Herrera Rodriguez (“Rodriguez”) appeals his sentence
imposed by the District Court. Rodriguez claims that the District Court did not clearly
articulate its “meaningful consideration” of the sentencing factors in 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a),
and therefor the sentence is not “reasonable” as required by United States v. Booker,
543 U.S. 220 (2005). We will affirm the District Court’s sentence.
DISCUSSION
We have jurisdiction over this appeal pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1291. We review
sentencing decisions for reasonableness. Booker, 543 U.S. at 264. As part of that review
we must determine whether the District Court exercised its discretion by giving
“meaningful consideration” to the factors in § 3553(a). United States v. Cooper, 437 F.3d
324, 329 (3d Cir. 2006).
Rodriguez is an illegal immigrant who has repeatedly entered the United States
illegally and subsequently been deported to Mexico. He was first deported for illegal
entry into the United States in 1997. His second illegal re-entry was not discovered until
2003, at which time he was convicted of illegal re-entry and sentenced to nine months’
imprisonment followed by one year of supervised release. A condition of his supervised
release was that he would not re-enter the United States. In 2004, Rodriguez attempted to
re-enter the United States a third time, specifically California. He was apprehended and
later released from custody in November 2004. He then traveled to Pennsylvania to be
with his family.
2
Police responded to a domestic dispute involving Rodriguez in April 2005. After
his illegal status became known, he was sentenced to a year of imprisonment for violation
of his supervised release condition from his 2003 conviction. The District Court
explained that it chose to impose a high sentence in the hope that the Government would
not bring an additional charge against Rodriguez. However, on June 22, 2005, the
Government charged Rodriguez with illegal re-entry into the United States by a
previously deported alien. Rodriguez pled guilty to that charge on January 5, 2006.
Rodriguez faced a statutory maximum of 120 months of imprisonment, and the
Probation Office’s Pre-Sentence Report (“PSR”) recommended 21-27 months. Rodriguez
requested a sentence of time served. The District Court sentenced Rodriguez to
18 months, and offered the following explanation from the bench regarding the § 3553(a)
factors:
The Court adopts the pre-sentence investigation report without
change. The sentence departs from the guideline range for the following
reasons: The Court has considered all factors in 3553(A), in particular the
history and characteristics of the Defendant, and deems that a jail sentence
is required considering his recidivism and his criminal history record.
However, the Court has departed because at the time of the sentence
imposed on his revocation of supervised release, the Court gave the
maximum sentence imposed in the hopes that consideration would be given
that no further action would be taken. The Court would have imposed a
lesser sentence if the Court had every expectation of thinking that a criminal
offense would be filed. Therefore, this reflects the Court’s expectation of
an appropriate sentence in this case.
Appx. 58.
3
This Court has explained that “[t]he record must demonstrate that the [District
Court] gave meaningful consideration to the § 3553(a) factors,” but does not need to
discuss each of the factors if the record makes it clear that the District Court took the
factors into account in sentencing. Cooper, 437 F.3d at 329. However, the Cooper Court
also noted that “a rote statement of the § 3553(a) factors should not suffice if at
sentencing either the defendant or the prosecution properly raises ‘a ground of legal merit
(provided it has a factual basis).’” Cooper, 437 F.3d at 329 (citation omitted).
The District Court did give “meaningful consideration” to the § 3553(a) factors in
this case. The District Court adopted the PSR without change, stated that it had
considered all of the § 3553(a) factors, specified which factors were most relevant to this
case, and imposed a sentence below the recommended range in light of its previous
experience sentencing Rodriguez. Rodriguez did argue that he was seeking to receive
time served because of his previous sentence, and the District Court properly explained
that, due to his recidivism and significant criminal history, a jail sentence was required.
In short, there is no suggestion that the District Court’s sentence was unreasonable
because it failed to give “meaningful consideration” to the § 3553(a) factors.
CONCLUSION
For the reasons described above, we will AFFIRM the sentence imposed by the
District Court.
4

=== CASE 9817034 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-09-01 03:51:04.905494+00 ===

OPINION OF THE COURT
RENDELL, Circuit Judge.
Defendants Steven Roberts and Daniel Mangini both pled guilty to conspiracy to possess methamphetamine with intent to distribute and are now serving terms of supervised release. Both are subject to several standard conditions of supervised release, which include a prohibition on “associat[ing] with any person convicted of a felony, unless granted permission to do so by the probation officer.” App. 54 (Mangini); App. 59 (Roberts). Both men requested permission to resume contact with one another and were denied by the probation office. Roberts and Mangini appeal the District Court’s denial of their request that the Court “clarify or modify the terms of both men’s conditions of release,” pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3583(e)(2), “to permit them to communicate and associate with one another.” App. 4.
I.
Mangini and Roberts were in a committed relationship for many years prior to their arrest and conviction. During that time, “they lived together and raised Defendant Roberts’ niece as their foster daughter.” United States v. Roberts, No. 04-37, slip op. at 2, 2007 WL 210402 (E.D.Pa. Jan. 24, 2007). Roberts and Mangini were arrested in December 2003 for conspiring to possess methamphetamine and related crimes. They later fled to Florida while on pretrial release and were subsequently recaptured. In May 2004, both pled guilty to conspiracy to possess methamphetamine with intent to distribute, in violation of 21 U.S.C. § 846. Mangini was sentenced to 18 months imprisonment, followed by 5 years supervised release. Roberts was sentenced to 30 months imprisonment, followed by 5 years supervised release. Both men are subject to a prohibition on “associating] with any person convicted of a felony, unless granted permission to do so by the probation officer.” App. 54 (Mangini); App. 59 (Roberts). Defendants are both supervised by Probation Officer John Sander-son.
Defendants asked Probation Officer Sanderson for permission to associate with one another after both men were released from custody. Permission was denied. Roberts then wrote directly to Sanderson’s supervisor, Charles Donahue, asking for permission for him and Mangini to “see and speak to one another and resume living together based on the fact that we were in a relationship for 18 years prior to our arrest.” App. 76-77. Donahue characterized the letter as a request for Roberts to “reside with” Mr. Mangini, and responded that “Mr. Mangini has made it clear to Mr. Sanderson that he does not approve of your request.” App. 78.
*174On December 14, 2006, defendants submitted a letter to the District Court requesting that the Court “clarify or modify the terms of both men’s conditions of release,” pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3583(e)(2), “to permit them to communicate and associate with one another.” App. 4. The Court denied the request on December 18, 2006 as to defendant Mangini and on January 4, 2007 as to defendant Roberts. App. 3, 7. On January 4, 2007, defendants filed a motion for reconsideration and filed exhibits in support of the motion, including affidavits from Mangini and Roberts. In his declaration, Mangini expressly stated that Donahue’s letter “miseharaeterizes what I said. What I told Mr. Sanderson is that right now, my health has to be my highest priority. Before I five with anyone, I have to make sure that living situation will support my efforts to be well, physically and emotionally.” App. 70.
In response to a request from the Court for more information about the association of defendants, Probation Officer Sanderson submitted a letter to the Court stating that the probation office denied defendants’ request to associate “due to the seriousness of their offense.” App. 82. Later in the letter, Sanderson added that “Mangini has become romantically involved with another individual” and that “Mangini informed this officer that he was not interested in resuming a romantic relationship with Mr. Roberts.” App. 82. Sanderson concluded that “[d]ue to the above-stated information, it is felt that there is no compelling reason as to why association should be permitted.” Id. However, he added that the probation office would be “guided by any comments or directives that the Court wishes to offer.”
The District Court denied the motion for reconsideration on January 24, 2007, one day after the government’s response to defendants’ motion was filed. The Court construed defendants’ motion for reconsideration as raising three arguments for modifying or terminating the terms or conditions of their supervised release. It then went on to reject each of defendants’ arguments.
The District Court understood defendants’ motion to raise a facial challenge to the anti-association condition under 18 U.S.C. § 3583(d) and under the due process clause of the Fifth Amendment. The Court concluded that the condition satisfies the statutory requirements of § 3583(d) because it is designed to protect the public from further crimes and the restrictive effect of the condition “is mitigated by the fact that the probation officer can permit Defendants to have contact with convicted felons if he deems it appropriate.” Roberts, No. 04-37, slip op. at 6, 2007 WL 210402. In its analysis, the Court did not consider Probation Officer Sanderson’s alleged admission that, in his opinion, defendants’ association would not endanger the public or lead them to commit further crimes. The Court ignored this alleged statement because it treated defendants’ request as a facial challenge to the validity of the condition, rather than as a challenge to the enforcement of the condition by the probation office. Id. at 6 n. 2.
The Court also found that the condition does not violate defendants’ due process rights because it is directly related to protecting the public and is narrowly tailored. Id. at 9 (quoting two-part test from United States v. Crandon, 173 F.3d 122, 128 (3d Cir.1999) to determine validity of a special condition that restricts constitutional rights). The Court noted that the condition “is narrowly tailored, because, aside from the fact that it permits Defendants to associate with those convicted of non-felony offenses, its prohibition is not absolute. Defendants may associate with each other *175if their probation officer permits it.” Id. at 9-10.
The Court did treat defendants’ argument that the enforcement of the condition violates their Fifth Amendment right to equal protection as a challenge to the enforcement of the anti-association condition, rather than as a facial challenge. The Court found, however, that it lacked jurisdiction under 18 U.S.C. § 3583(e) to modify the anti-association condition on the ground that it is being unconstitutionally enforced. Id. at 10. The Court concluded that “[defendants’ equal protection claim, if any, lies against the Probation Office in a separate action.” Id. at 11.
Following the denial of their request and denial of their motion for reconsideration, defendants appealed. They also filed supplemental declarations with the District Court that contain the testimony defendants would have given if the Court had held an evidentiary hearing prior to the denial of their request. Roberts attested that “I still consider Daniel [Mangini] my life partner, and want to be reunited with him.” App. 93. Mangini echoed this sentiment. App. 94 (“Although Steven [Roberts] and I have been separated for several years, I still consider him to be my partner. Contrary to Mr. Sanderson’s statements, I am eager to resume my relationship with Steven and I do not have a new partner.”).
During the pendency of this appeal, Probation Officer Sanderson has continued to deny defendants permission to have contact with one another. Moreover, the probation office at present reads the District Court’s order as mandating that defendants not be granted permission to associate with one another except under extraordinary circumstances, even though the order suggests nothing of the kind. The probation office has stated that it will not make any determination regarding contact between defendants without further proceedings before the District Court.
II.
The District Court had jurisdiction over defendants’ case pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3231. We have jurisdiction over the District Court’s order denying defendants’ request for modification of a condition of their supervised release pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1291. “To the extent we are reviewing the District Court’s denial of [the] motion to reconsider, our review is plenary where the denial was based on ‘the interpretation and application of a legal precept.’ ” United States v. Smith, 445 F.3d 713, 716 (3d Cir.2006) (quoting Koshatka v. Phila. Newspapers, Inc., 762 F.2d 329, 333 (3d Cir.1985)). “Otherwise, we review such denials for abuse of discretion.” Id.
Following oral argument, and at the urging of this Court, the parties have clarified and agreed upon certain facts regarding defendants’ relationship: “All parties now agree and accept that Mr. Mangini and Mr. Roberts have been for over twenty years and remain, despite the separation that resulted from their incarceration, committed life partners.” Joint Letter (May 21, 2007) at 2. Furthermore, both sides agree that the District Court’s order should be vacated and the matter should be remanded to the District Court for further proceedings in light of this agreed factual predicate. However, they disagree as to the extent of the guidance we should give to the District Court as to these proceedings.
Defendants argue that the District Court’s denial of their request was colored by two errors of law and request that we correct those errors on appeal. First, they argue that the District Court erred in ruling that it lacked jurisdiction under *176§ 3583(e)(2) to consider the defendants’ request for modification of the conditions of their release on the ground that the anti-association condition, as enforced by the probation office, violates their right to equal protection. Second, they urge that the Court erred in considering defendants’ request for modification as a facial challenge to the validity of the condition, rather than as a challenge to its enforcement by the probation office.
The District Court’s conclusion that it had no jurisdiction under § 3583(e) to consider defendants’ request for clarification or modification on the ground that the anti-association condition, as applied, violated their right to equal protection effectively terminated review of this constitutional claim. In addition, the Court’s treatment of defendants’ request for modification as a facial challenge to the anti-association condition under § 3583(d) and the due process clause, rather than a request for a clarification of how it may be applied by the probation office, also colored the Court’s review of these claims. We think it appropriate to review these rulings on appeal because the District Court’s misunderstanding of defendants’ request and of the scope of its jurisdiction, if left uncorrected, would result in the Court again denying defendants’ request for clarification on jurisdictional grounds and/or continuing to misconstrue defendants’ argument on remand as a facial challenge to the anti-association condition.
A. Authority Under § 3583(e)(2)
The District Court ruled that under 18 U.S.C. § 3583(e),1 which governs requests for modifications of conditions of supervised release, it lacked “jurisdiction” to modify the conditions of defendants’ supervised release on the grounds that they are unconstitutional, citing United States v. Myers, 426 F.3d 117, 123 (2d Cir.2005). Roberts, No. 04-37, slip op. at 10, 2007 WL 210402. In Myers, which was a direct appeal of a sentence, rather than a motion to modify under § 3583, the court addressed whether it should wait to adjudicate the defendant’s challenge to the legality of a condition of his supervised release until after the defendant was released from custody. The Court found that it was appropriate to adjudicate defendant’s challenge on appeal because the defendant would not be able to raise the challenge to the constitutionality of the condition, that the probation office preapprove his visits with his minor child, through a subsequent motion under 18 U.S.C. § 3583(e)(2). Id. at 123.
Myers involved a facial challenge to a condition of release, rather than a challenge to the application of the condition or interpretation of the meaning of the condition by the probation office. The other cases cited by the District Court all likewise involved facial challenges to conditions of release, rather, than challenges to the way that the conditions were interpreted or enforced. See United States v. Gross, 307 F.3d 1043, 1044 (9th Cir.2002) (facial challenge to condition of release on grounds of illegality could not be considered under § 3583); United States v. Hatten, 167 F.3d 884, 886 (5th Cir.1999) *177(same); United States v. Lussier, 104 F.3d 32, 36 (2d Cir.1997) (court did not have jurisdiction under § 3583 to rescind restitution order on the grounds that the order is illegal on its face); see also United States v. Smith, 445 F.3d 713, 717 (3d Cir.2006) (cited by District Court because it cites Lussier); United States v. Alevras, 114 Fed.Appx. 488, 489 (3d Cir.2004) (same).
In contrast, Roberts and Mangini presented the District Court with a true request for modification or “clarification,” rather than an impermissible attempt to use § 3583(e)(2) “as a backdoor to challenge the legality of [their] sentence.” Gross, 307 F.3d at 1044. The District Court had grounds for modification under § 3583(e)(2) because the request was premised on “new or unforeseen circumstances,” namely, the probation office’s refusal to grant defendants’ requests to see one another despite their longstanding intímate relationship. See Smith, 445 F.3d at 717 (noting that “new or unforeseen circumstances” permit a court to modify conditions of release under § 3583(e)).2 We will therefore instruct the District Court that it has the authority on remand, under § 3583, to clarify how the probation office may apply the anti-association condition of defendants’ supervised release.
B. The Nature of Defendants’ Request for Clarification
The District Court treated defendants’ request for modification or clarification of the anti-association condition of their release as a facial challenge to the condition on the grounds that the condition fails to satisfy the requirements of 18 U.S.C. § 3583(d) and violates their substantive due process rights. The Court focused only on the language of the condition of release, not its application by the probation office.3 However, defendants clearly *178stated in their motion to the Court that they were not seeking elimination of the prohibition against association with felons absent permission from the probation office, but were merely asking the Court to correct the probation office’s failure to grant them permission to see one another. Defendants argued that the condition, as applied by the probation office, does not meet the requirements of 18 U.S.C. § 3583(d) and that the probation office’s refusal of permission for defendants to associate renders an otherwise permissible condition of release unconstitutional. App. 65-66.
Although § 3583(e) cannot be used as a backdoor to challenge the legality of a condition of release, it may be used to challenge the arbitrary or unfair application of a condition of release by the probation office. See United States v. Mickelson, 433 F.3d 1050, 1057 (8th Cir.2006) (rejecting facial challenge to condition restricting defendant’s contact with minors without written permission of the probation office, but adding that “if such permission is arbitrarily or unfairly denied, [defendant] is free to seek relief from the district court under § 3583(e)”); United States v. Bowman, 175 Fed.Appx. 834, 838 (9th Cir.2006) (finding that condition of release delegating authority to probation officer to recommend whether or not defendant should have unsupervised visits with grandson was permissible because delegation was limited and “if the probation officer arbitrarily or unfairly denies [defendant] a favorable recommendation, [defendant] is free to seek relief from the district court under 18 U.S.C. § 3583(e)(1)”).4 This is exactly what defendants seek to do in this case, as the government acknowledges in its brief. Appellee Br. 18-19.5
As the Mickelson court observed, even though a court delegates authority to construe a condition of release to the probation office, the court nevertheless retains the ultimate responsibility for reviewing the exercise of that authority. Id. at 1056 (“Conditions delegating limited authority to non judicial officials such as probation officers are permissible so long as the delegating judicial officer retains and exercises ultimate responsibility.”). Here, the District Court treated defendants’ request for clarification as a facial challenge to the condition, rather than as a request to prevent the probation office from construing the condition in a way that the defendants view as violating their rights. The Court, thus, avoided addressing the actual issue presented by defendants’ request for clarification.
We therefore instruct the District Court on remand to address defendants’ actual request, which is for modification or clarification of the proper application of the anti-association condition, in light of the probation office’s allegedly unlawful exercise of its discretion in a manner that violates 18 U.S.C. § 3583(d)(2) and defendants’ constitutional rights.6
*179III.
For the reasons set forth above, we will vacate the order of the District Court denying defendants’ request and remand for the Court to consider defendants’ challenge to the probation office’s application of the anti-association condition.
. Section 3583(e)(2) provides that: "The court may, after considering the factors set forth in section 3553(a)(1), (a)(2)(B), (a)(2)(C), (a)(2)(D), (a)(4), (a)(5), (a)(6), and (a)(7)-(2) extend a term of supervised release if less than the maximum authorized term was previously imposed, and may modify, reduce, or enlarge the conditions of supervised release, at any time prior to the expiration or termination of the term of supervised release, pursuant to the provisions of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure relating to the modification of probation and the provisions applicable to the initial setting of the terms and conditions of post-release supervision.”
. Arguably, defendants could have attempted to challenge the anti-association provision on direct appeal, like the defendant in United States v. Loy, 237 F.3d 251 (3d Cir.2001). On direct appeal, Loy challenged the condition of his supervised release that restricted his contact with minors, on the ground that it would inhibit his ability to have and raise his own children. The Loy court found that, although the condition could arguably be read to extend to Loy’s own children, the court would construe the condition not to extend to any children that Loy might father after his release from prison. Id. at 270. If Loy were to father any children following his release from custody, the District Court then could consider modification to the condition in the event that it wished to restrict Loy’s interaction with those children. Id. However, even though the Loy court considered the challenge on direct appeal, the court did not suggest that Loy could not have brought a motion for modification or clarification of the condition later, at such time that Loy had children and the district court construed the provision to restrict his interaction with those children.
. In fact, the Court noted that, although it understood defendants' "frustration with the probation officer’s refusal of permission for them to associate with each other when he allegedly has admitted that such association would not, in his opinion, endanger the public or lead them to commit further crimes,” "18 U.S.C. § 3583(d) does not accord the probation office’s opinion any weight.” Roberts, No. 04-37, slip op. at 6 n. 2, 2007 WL 210402. The Court then went on to apply the § 3583(d) requirements to the condition as written, rather than to the condition as applied by the probation office. Id. at 6-7. Similarly, in analyzing defendants’ due process claim, the Court looked only at the condition as written, noting that the condition is narrowly tailored because “its prohibition is not absolute. Defendants may associate with each other if their probation officer permits it.” Id. at 9-10. The Court ignored the central problem: that the probation office was allegedly applying the condition so as to create an absolute bar on defendants’ contact with one another and without consideration of the requirement under § 3583(d)(2) that the condition ”involve[] no greater deprivation of liberty than is reasonably necessary for the purposes set forth in section 3553(a)(2)(B), (a)(2)(C), and (a)(2)(D).”
. We recognize that this court of appeals opinion was not issued as precedent and, as such, it is not authority for the proposition noted. However, it reflects the view of another court consistent with ours, and we cite it to demonstrate that our view is not novel or unique.
. The government notes in its brief that "in this proceeding the appellants do 'not question the legality of forbidding them generally from associating with convicted felons except as authorized by the probation officer.’ [Blue] Br. 22. They assert that 'to the extent that the district court may have thought that the defendants were challenging the validity of Standard Condition 9 as a general matter or on its face, that notion was mistaken.’ ’’ Appellee Br. 18-19.
. We take no position as to whether the standard set forth in United States v. Loy, 237 F.3d 251, 256 (3d Cir.2001), is implicated here, *179leaving that determination for the District Court in the first instance.

=== CASE 2210552 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:54.918237+00 ===

241 Cal.App.2d 812 (1966)
51 Cal. Rptr. 18
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
CECIL MASSIE, Defendant and Appellant.
Docket No. 9967.
Court of Appeals of California, Second District, Division One.
May 4, 1966.
*813 Eugene V. McPherson, under appointment by the District Court of Appeal, for Defendant and Appellant.
*814 Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, William E. James, Assistant Attorney General, and Gilbert F. Nelson, Deputy Attorney General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
WOOD, P.J.
In an amended information the defendant was accused of burglary in that he willfully entered a vehicle, to wit, a semitrailer used in conjunction with a motor vehicle, to wit, a motor truck and semitrailer combination, the property of John M. Collier, the doors of said vehicle being locked, and with the intent then and there to commit theft.
In a jury trial, defendant was found guilty of burglary in the first degree. Probation was denied, and he was sentenced to imprisonment in the state prison. He appeals from the judgment.
The judgment was affirmed by this court. (People v. Massie (Cal. App.) 44 Cal. Rptr. 297.) The Dorado-case rule was not raised by appellant prior to the time that opinion was filed. The Supreme Court granted a hearing and retransferred the case to the court for further consideration in the light of People v. Stewart, 62 Cal.2d 571 [43 Cal. Rptr. 201, 400 P.2d 97]; People v. North, 233 Cal. App.2d 884 [44 Cal. Rptr. 123]; and People v. Andrews, 234 Cal. App.2d 69 [44 Cal. Rptr. 94]. (These cases pertain to the Dorado-case rule.)
Appellant contends (as shown by his briefs on the original hearing) that the court did not instruct the jury properly; that the court erred in allowing the information to be amended; that the amended information does not allege an offense; and that the evidence was not sufficient to support the judgment. He contends further (as shown by his petitions for rehearing and for hearing) that the rule in the Dorado case was applicable herein,  that the officers' conversations with the defendant were not admissible in evidence, because the defendant had not been advised of his right to counsel or of his right to remain silent.
[1a] On December 3, 1963, about 10 p.m., Mr. Collier, a truck driver in the employ of the Thrifty Drug Company, drove a truck-tractor, to which were attached two 22-foot semitrailers, containing drug store merchandise, to a place at the rear of a Thrifty Drug Store in Compton and parked the vehicle there. He had driven the vehicle from the Thrifty Drug Company's warehouse in Los Angeles to that store for the purpose of delivering some of the merchandise there.
The first trailer (the one next to the tractor) had a double-door at the rear end and a single door on each side. Each of *815 the doors on this trailer was sealed by a metal clip, which is a piece or strip of pliable metal about six inches long, and one-fourth inch wide, which "goes around the hasp over the handle of the door"  and one end of the strip is placed through a clip at the other end of the strip, and then the clip locks itself. When the doors are sealed with a clip, it is necessary to use force to break the metal seal in order to open the doors.
The second or rear trailer had a rear door and a side door, which doors were locked with devices or padlocks which could be opened only by using a key.
When the driver left the warehouse the doors of the trailers were sealed or locked and he did not stop the vehicle, except for traffic requirements, until he arrived at the Compton store. After parking the vehicle there, he went into the store to ask the manager to unlock the trailers so that he could make the deliveries. When he left the vehicle to enter the store, the doors of the trailers were sealed or locked in the manner above described, but the doors of the tractor were not locked. The assistant manager Mr. Banks, after obtaining the key to the trailer, proceeded with Mr. Collier and another employee, Mr. Collado, to the trailers. As they approached the trailers, they saw the defendant Massie standing inside the first trailer and they saw another man, who was outside that trailer, holding the side door of the trailer open. The metal seal on that door had been broken. Then the man who was holding the door ran away. The defendant jumped out of the trailer and started walking away. The employees asked him to stop, but he kept walking and then he ran across the street. During this time the employees were following him. When they were within a few feet of him, he pulled out a knife and began swinging it. Mr. Collado went to the store and returned in his automobile to the other employees, who entered the automobile, and then they followed defendant to a street corner, where they again approached him. At that time Mr. Collado had a tire iron in his hand and the two other employees had similar weapons. They compelled the defendant to put the knife on the ground, and to drop a pair of leather gloves which he was wearing and which had been in the tractor cab when Mr. Collier went into the store. Then two police officers, who were on patrol duty, arrived there in a police car and arrested defendant.
Officer Parker testified that about five minutes after the arrest, while he and the defendant were in the back seat of the police car, he asked the defendant to relate what had occurred *816 just prior to the arrest; and that defendant's statements at that time were made freely and voluntarily. When the deputy district attorney asked him to relate that conversation, defendant's counsel objected thereto upon the ground that the corpus delicti had not been proved. His argument upon the objection was to the effect that the vehicle was not a locked vehicle (as required by section 459 of the Penal Code in order to constitute burglary), and therefore a burglary was not committed  that is, that since the tractor doors were not locked the vehicle was not a locked vehicle, even though the two trailers attached to the tractor were locked. The objection was overruled. Then Officer Parker related the conversation, as follows: Defendant said that he and Henry Eberhardt had been in the drug store where Eberhardt shoplifted a quart of whiskey, and then they went outside near the truck; Eberhardt found leather gloves in the cab of the truck; they agreed to break into the truck and that Eberhardt would get inside, pitch things out to defendant, and then they would leave; both of them entered the truck, after Eberhardt broke the seal; soon thereafter the employees came and chased them from the truck.
Officer Morrison testified that on December 5 (two days after the arrest) he had a conversation with the defendant at the police station; and that defendant's statements at that time were made freely and voluntarily. He (officer) asked the defendant to relate the circumstances which brought about his arrest. Defendant replied that he and Henry Eberhardt were in the drug store and Henry took a bottle of whiskey and they left the store; Henry took some gloves from the cab of the parked truck (tractor) and handed them to defendant, who put them on his (defendant's) hands; and Henry broke the seal on the trailer door and got into the trailer. Defendant replied, "No"; and stated further that when some employees came from the store, Henry ran from the scene, and defendant walked away and then "ran." The officer asked him whether he pulled a knife on the employees, and had swung it at them in a threatening manner. He replied in the affirmative.
Defendant testified that Eberhardt took the gloves from the cab of the truck and handed them to defendant, who returned them to Eberhardt; defendant did not know whether Eberhardt broke the seal on the truck, but Eberhardt went into the truck; defendant did not go inside the truck; when the employees came there, Eberhardt jumped out of the truck and ran away, but defendant walked down the street; the employees *817 asked whether he was burglarizing the truck; he said he did not know anything about the truck or burglarizing; the employees wanted to hold him, but he said, "No, you are not going to hold me."; he ran across the street because some cars were coming; when the employees were first following him, they did not have any weapons, but later they had "hook blade knives"; one of the employees flashed a light on him and asked whether he had a knife; then defendant threw a knife in the grass; at this time, the officers came and put him in the police car; he did not have a conversation with Officer Parker in the car; he did not tell Officer Morrison that he was inside the truck. On cross-examination, he said that when he was arrested he had the gloves in his hand; that he knew that Eberhardt was inside the truck to do some stealing; that he did talk to Officer Parker while they were in the car, but defendant did not say that he and Eberhardt agreed to break into the truck.
[2] Appellant contends that the court erred in giving the following two instructions: (1) "... that the word `lock' means to make fast by the interlinking or interlacing of parts." (2) "If you find as a matter of fact that all the doors of the semi-trailer were secured with metal seals such as Exhibit No. 1 in evidence prior to the entry, and that application of some force was required to break the seal to permit entry to the interior of the vehicle through the door, then such vehicle was locked within the meaning of the law." Appellant argues that these are instructions on questions of fact, and that they instruct the jury that a seal is a lock. Section 459 of the Penal Code provides, in part: "Every person who enters any house ... or other building ... trailer coach as defined by the Vehicle Code, vehicle as defined by said code when the doors of such vehicle are locked, ... with intent to commit ... larceny or any felony is guilty of burglary." (Italics added.) In the present case, the evidence was uncontradicted that, when the driver entered the store, each door of the first trailer was sealed with a pliable metal strip "around the hasp over the handle of the door," with one end of the strip through a self-locking clip at the other end of the strip. The definition of the word "lock," as stated in the given instruction, was a correct definition of that word. The other instruction, above quoted, was to the effect that if the jury found as a matter of fact that all the doors of the semitrailer (first trailer) were secured with metal seals, as described in the evidence, the vehicle was locked within the meaning of said *818 code section. The matter of construing the section was a question of law for the court. It does not appear that the court instructed the jury as to what the facts were with respect to questions of fact. It appears that the court was instructing the jury that if it found certain facts, then and in that event the court was declaring as a matter of law that the trailer was a locked vehicle within the meaning of said code section. Under the evidence, it was proper to instruct the jury that the trailer was locked.
Appellant argues further, however, to the effect that even if such sealing of the trailer amounted to a locking of the trailer, the "vehicle," which he asserts consisted of the truck-tractor and the trailers, was not a "locked vehicle," since the doors of the truck-tractor were not locked. In People v. Toomes, 148 Cal. App.2d 465 [306 P.2d 953], wherein the doors and the trunk of an automobile were locked and the defendant broke the trunk open and stole a tire therefrom, it was held that the act of entering the locked trunk for the purpose of theft was burglary. In that case the burglarized part (trunk) of the automobile was a separate enclosed part which could not be entered from the passenger part of the vehicle. [3] In the present case the trailer was a separate enclosed part of the tractor-trailer combination and it could not be entered from the passenger or cab part of the tractor. As above indicated, section 459 of the Penal Code, in specifying various things or places which may be the subjects of burglary, states in part: a "vehicle as defined by said code [Vehicle Code] when the doors of such vehicle are locked." (Italics added.) Section 550 of the Vehicle Code defines "semitrailer" as "... a vehicle designed for carrying persons or property, used in conjunction with a motor vehicle, and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon, or is carried by, another vehicle." (Italics added.) The court, in giving the said instruction, properly referred to the semitrailer as "a vehicle." The court did not err in giving said instruction, above quoted, to the effect that if the jury found certain facts, then and in that event the trailer was a "locked vehicle."
[4] Appellant contends further that the court should have given an additional instruction, namely, Instruction 115-B of California Jury Instructions, Criminal, concerning conviction of a lesser degree of the crime of burglary. Appellant did not request the trial court to give the instruction. Under the circumstances, the court was not required to give such an instruction. (See People v. Walker, 155 Cal. App.2d 273, 275 *819 [318 P.2d 77].) The court gave an instruction to the effect that if the jury found the defendant guilty of the crime of burglary it should determine the degree of the crime; that evidence had been admitted from which the jury could conclude that the defendant was armed with a deadly weapon and that in the commission of the crime he assaulted a person; and that the degree may be found to be of the first degree if the proof shows beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant committed one or both of such acts.
[5a] Appellant also contends that the court erred in allowing the information to be amended. The original information alleged, in part, that defendant committed burglary in that he "did willfully enter a motor vehicle, to wit, a semi-truck and trailer combination ... the doors of said motor vehicle being locked ... with the intent ... to commit theft." During the trial (while the sixth witness for the prosecution was testifying), upon motion of the prosecution and over the objection of the defendant, the information was amended by interlineation to read that defendant "did willfully enter a vehicle, to wit, a semi-trailer used in conjunction with a motor vehicle, to wit, a motor truck and semi-trailer combination ... the doors of said vehicle being locked ... with the intent ... to commit theft." Appellant argues that the amendment constituted a substantial change in the information and required a plea to the amended information and necessitated a continuance. Defendant did not request a continuance, and, at the time of trial, apparently did not consider that he had been prejudiced. It does not appear that the rights of defendant were prejudiced by the amendment. [6] "Whether the prosecution should be permitted to amend an information is a matter within the sound discretion of the trial court and its discretion will not be overruled in the absence of a clear abuse thereof." (People v. Baldwin, 191 Cal. App.2d 83, 87 [12 Cal. Rptr. 365]  reaffirmed on rehearing in 228 Cal. App.2d 840 [39 Cal. Rptr. 335].) [5b] It was not necessary for defendant to enter another plea. He had pleaded not guilty to the information and he retained the benefit of that plea to the amended information. The court did not abuse its discretion in allowing the amendment.
[7] Appellant contends further that the amended information does not allege an offense. As hereinabove indicated, section 459 of the Penal Code proscribes the entry of a "vehicle as defined by said code [Vehicle Code] when the doors of such vehicle are locked." Also, as above shown, section 550 of *820 the Vehicle Code refers to a semitrailer as a "vehicle." The amended information alleges the crime of burglary.
Appellant asserts further that the evidence was insufficient to support the judgment. [1b] The substance of the evidence has been set forth hereinabove. It is clear that the evidence amply supports the judgment.
The additional contention presented on this rehearing is that the defendant's conversations with the officer should not have been received in evidence, because the Dorado-case rule was applicable and the defendant had not been advised of his right to counsel or his right to remain silent. In People v. Dorado, 62 Cal.2d 338, 353-354 [42 Cal. Rptr. 169, 398 P.2d 361], it is said: "[D]efendant's confession could not properly be introduced into evidence because (1) the investigation was no longer a general inquiry into an unsolved crime but had begun to focus on a particular suspect, (2) the suspect was in custody, (3) the authorities had carried out a process of interrogations that lent itself to eliciting incriminating statements, (4) the authorities had not effectively informed defendant of his right to counsel or of his absolute right to remain silent, and no evidence establishes that he had waived these rights." The Stewart case (62 Cal.2d 571 [43 Cal. Rptr. 201, 400 P.2d 97]), referred to in the order retransferring the present case to this court, applied the Dorado-case rule, in reversing convictions of robbery and murder, under circumstances where the defendant therein had admitted that he robbed and "he could have kicked" the victim on the head after she fell. In that case the defendant "had been in custody for five days and had been interrogated daily," and it was held that all the conditions of the Dorado-case rule (requiring reversal) had been fulfilled,  that the investigation had begun to focus on Stewart, that the officers had carried out a process of interrogations that lent itself to eliciting incriminating statements, and that defendant had not been informed of his right to counsel or his right to remain silent.
The North case and the Andrews case, supra, also referred to in the retransfer order, applied the Dorado rule under factual situations which were held to be sufficient to show, in each case, that incriminatory statements of the defendant were made after the investigation had focused on him, that interrogations by the officers elicited the incriminating statements, and that the defendant had not been informed of his constitutional rights regarding counsel and remaining silent.
[8] In the present case, Officer Parker, who testified *821 regarding a conversation with defendant, was one of the officers who, while on patrol duty in a police car, arrived at the street corner where the drug store employees, using tire irons as weapons, were attempting to apprehend the defendant who was swinging a knife in a threatening manner at the employees. About five minutes after defendant was arrested, and while he and Officer Parker were in the police car, the officer asked him to relate what had occurred just prior to the arrest. The defendant said, in substance, that after Eberhardt had shoplifted some whiskey they (defendant and Eberhardt) went outside the drug store, and Eberhardt found gloves in the cab of the truck; that they agreed to break into the truck, and that Eberhardt would get into the truck and pitch things out to the defendant; both of them entered the truck, after Eberhardt broke the seal; and the employees came and chased them from the truck. No other question was asked by this officer. It thus appears that the officer did not carry on a process of interrogations that lent itself to eliciting incriminating statements, but on the contrary, by asking the one general question within a few minutes after the arrest, he afforded the defendant an immediate opportunity to explain the circumstances of his involvement or difficulty with the employees. In People v. Stewart, supra (62 Cal.2d 571, 578-579 [43 Cal. Rptr. 201, 400 P.2d 97]), in referring to United States v. Konigsberg (3d Cir.1964) 336 F.2d 844, it is said: "Federal Bureau of Investigation agents apprehended the defendants in a garage containing stolen goods, arrested them and took them to the bureau's office. At that office, prior to the arraignment, the agents asked Konigsberg `"why he was in this garage and just what had taken place ... and ... if he wished to cleanse himself or explain ... what his reasons for being there were, why the other individuals were there."' [Page citation.] Konigsberg then made some incriminating statements. Among other reasons for not applying Escobedo, the court said that the purpose of the interrogation, even though it took place after the arrest, was not to elicit a confession. The court stated, `The uncontradicted purpose of the discussion was to give Konigsberg a chance to explain his presence in the garage if he could; to hear Konigsberg's side of the story.... If Konigsberg or any of the other people caught in the garage could account for their presence this was their opportunity.'" In the present case, the court did not err in receiving in evidence the conversation which Officer Parker had with the defendant.
*822 [9] Officer Morrison, who testified regarding a conversation he had with the defendant at the police station two days after the arrest, was not an arresting officer but was a member of the detective division. This officer asked the defendant to relate the circumstances which brought about his arrest. Defendant's reply, as shown hereinabove in stating the officer's testimony, included a statement that Eberhardt broke the seal on the trailer door and got into the trailer. The officer then asked defendant whether he entered the trailer. Defendant replied, "No"; and stated further that when some employees came, Eberhardt ran away, and the defendant walked away and then "ran." The officer asked whether the defendant pulled a knife on the employees and swung it at them in a threatening manner. He replied in the affirmative. The first of the three questions asked by the officer was a general one which afforded the defendant an opportunity to explain the circumstances of the arrest. After the defendant had said, in reply to the first question, that Eberhardt had broken the seal and entered the trailer, the officer asked a second question as to whether the defendant had entered the trailer. His reply, "No," was of course exculpatory, but the remainder of his reply (to the effect that when the employees came he walked away and then began to run) might be construed as indicating consciousness of guilt. After the defendant had said, in effect, that he had run away from the employees, the officer asked him the third question as to whether he pulled a knife on them. This reply might also indicate culpability. It appears that the three questions were similar to the questions referred to hereinabove in the quotation from the Konigsberg case,  wherein Konigsberg was asked why he was in the garage, what had taken place, whether he wished to explain, and why the other individuals were there. In that case, where the defendant made some incriminating statements, it was said, as above indicated, that the purpose of the interrogation was to give the defendant an opportunity to explain the circumstances or to give his side of the story. In the present case, it appears that the three questions did not constitute a process of interrogations that lent itself to eliciting incriminating statements, but on the contrary the officer, by asking the general question, and by asking the two other questions based on the replies, afforded the defendant an opportunity to explain the circumstances of his involvement *823 in the truck incident. The trial court did not err in receiving in evidence the conversation which Officer Morrison had with the defendant.
The judgment is affirmed.
Fourt, J., and Lillie, J., concurred.
Appellant's petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied July 20, 1966. Peters, J., was of the opinion that the petition should be granted.

=== CASE 2210581 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:55.282891+00 ===

711 N.E.2d 533 (1999)
William WAMPLER and Larrin Wampler, Appellants-Plaintiffs,
v.
William TUSING and Laura Tusing, Appellees-Defendants.
No. 53A01-9808-CV-288.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
April 22, 1999.
*534 Thomas M. McDonald, Diane J. Walker, Applegate McDonald & Koch, P.C., Bloomington, Indiana, Attorneys for Appellants.
John W. Richards, Thomas Bunger, Bunger & Robertson, Bloomington, Indiana, Attorneys for Appellees.
OPINION
FRIEDLANDER, Judge
In this suit to quiet title between adjacent landowners, William and Larrin Wampler sought to have William and Laura Tusing remove a fence which the Wamplers claimed encroached upon their property. The trial court found in favor of the Tusings, determining that they had established title to the property in question by virtue of adverse possession. The Wamplers filed a motion to correct errors, which the trial court denied. The following restated issue is presented for our review:
Did the trial court err in finding in favor of the Tusings on the basis of adverse possession, where adverse possession was not pleaded as an affirmative defense, where the issue was not tried with the consent of both parties, and the trial court sustained the Wamplers' objection, made on the ground that the Tusings had failed to plead the affirmative defense of adverse possession, to the introduction of evidence by the Tusings with regard to adverse possession?
We reverse and remand.
On April 12, 1996, the Wamplers filed a pro se action against the Tusings in the small claims division of the Monroe Circuit Court II. The Wamplers' handwritten small claims complaint contained the following notation: "Statement of Claim for $650.00 + fence moved + $30.00 Court Cost encroachment of fence on our property". Record at 12. The Tusings did not file an answer. The Tusings' attorney entered his appearance and the Wamplers thereafter retained counsel. Defense counsel filed a motion for a continuance in which he stated that "[t]he parties believe that the issues in this matter are beyond the jurisdiction of the Small Claims Court." Record at 21. After a pretrial conference was held in small claims court, this matter was transferred to the plenary docket of the Monroe Circuit Court V.
The Tusings did not file an answer even after this matter was transferred to the plenary docket, nor were any affirmative defenses pleaded.
Trial was held before the Monroe Circuit Court V on March 8, 1998. After the Wamplers had rested, the Tusings attempted to introduce evidence with regard to the affirmative defense of adverse possession. The following colloquy occurred during the direct examination of William Tusing:
[Defense Counsel]: Is it your position here today that even if Mr. Graham's survey is correct that title should be quieted in your favor based upon the fact that defense has been ...
[Counsel for Plaintiffs]: Objection, Your Honor. There is no pleading for adverse possession in this matter. It's an affirmative defense. It must be pleaded.
[Defense Counsel]: This matter was originally filed in small claims court to which no *535 responsive pleadings are required in response to a small claim complaint.
THE COURT: I'm going to sustain the objection.
Record at 163. At the conclusion of the trial, the trial court took the matter under advisement.
On May 14, 1998, the trial court made the following entry in its chronological case summary:
The court having now reviewed the evidence presented in this case and being duly advised finds that the fence (barbed wire and its steel post replacement) establish the property line between the parties by the doctrine of adverse possession. The plaintiffs will take nothing by their complaint and title to the real estate east of the fence should be quieted to Defendants. Costs to Plaintiffs. Counsel for defendants to provide appropriate written entry for the court's review and use.
Record at 10. The court's subsequent Judgment Order stated in pertinent part:
The plaintiffs shall take nothing by way of their complaint. Title to the disputed real estate shall vest in the defendants based upon the doctrine of adverse possession because the defendants' possession of the property was actual, visible, open and notorious, exclusive, under a claim of ownership, hostile, and continuous for the statutory period.
The defendants shall have a survey performed to establish the legal description for the real estate east of the fence so that title in said real estate may be quieted to defendants.
Record at 50.
The Wamplers filed a motion to correct errors. The Tusings filed a response to the Wamplers' motion and requested that the trial court allow them to amend the pleadings to conform to the evidence with regard to adverse possession. As noted above, the trial court denied the Wamplers' motion to correct errors. There is nothing in the record to indicate that the trial court ever ruled on the Tusings' request to amend the pleadings or that the pleadings were ever amended.
Rule 8(C) of the Indiana Rules of Trial Procedure requires that affirmative defenses be specifically pleaded in a responsive pleading. Nonetheless, Ind. Trial Rule 15(B) provides:
When issues not raised by the pleadings are tried by the express or implied consent of the parties, they shall be treated in all respects as if they had been raised in the pleadings. Such amendment of the pleadings as may be necessary to cause them to conform to the evidence and to raise these issues may be made upon motion of any party at any time, even after judgment, but failure so to amend does not affect the result of the trial of these issues. If evidence is objected to at the trial on the ground that it is not within the issues made by the pleadings, the court may allow the pleadings to be amended and shall do so freely when the presentation of the merits of the action will be subserved thereby and the objecting party fails to satisfy the court that the admission of such evidence would prejudice him in maintaining his action or defense upon the merits. The court may grant a continuance to enable the objecting party to meet such evidence.
Here, the Wamplers did not expressly or impliedly consent to litigate the issue of adverse possession. As noted above, when the Tusings attempted to introduce evidence pertaining to adverse possession, the Wamplers promptly objected on the ground that the Tusings had not pleaded it as an affirmative defense. The trial court did not then permit the pleadings to be amended and the evidence presented. Rather, the trial court sustained the Wamplers' objection, and the Wamplers did not seek a continuance or offer any evidence with regard to adverse possession. Under these circumstances, fairness dictates that the trial court not make its ultimate decision on the basis of adverse possession without at least granting the Wamplers a continuance in order to properly prepare to meet such evidence.
Fairness requires that the opposing party have "some notice that an issue is before the court which has not been pleaded or has not been agreed to in a pre-trial order." *536 Aldon Builders, Inc. v. Kurland [, 152 Ind.App. 570, 284 N.E.2d 826, 832 (1972) ]. This is particularly true when the new issue is not unequivocally clear from the evidence presented at trial. Id. "Implied consent to trial of an unpleaded defense may not be deduced merely because evidence relevant to a properly pleaded defense inferentially suggests a defense not within the pleadings." Elkhart County Farm Bureau Coop. Ass'n. v. Hochstetler [, 418 N.E.2d 280, 284 (Ind.Ct.App.1981) ].
Apple v. Kile, 457 N.E.2d 254, 256-57 (Ind. Ct.App.1983). In addition, in K Mart Corp. v. Brzezinski, 540 N.E.2d 1276, 1281 (Ind.Ct. App.1989), trans. denied, this court stated:
Before a party may impliedly consent to the trial of an unpleaded issue, he must be given some notice as to the existence of that issue. Notice may be overt, as where the unpleaded issue is expressly raised prior to or sometime during the trial but before the close of evidence. Notice may be implied where the evidence presented at trial is such that a reasonably competent attorney would have recognized the unpleaded issue as being litigated. However, the opposing party may not put a new issue into a trial under the cloak of evidence relevant to an already pleaded issue. Both parties must litigate the new issue, and implied consent will not be found unless the parties know or should have known that the unpleaded issue was being presented.
After having reviewed the record, we conclude that the issue of adverse possession was not so unequivocally clear from either the evidence presented at trial or the deposition of Vernon Mills, which was taken before trial, that a reasonably competent attorney would have recognized that it was being litigated.[1] This is particularly true given that the trial court sustained the Wamplers' objection to evidence expressly relating to the issue of adverse possession. Accordingly, we reverse the judgment entered in favor of the Tusings and remand this case to the trial court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Judgment reversed and remanded.
KIRSCH and MATTINGLY, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  The Tusings point out that they submitted a pre-trial brief to the trial court on the issue of adverse possession prior to the introduction of evidence. However, the Wamplers correctly note on appeal that the pre-trial brief was not file stamped, and it appears that such brief was not filed with the court until the beginning of trial.

=== CASE 2210612 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:55.732799+00 ===

93 N.Y.2d 893 (1999)
711 N.E.2d 963
689 N.Y.S.2d 685
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, Respondent,
v.
GERALD DION, JR., Appellant.
Court of Appeals of the State of New York.
Argued March 24, 1999.
Decided April 29, 1999.
Kevin J. Bauer, Buffalo, for appellant.
Michael A. Arcuri, District Attorney of Oneida County, Utica (Matthew P. Worth of counsel), for respondent.
Before: Chief Judge KAYE and Judges BELLACOSA, SMITH, LEVINE, CIPARICK, WESLEY and ROSENBLATT concur.
*894 OPINION OF THE COURT
MEMORANDUM.
The order of the County Court should be affirmed.
Defendant was convicted of criminal mischief in the fourth degree and petit larceny, both class A misdemeanors (Penal Law §§ 145.00, 155.25). On March 13, 1996, the People commenced an action against defendant for criminal mischief in the third degree, a class E felony (Penal Law § 145.05), and petit larceny (Penal Law § 155.25), a class A misdemeanor. Defendant was arraigned on March 29, 1996.
On May 14, 1996, the People stated on the record that they were ready to proceed to trial. The People also moved to reduce the felony charge of criminal mischief in the third degree to the misdemeanor charge of criminal mischief in the fourth degree. The defendant and the court consented to the reduction. Nevertheless, no reduction was accomplished because the court did not conform to the requirements of CPL 180.50. The charge was not properly reduced until October 15, 1996, at which time the People continued to assert their readiness for trial.
Defendant argues that because the felony charge continued until properly reduced on October 15more than six months after the action was commencedthe People did not make a timely assertion of their readiness for trial and CPL 30.30 was violated (see, CPL 30.30 [5] [c]). Thus, defendant contends that his conviction should be overturned and the action dismissed. We agree with the conclusion of the County Court that six months cannot be charged to the People in view of defendant's numerous pretrial motions and five changes of attorney (CPL 30.30 [4] [a], [f]). In addition, when the People answered ready on May 14, 1996, their readiness included the misdemeanor charge of petit larceny. That unreduced charge was unaffected by the procedural mechanics of CPL 180.50.
Defendant's remaining contention is without merit.
Order affirmed in a memorandum.

=== CASE 2210618 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:55.803549+00 ===

711 N.E.2d 1230 (1999)
305 Ill. App.3d 311
238 Ill.Dec. 569
The PEOPLE of the State of Illinois, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Erick L. MURRY, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 2-98-0196.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Second District.
June 16, 1999.
Rehearing Denied July 6, 1999.
*1232 G. Joseph Weller, Deputy Defender (Court-appointed), Office of the State Appellate Defender, Elgin, Jerry Finney (Court-appointed), Decatur, for Erick L. Murry.
Michael J. Waller, Lake County State's Attorney, Waukegan, Martin P. Moltz, Deputy Director, State's Attorneys Appellate Prosecutor, Elgin, Jane M. Brennan, Naperville, for the People.
Presiding Justice BOWMAN delivered the opinion of the court:
Following a jury trial, defendant, Erick Murry, was found guilty of the unlawful possession of a controlled substance (720 ILCS 570/402(c) (West 1996)). Defendant appeals, arguing that his conviction should be reversed and the cause remanded for a new trial because a per se conflict of interest arose when his attorney represented both defendant and two codefendants during preliminary hearings. We disagree, and we affirm.
Defendant, codefendant Shenell Washington and codefendant Joaquin Smith were all charged by information with the unlawful possession of a controlled substance (720 ILCS 570/402(c) (West 1996)) and the unlawful possession of drug paraphernalia (720 ILCS 600/3.5 (West 1996)). The basis for these charges stems from the fact that defendant and codefendants were found on August 7, 1997, at Washington's home with cocaine, a pipe, and other drug paraphernalia.
On August 18, 1997, a probable cause hearing was held, and defendant and codefendants were represented by one public defender, Martin Shaffer. The trial court found that there was probable cause, and an arraignment for defendant and codefendants was held on September 4, 1997.
At the arraignment, Shaffer again represented defendant and the two codefendants. Defendant, who was in custody and not present in court, and codefendants pleaded not guilty to the two charges. The trial court then set the matter over to October 8, 1997.
At the October 8, 1997, proceedings, Shaffer filed a motion to terminate the appointment of the public defender and to appoint conflict counsel. The trial court granted the motion and appointed a new attorney for codefendant Washington and another attorney for codefendant Smith. Shaffer continued to represent defendant.
At the trial, codefendant Washington testified. Washington admitted that she pleaded guilty in exchange for probation and that she was a recovering drug addict. Washington was asked about the statement she made to *1233 police, and she admitted that she never indicated in her written statement that defendant brought the cocaine into her apartment. Washington contended in her written statement only that the drugs did not belong to her and that someone else brought the drugs into her home. The problem that defendant alleges arose when the following dialogue took place:
"MR. SHAFFER: Well, his name isn't mentioned in your written? [sic]
WASHINGTON: It's not mentioned, but I do recall talking with you about the drugs not being mine and you saying that you were sure."
Shaffer objected, providing no basis for the objection, and the trial court ruled that defendant's answer was not responsive.
On redirect examination, the assistant State's Attorney asked Washington some questions and the problem defendant alleges arose as follows:
"MR. MORRISON [Assistant State's Attorney]: When was the first time that you mentioned Erick Murry that you recall?
WASHINGTON: When I was trying to talk with him about that.
MR. MORRISON: When you say `him,' who are you talking about?
WASHINGTON: Mr. Shaffer when he was appointed my public defender, but he said he wouldn't be able.
* * * * * *
MR. MORRISON: Did you tell Mr. Shaffer that Erick Murry brought drugs into your house?
WASHINGTON: I told him that they weren't my drugs and that Erick had him [sic] in his socks, yes."
Shaffer never objected to this testimony.
Codefendant Smith then testified, and, during a discussion among Shaffer, the trial court and the assistant State's Attorney about impeaching codefendant Smith, Shaffer asked for a-mistrial because, during cross-examination, Washington had alluded to a conversation that Shaffer and Washington allegedly had. Shaffer indicated that he did not remember any such conversation and that he was afraid he could be called as a witness. The trial court denied Shaffer's oral motion for a mistrial. However, before the testimony of codefendant Smith continued, the trial court did instruct the jury to disregard the statements Washington made on cross-examination.
On November 4, 1997, at the close of the trial, the jury found defendant guilty of the unlawful possession of a controlled substance, and the trial court entered judgment on the jury's verdict. On December 4, 1997, defendant then filed a motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict or, in the alternative, for a new trial. In this motion, defendant argued that the trial court erred in denying his motion for a mistrial.
On December 9, 1997, defendant's motion was denied, and defendant was sentenced to four years in prison with credit for time served and good time credit. On January 8, 1998, defendant filed a motion to reconsider the sentence, and the trial court denied the motion on February 13, 1998. Defendant then filed this timely appeal.
We first must address whether or not a per se conflict of interest arose because Shaffer represented defendant and codefendants during preliminary hearings. Under the sixth amendment to the United States Constitution, a criminal defendant is entitled to the undivided loyalty of counsel who is free from conflicting interests or inconsistent obligations. People v. Hernandez, 246 Ill. App.3d 243, 249, 186 Ill.Dec. 39, 615 N.E.2d 843 (1993). When a defendant's counsel has represented a State's witness in prior proceedings a per se conflict of interest will arise if the representation of the defendant is contemporaneous with the representation of the State's witness. Hernandez, 246 Ill.App.3d at 249, 186 Ill.Dec. 39, 615 N.E.2d 843.
Here, Shaffer was not representing both defendant and codefendants at the time of trial. Rather, Shaffer only represented defendant, and codefendants were each given their own independent representation. We conclude that no per se conflict of interest existed because Shaffer was not contemporaneously representing both defendant and codefendants.
*1234 We next must address whether an actual conflict of interest arose because Shaffer represented defendant and codefendants in prior proceedings. Initially, we note that there is a second class of alleged conflicts aside from per se conflicts of interest. People v. Spreitzer, 123 Ill.2d 1, 17, 121 Ill.Dec. 224, 525 N.E.2d 30 (1988). These alleged conflicts generally involve joint or multiple representation of the codefendants. Spreitzer, 123 Ill.2d at 17, 121 Ill.Dec. 224, 525 N.E.2d 30. In order to prevail on a claim of ineffective assistanceof counsel due to joint or multiple representation, the defendant must establish that there was an actual conflict of interest manifested at trial. In re T.M., 210 Ill.App.3d 651, 654, 155 Ill.Dec. 348, 569 N.E.2d 529 (1991). That is, a defendant must show that an actual conflict of interest affected his attorney's performance. Spreitzer, 123 Ill.2d at 17, 121 Ill.Dec. 224, 525 N.E.2d 30.
We conclude, as explained below, that no actual conflict of interest arose. No actual conflict of interest was manifested at trial because (1) Shaffer effectively cross-examined Washington, (2) the attorney-client privilege prevented the disclosure of Washington's conversation with Shaffer, and (3) the trial court's admonishment to the jury cured any conflict.
We note that no actual conflict of interest existed because Shaffer conducted an effective cross-examination of Washington, the witness who revealed the alleged conflict. In joint or multiple representation cases, the primary concern is whether or not the defendant's attorney conducted a thorough cross-examination of the attorney's former client who now serves as a State's witness. People v. Cunningham, 107 Ill.2d 143, 149, 89 Ill.Dec. 879, 481 N.E.2d 722 (1985), citing United States v. Jeffers, 520 F.2d 1256, 1259 (7th Cir.1975). Jeffers applied a two-prong test to decide whether or not a conflict of interest arises when one defense attorney represents more than one defendant. Cunningham, 107 Ill.2d at 149, 89 Ill.Dec. 879, 481 N.E.2d 722.
The first prong of the test requires determining whether or not the defense attorney's pecuniary interests or future business would cause the attorney to avoid cross-examining the witness in a way that could be embarrassing or offensive to the witness. Cunningham, 107 Ill.2d at 149, 89 Ill.Dec. 879, 481 N.E.2d 722. The second prong involves determining whether or not information the attorney received from the witness would be relevant to effectively cross-examining the witness. Cunningham, 107 Ill.2d at 149-150, 89 Ill.Dec. 879, 481 N.E.2d 722. When the defense attorney is a public defender and the defendant is indigent, the answer to the first prong will be that the attorney has no pecuniary interest or future business that would prevent him from effectively cross-examining the State's witness. Cunningham, 107 Ill.2d at 150, 89 Ill.Dec. 879, 481 N.E.2d 722.
Here, no actual conflict of interest arose because Shaffer, a public defender representing an indigent defendant, had no pecuniary interest or future business opportunities afforded to him based on his representation of Washington. Also, Shaffer conducted a thorough cross-examination of Washington and did impeach Washington's testimony. Specifically, Washington admitted that she was high when she wrote her statement, that she abused drugs, that she lied in her written statement to the police, and that she sold cocaine in the past to support her drug habit. In his cross-examination, Shaffer painted Washington as a less than credible witness. Thus, we conclude that no actual conflict was manifested at trial because Shaffer did effectively cross-examine Washington.
We also conclude that no conflict of interest arose because the attorney-client privilege prevented the disclosure of Washington's conversation with Shaffer. An attorney-client privilege arises "`(1) [w]here legal advice of any kind is sought (2) from a professional legal advisor in his capacity as such, (3) the communications relating to that purpose, (4) made in confidence (5) by the client, (6) are at his instance permanently protected (7) from disclosure by himself or by the legal advisor, (8) except the protection be waived.'" (Emphasis in original.) Dalen v. Ozite Corp., 230 Ill.App.3d 18, 26-27, 171 *1235 Ill.Dec. 845, 594 N.E.2d 1365 (1992), quoting People v. Adam, 51 Ill.2d 46, 48, 280 N.E.2d 205 (1972). When the attorney-client privilege attaches to the communication, it remains protected until the protection is waived, and only the client can waive the privilege. Exline v. Exline, 277 Ill.App.3d 10, 14, 213 Ill.Dec. 491, 659 N.E.2d 407 (1995).
Several tests have been advanced to determine whether the privilege has been waived. Dalen, 230 Ill.App.3d at 28, 171 Ill.Dec. 845, 594 N.E.2d 1365. The three tests are the subjective analysis test, the objective analysis test, and the balancing test. Dalen, 230 Ill.App.3d at 28, 171 Ill.Dec. 845, 594 N.E.2d 1365. Given the facts presented here, we believe that the subjective analysis test should be applied.
Under the subjective analysis test, inadvertent disclosure can never result in a waiver of the privilege because the client had no intention of waiving the privilege, and a client must knowingly waive the privilege. Dalen, 230 Ill.App.3d at 28, 171 Ill.Dec. 845, 594 N.E.2d 1365. Under this test, we conclude that Washington did not waive the attorney-client privilege when she started talking about the conversation she had with Shaffer. As noted previously, the conversation was first mentioned when Washington was unresponsive to a question Shaffer posed to her. Nothing suggests that Washington knew she was waiving the attorney-client privilege and intending to waive the privilege. Rather, the record suggests that Washington's statement about the conversation was inadvertent.
The issue then becomes whether or not Washington would have waived the privilege if defendant was reprosecuted. We will not speculate about whether or not Washington would have waived the attorney-client privilege if defendant was reprosecuted. Furthermore, we do not believe that judicial economy would be well served by dismissing counsel, reappointing counsel, and starting trials over again when it is uncertain whether or not a witness will waive the attorney-client privilege when it comes time for the witness to testify. Finally, without Washington waiving the privilege, Shaffer was prohibited from discussing the contents of the conversation either during this trial or in a new trial.
While the conversation is privileged, it is important to look at how the trial court cured any conflict. Both People v. Crawford, 23 Ill.2d 605, 179 N.E.2d 667 (1962), and People v. Burage, 23 Ill.2d 280, 178 N.E.2d 389 (1961), are instructive on this issue. In Crawford, a jury found the defendant guilty of burglary. Crawford, 23 Ill.2d at 606, 179 N.E.2d 667. At the trial, an accomplice testified and was asked where the defendant got the tools to commit the burglary. Crawford, 23 Ill.2d at 609, 179 N.E.2d 667. The accomplice testified that the defendant acquired the tools from a previous burglary. Crawford, 23 Ill.2d at 609, 179 N.E.2d 667. The defendant moved for a mistrial, and the trial court denied the motion. Crawford, 23 Ill.2d at 609, 179 N.E.2d 667. Our supreme court concluded that the evidence of a prior offense was not admissible, but the trial court acted properly in denying the motion for a mistrial. Crawford, 23 Ill.2d at 609, 179 N.E.2d 667. The court noted that any prejudice could have been cured by the defendant asking the trial court to strike the testimony and to admonish the jury. Crawford, 23 Ill.2d at 609, 179 N.E.2d 667.
In Burage, the defendant was found guilty of the unlawful sale and possession of narcotic drugs. Burage, 23 Ill.2d at 281, 178 N.E.2d 389. At trial, the police officer to whom the defendant sold the drugs testified. Burage, 23 Ill.2d at 282, 178 N.E.2d 389. The defendant pressed the police officer for the contents of a conversation she had with the defendant. Burage, 23 Ill.2d at 282, 178 N.E.2d 389. The police officer stated that the defendant told her he was trying not to get involved with drugs again after getting out of prison. Burage, 23 Ill.2d at 282, 178 N.E.2d 389. The defendant moved for a mistrial but never asked that the jury be instructed to disregard the statement. Burage, 23 Ill.2d 280, 178 N.E.2d 389. Our supreme court concluded that the defendant's prior offense was completely irrelevant. Burage, 23 Ill.2d at 282, 178 N.E.2d 389. However, the court stated that a defendant cannot procure, invite, or acquiesce in the admission of evidence and then complain *1236 that the evidence is improper. Burage, 23 Ill.2d at 283, 178 N.E.2d 389. The court also stated that a trial court is not obligated to exclude improper evidence when the defendant makes no objection and does not move to exclude the testimony or disclaim the witness's answers. Burage, 23 Ill.2d at 283, 178 N.E.2d 389.
Here, the discussion of the conversation Shaffer allegedly had with Washington was not proper absent Washington waiving the privilege. However, the trial court cured any potential conflict by admonishing the jury.
Further, Shaffer invited Washington's comment about his conversation with her. Shaffer asked Washington if defendant's name was mentioned in her written police statement, and Washington stated that she did not mention defendant by name in the statement, but she did remember telling Shaffer that the drugs did not belong to her. Washington responded this way after being previously asked when was the first time that she mentioned defendant's name. Shaffer objected, and the trial court ruled that Washington's answer was not responsive to the question. Shaffer then asked for a mistrial, or, in the alternative, Shaffer asked the trial court to instruct the jury that Washington's statement on cross-examination should be disregarded. The trial court denied the motion for a mistrial but did instruct the jury to disregard Washington's statement on cross-examination.
Further, during jury instructions, the trial court told the jury that they should not consider evidence that was elicited but denied admission due to the sustaining of an objection. We conclude that no actual conflict was manifested at trial because defendant caused the conflict by pressing Washington to answer the question, and no actual conflict was manifested at trial because the trial court cured the conflict by instructing the jury to disregard Washington's statement on cross-examination.
There was a second problem raised when the assistant State's Attorney asked about Washington's conversation with Shaffer. However, Shaffer never objected to the testimony. We conclude that no actual conflict was manifested at trial because the trial court was not obligated to exclude testimony sua sponte, Shaffer never objected to the testimony, and nothing established that this testimony affected Shaffer's ability to represent defendant.
The judgment of the circuit court of Lake County is affirmed.
Affirmed.
INGLIS and HUTCHINSON, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2210623 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:55.860495+00 ===

260 Cal.App.2d 702 (1968)
In re JAMES RONALD RICKS on Habeas Corpus.
Crim. No. 4805.
California Court of Appeals. Third Dist.
Apr. 1, 1968.
James Ronald Ricks, in pro. per., for Petitioner.
Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, Edward A. Hinz, Jr., and Harold F. Bradford, Deputy Attorneys General, for Respondent.
REGAN, J.
[1] Petitioner, lawfully confined in Folsom Prison pursuant to a judgment of conviction not here in issue,  [fn. 1] attacks as improper the failure of the trial court to credit him with time served, by reason of an invalid commitment, as required by Penal Code, section 2900.1, which provides: "Where a defendant has served any portion of his sentence under commitment based upon a judgment which judgment is subsequently declared invalid or which is modified during the term of imprisonment, such time shall be *703 credited upon any subsequent sentence he may receive upon a new commitment for the same criminal act or acts."
On November 21, 1961, an information was filed in the Superior Court of Los Angeles County accusing petitioner of possession of heroin (Health & Saf. Code,  11500) on October 12, 1961, and charging a prior misdemeanor conviction for violation of the same section.petitioner was convicted of the crime charged and on January 17, 1962, sentenced to state prison for the term prescribed,  [fn. 2] the sentence in this case (#250655) to be served concurrently with the sentence resulting from the 1957 proceedings (#191886).petitioner began serving this sentence on January 30, 1962. He was released on parole June 7, 1965, and returned as a parole violator on November 23, 1966.
The 1962 conviction (#250655) was affirmed by the Court of Appeal for the Second Appellate District on October 13, 1965  [fn. 3] (hg. den.). A petition for certiorari was granted by the United States Supreme Court and, on March 13, 1967, the judgment was vacated and the case remanded to the Court of Appeal for reconsideration in light of Chapman v. California, 386 U.S. 18 [17 L.Ed.2d 705]. The conviction was reversed by the Court of Appeal for the Second Appellate District on June 19, 1967.  [fn. 4]
Petitioner was removed from Folsom Prison to the Los Angeles County Jail on August 30, 1967, for further proceedings in case number 250655. Petitioner subsequently entered a plea of guilty to the lesser charge of knowingly being present in a place where narcotics are being used (Health & Saf. Code,  11556), and requested a probation hearing. Probation was denied on January 16, 1968, and petitioner sentenced to the Los Angeles County Jail for a term of six months, this term to be served concurrently with petitioner's prison sentence in case number 191886.
A petition for writ of habeas corpus, based on the operation of Penal Code, section 2900.1, was filed in the Los Angeles Superior Court on January 17, 1968, and was summarily denied on February 1, 1968.petitioner was returned to Folsom Prison on January 25, 1968, where he is lawfully confined *704 pursuant to the judgment of September 4, 1957, in case number 191886.
Under Penal Code, section 2900.1 petitioner is entitled to have the time served pursuant to the judgment of January 17, 1962, in case number 250655, which judgment was declared invalid, credited toward the sentence imposed January 16, 1968, in the same numbered case, based upon the same criminal activities. (See People v. Thatcher, 255 Cal.App.2d 830, 832-833 [63 Cal.Rptr. 492]; In re Masching, 41 Cal.2d 530, 534 [261 P.2d 251]; In re Roberts, 40 Cal.2d 745, 748-749 [255 P.2d 782]; In re Levi, 39 Cal.2d 41, 47 [244 P.2d 403]; In re James, 38 Cal.2d 302, 314 [240 P.2d 596].) As previously stated, petitioner began serving his term in case number 250655 on January 30, 1962, and was released on parole June 7, 1965. He has served in excess of the six-month county jail term imposed in the retrial of case number 250655 on January 16, 1968, and must be credited with having completed said sentence.
Petitioner is not entitled to release from custody since he is held pursuant to the valid judgment in case number 191886.
The Los Angeles County Superior Court is directed to determine the actual time served by petitioner under commitment in case number 250655 (1962) and certify the same in petitioner's commitment to county jail in case number 250655 (1968). (People v. Thatcher, supra, 255 Cal.App.2d 830, 833.)petitioner shall be credited with such time pursuant to Penal Code, section 2900.1. The superior court is also directed to certify to the Adult Authority that said county jail sentence has been satisfied. The Adult Authority shall correct its records accordingly. The order to show cause, having served its purpose, is discharged; the writ is denied.
Friedman, Acting P. J., and Bray, J.,  [fn. *] concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. On September 4, 1957, in the Superior Court of Los Angeles County, No. 191886, petitioner was convicted on two counts of first degree robbery (Pen. Code,  211) and sentenced to state prison as prescribed by law ("... not less than five years."), the terms to be concurrent.petitioner was paroled on September 17, 1960.
[fn. 2]  2. Not less than two nor more than ten years. (Health & Saf. Code,  11500.)
[fn. 3]  3. Crim. No. 8216, filed October 13, 1965. Opinion certified for nonpublication.
[fn. 4]  4. Crim. No. 8216, filed June 19, 1967. Opinion certified for nonpublication.
[fn. *]  *. Retired Presiding Justice of the Court of Appeal sitting under assignment by the Chairman of the Judicial Council.

=== CASE 9737469 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:26:16.048024+00 ===

ROTH, P. J.
—Appellant Charles Reed was convicted by the court of burglary (violation of Penal Code, § 459) and receiving stolen property (violation of Penal Code, § 496.) He admitted a prior burglary conviction. Probation was revoked on the prior and appellant was sentenced to prison concurrently on all convictions. This appeal is from the judgments in each case.
Uniformed police officers driving a marked police car at 9 :15 at night in a high frequency crime area saw appellant crossing the street carrying a large commercial type clothing bag. They recognized him due to previous interrogations on the street and at the police station. When they approached, he transferred the bag to his other arm, reversed his direction a few steps, and then again reversed and proceeded in his original direction.
They pulled up next to him and asked what was in the bag. *884He answered that there were some clothes. He did not have any personal identification. The officers, obtaining' his permission to look in the bag, found seven new dresses of assorted sizes, one from one manufacturer, six from another. Appellant explained he purchased them for $20 from a man on the street that morning. He said he did not know the man’s name and would not recognize him again. The officers then arrested appellant for burglary.
Investigation developed that the single dress was one of several taken without permission about a week before from a manufacturer's premises (Saba); the other six were from a group of 30 taken without permission from another manufacturer ’s place of business (Pesantes) that morning.
Evidence clearly placed appellant at the Saba plant when its garments were taken. In that instance, many dresses in specially wrapped boxes ready for shipment were in the third floor shipping room near the elevator and stairway of the building. Appellant, standing in the alley doorway to that area, asked an employee if there was a dressmaker’s shop upstairs and was told of Saba’s. Appellant then said “O.K.” and left the building. Twenty minutes later, this same employee saw appellant walking down the alley away from the entrance with two labeled Saba shipping boxes under his arms. These two boxes contained the missing dresses.
Appellant was convicted of burglary of Saba’s plant and of receiving property stolen from Pesantes ’.
Appellant urges prejudicial error on the ground that the dresses introduced were obtained by an illegal search and seizure, and also insufficiency of evidence to sustain his conviction of receiving stolen property.
Appellant relies on People v. Henze, 253 Cal.App.2d 986 [61 Cal.Rptr. 545], to fortify his point that the dresses were illegally seized and introduced in evidence since at the time they were seized no valid reason existed for his temporary detention and subsequent arrest.
In Henze, supra, at page 988, the court said: “While the circumstances which will justify temporary detention have not been articulated with precision, still from the cases we have acquired a rough picture of the situations in which such a detention is warranted. First, there must be a rational suspicion by the peace officer that some activity out of the ordinary is or has taken place. Next, some indication to connect the person under suspicion with the unusual activity. *885Finally, some suggestion that the activity is related to crime.”
We then emphasized that the activity in Henze, although insufficient in its relation to crime under the facts there presented, required only a slightly stronger showing to validate a temporary dentention hy the police. As illustrative of some of the factors, any one of which could have affected the situation in Henze, we mentioned nighttime, high frequency crime area, erratic activity, and police knowledge of appellant’s prior criminal record.
In the case at bench appellant was carrying a filled garment bag of the type used by commercial dress manufacturers at 9:15 p.m. in a high frequency crime area. When he saw the police car, he first reversed the direction of his travel and then reversed himself again. Although the record does not indicate the officers specifically knew of his prior burglary conviction, he had been previously interrogated on the streets and at the police station by the arresting officers.
These existent factors at bench are strong enough to permit temporary detention for investigation by prudent police officers.
The foregoing analysis of the facts at bench were sufficient to give probable cause for the arrest. In addition, however, it will be remembered appellant gave the police permission to look into the garment bag. Once the contents were observed—seven new dresses of various sizes—and appellant’s tenuous explanation evaluated, the police had ample reason to arrest him for suspicion of burglary even though they had no specific report relating to these particular items. There was no illegal detention, no illegal search and seizure; no illegal arrest. (People v. West, 144 Cal.App.2d 214, 219-220 [300 P.2d 729].)
The evidence sustains the conviction of appellant on the charge of receiving stolen property.
• The Pesantes dresses disappeared in the morning and appellant was found with some of them in the garment bag that night. Possession of recently stolen goods creates an inference that the goods were received with knowledge that they were stolen. Slight additional corroboration is sufficient. (People v. McFarland, 58 Cal.2d 748, 754 [26 Cal.Rptr. 473, 376 P.2d 449].) At bench corroboration is found in appellant’s vague' explanation of how he acquired the dresses for $20 from an unknown person. The trial court could and did reject the explanation as false.
*886The judgment (order revoking probation) in superior court number 267231 is affirmed. The judgment in superior court number 321542 is affirmed.
Fleming, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9737471 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:26:16.313118+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE BUCKLEY delivered the opinion of the court: This is a direct administrative review action in which a dentist seeks review of an order and decision of the Illinois Human Rights Commission (the Commission). The Commission found that the dentist violated the Illinois Human Rights Act (the Human Rights Act) (775 ILCS 5/1—101 et seq. (West 1996)) when he referred an HIV-positive patient (G.S.) to another facility for routine dental care. The Commission awarded the following: $48 in actual damages; $8,000 for emotional distress; $339,609 in attorney fees; and $8,146.32 for costs. The dentist (petitioner) petitioned this court for direct review and raises the following issues: (1) whether the Commission properly allowed G.S.’s estate to substitute for G.S. as complainant in the action following G.S.’s death; (2) whether a dental office is a place of public accommodation under the Human Rights Act; (3) whether petitioner discriminated against G.S. when he referred G.S. to another facility for routine dental care; (4) whether the charge was timely filed; (5) whether the awards for actual damages and emotional distress were proper; (6) whether petitioner was denied due process; and (7) whether the award of attorney fees was proper. We reach only issues (1), (2) and (4) and we reverse. In September 1986, petitioner Karim Baksh, D.D.S., was in private practice of limited-general dentistry and provided regular examinations and teeth cleaning as well as doing crowns, caps, bridges, root canal work, and simple extractions. G.S. had been a regular patient of petitioner for over 10 years prior to September 1986. Since at least September 1986, G.S. had been infected with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), the causative agent of the acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). G.S. filed a charge with the Department of Human Rights on March 20, 1987, and a complaint with the Commission on February 11, 1988, alleging that in September 1986 petitioner refused to treat him after being informed by him that he had tested positive for HIV and that petitioner’s actions in so refusing constituted illegal discrimination on the basis of handicap by a place of public accommodation under the Human Rights Act. On May 23, 1988, G.S. was granted leave to file an amended complaint. An evidentiary hearing was held before administrative law judge (ALJ) Patricia A. Patton, which began on October 30, 1989, and ended on November 2, 1989. The following testimony, relevant for purposes of this opinion, was adduced at the hearing. G.S. testified that he telephoned petitioner on September 5, 1986, a few days before a scheduled appointment for routine dental cleaning and examination. G.S. told petitioner that he had a sore throat, which was probably due to a herpetic lesion on the uvula of his mouth and that he wanted to reschedule his September 9 appointment. During this call, G.S. also told petitioner that he was HIV positive but that there should be no difficulty providing him with care since Darla, one of petitioner’s hygienists, always wore gloves and a face mask. According to G.S., petitioner responded by saying that G.S. should reschedule his appointment when he felt better. G.S. further testified that he next spoke with petitioner on September 22, 1986. G.S. telephoned petitioner in response to a message left by petitioner at G.S.’s place of business for S.B., G.S.’s live-in companion and business partner. During the call, petitioner asked him if S.B. was “safe to treat.” G.S. responded that petitioner would have to ask S.B. that question. G.S. stated that petitioner then told him that he could not treat him in his office anymore and that G.S. would have to go elsewhere. Petitioner told him there was a Peter “someone” at Northwestern University who could treat him. G.S. asked for this doctor’s telephone number but petitioner did not have it. G.S. later spoke with his doctor, Doctor Norman, who told G.S. he could see Dr. Peter Hurst at Northwestern. Subsequently, G.S. sent a letter to petitioner requesting that petitioner forward his dental records to Dr. Hurst. G.S. made an appointment at Northwestern and, on September 29, 1986, had his teeth cleaned and examined by Dr. John Davis. Petitioner also testified at the hearing. Petitioner stated that during the first week of September 1986 he spoke with G.S. on the telephone. During this call, G.S. told petitioner that he would like to postpone his appointment because he had a herpetic lesion in his mouth. G.S. also told him that he had tested positive for HIV Petitioner transferred the call to the receptionist so that G.S. could make another appointment. After the call, petitioner spoke with Lynette Lueker, the dental hygienist scheduled to clean G.S.’s teeth, and told her that G.S. was HIV positive. Petitioner asked the hygienist how she felt about cleaning G.S.’s teeth. The hygienist responded that she did not know much about treating people with HIV and that she was reluctant to do so. Petitioner further testified that he subsequently telephoned his friend, Dr. Akal, who was chairman of the Illinois State Dental Society Peer Review Committee, and asked his advice. Dr. Akal told petitioner he would call him back and did so later that same day. During the later telephone conversation, Dr. Akal told petitioner that there was a clinic at Northwestern University Dental School specially set up to treat patients with HIV and that Peter Hurst was the doctor in charge. According to petitioner, Dr. Akal suggested that petitioner refer G.S. to the clinic as it was only one block away from petitioner’s office. Petitioner testified that he next spoke with G.S. on or before September 9, 1986, and told G.S. that the hygienist was reluctant to clean his teeth. He further told G.S. that he would like to refer him to a clinic at Northwestern University, which was specially set up to treat patients who had tested positive for HIV Petitioner told G.S. that Dr. Peter Hurst was in charge of the clinic and he gave G.S. the telephone number and directions. G.S. responded that he did not see any problem with being treated at petitioner’s office since Darla, the hygienist who treats him, always wears gloves and a mask and that all they would have to do is wipe the instruments with Clorox. Petitioner told G.S. that Darla would be out of town. Petitioner also told G.S. that he did not know much about the virus and that he felt it would be safer for G.S. to receive treatment at the clinic as it is more knowledgeable than petitioner. Petitioner later received a letter from G.S. requesting that his X rays be sent to Northwestern University. Petitioner further testified that he next spoke with G.S. on September 22, 1986. Petitioner’s office had called S.B.’s place of business to confirm S.B.’s appointment for the next day. G.S. asked to speak with petitioner, believing that petitioner was calling to cancel S.B.’s appointment. A little more than two years after the hearing in February 1992, ALJ Patton died prior to issuing a decision. On August 20, 1992, a supplemental hearing was held before Chief Judge Jane Bularzik and additional testimony was provided. By agreement of the parties, the factual record from both hearings was submitted to Chief Judge Bularzik. On July 8, 1994, Chief Judge Bularzik issued her recommended liability determination, recommending $48 in actual damages and $8,000 in emotional damages. On August 3, 1995, Chief Judge Bularzik issued her recommended order and decision on attorney fees and costs suggesting an award of $347,755.32 in fees and costs. G.S. died on October 28, 1995. The estate of G.S., by its executor, S.A.B. (respondent), was substituted as complainant by order of the Commission on February 6, 1996. On June 27, 1996, the Commission issued its order and decision affirming Chief Judge Bularzik’s determinations. On September 6, 1996, the Commission denied petitioner’s petition for rehearing and he now appeals. I. STANDARD OF REVIEW  It is well established that when reviewing a decision of an administrative agency “[t]he findings and conclusions of the administrative agency on questions of fact shall be held to be prima facie true and correct.” 735 ILCS 5/3—110 (West 1994). We must sustain the Commission’s findings of fact unless we determine that such findings are against the manifest weight of the evidence. Zaderaka v. Illinois Human Rights Comm’n, 131 Ill. 2d 172, 180 (1989). We are not bound, however, to give similar deference to the Commission’s conclusions of law or statutory construction because this court exercises independent review over such questions. Raintree Health Care Center v. Illinois Human Rights Comm’n, 173 Ill. 2d 469 (1996). Because the construction of a statute is a question of law, the standard of review on this issue is de novo. Lucas v. Lakin, 175 Ill. 2d 166, 171 (1997). II. SURVIVABILITY OF CLAIM G.S. died on October 28, 1995, before the Commission issued its order and decision on June 27, 1996. Petitioner argues that, as a result, G.S.’s cause of action has abated.  The Commission’s procedural rules explicitly provide that, “[i]f a Party to a Complaint dies, the proper Party or Parties may be substituted upon motion.” 56 Ill. Adm. Code § 5300.660(b) (1996). The definition section explains that “[t]he term ‘Party’ shall refer to a Person designated as Complainant or Respondent in a Charge or Complaint.” 56 Ill. Adm. Code § 5300.10 (1996). In the instant case, the Commission noted that “[i]t is clear that the complainant’s estate can be substituted for the complainant upon his death, [for such substitution] is provided for in the Commission’s rules and has been a practice of this Commission.” Nevertheless, petitioner argues that the statutory cause of action for the alleged violation of the Human Rights Act does not survive the death of G.S. because no specific provision for such survival is provided in the Illinois Survival Act (the Survival Act) (755 ILCS 5/27—6 (West 1992)). While the Human Rights Act may not provide for the survival of G.S.’s cause of action upon his death, “[i]t is well established that the Illinois survival statute allows a decedent’s representative to maintain those common law or statutory actions which had already accrued to the decedent prior to his death. [Citations.]” Wasleff v. Dever, 194 Ill. App. 3d 147, 152 (1990). The Survival Act provides in pertinent part: “In addition to the actions which survive by the common law, the following also survive: *** actions to recover damages for an injury to real or personal property ***.” 755 ILCS 5/27—6 (West 1992). Illinois courts have repeatedly held that the term “personal property” as used in the Survival Act includes intangible property, such as rights of action under statutes or the common law that had accrued prior to the decedent’s death. See McDaniel v. Bullard, 34 Ill. 2d 487 (1966); Stonestreet v. Iroquois County Sheriff’s Merit Comm’n, 150 Ill. App. 3d 1092 (1986); Bryant v. Kroger Co., 212 Ill. App. 3d 335 (1991).  In the instant case, petitioner argues that G.S.’s action did not accrue prior to his death because the Commission’s order and decision was not entered until eight months after G.S.’s death. Petitioner asserts that G.S. was not entitled to any damages as of the date of his death. To counter this argument, respondents assert that G.S.’s cause of action for compensatory damages accrued in September 1986 when petitioner unlawfully discriminated against G.S. We agree with respondents. Respondents rely, in part, on three cases in which causes of action survived. First, in McDaniel v. Bullard, 34 Ill. 2d 487 (1966), the Illinois Supreme Court considered the issue of whether a statutory cause of action under the Wrongful Death Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 70, par. 1) survived the death of the plaintiff, a child whose parents had been killed in a car accident, which occurred after the complaint had been filed. The court held that the action was personal property under the Survival Act and survived the death of the child. McDaniel, 34 Ill. 2d at 491. Second, respondents rely on Stonestreet v. Iroquois County Sheriff’s Merit Comm’n, 150 Ill. App. 3d 1092 (1986), in which the third district cited McDaniel with approval and held that a suit by a police officer challenging his discharge by the sheriff and county commission accrued to the deputy sheriff prior to his death and constituted personal property under the Survival Act; thus, it survived his death. Third, respondents rely on Bryant v. Kroger Co., 212 Ill. App. 3d 335 (1991), in which the court held that a husband’s cause of action for loss of consortium resulting from injuries sustained by his wife survived the husband’s death. The court found that the husband’s claim for loss of consortium is personal property within the meaning of the Survival Act and, therefore, did not abate at his death. Bryant, 212 Ill. App. 3d 335. We note as well that the Illinois Supreme Court has repeatedly and explicitly disapproved of the rule of abatement. Murphy v. Martin Oil Co., 56 Ill. 2d 423 (1974); McDaniel v. Bullard, 34 Ill. 2d 487 (1966); see also Bryant v. Kroger Co., 212 Ill. App. 3d 335 (1991) (discussing Illinois Supreme Court’s disapproval of rule of abatement). Based on the above, we find that G.S.’s cause of action for compensatory damages under the Human Rights Act accrued in September 1986 when the alleged discrimination occurred and that G.S.’s cause of action constitutes “personal property” under the Survival Act. Thus, G.S.’s cause of action survives his death and the substitution of the estate was proper. We also reject petitioner’s assertion that the Act is penal, as opposed to remedial, in nature and therefore G.S.’s cause of action does not survive. Both this court and the Illinois Supreme Court have described the Act as remedial. Board of Trustees of Community College District No. 508 v. Human Rights Comm’n, 88 Ill. 2d 22 (1981); Tandy Corp. v. Human Rights Comm’n, 264 Ill. App. 3d 828 (1994). III. TIMELY FILING OF CHARGE  In Illinois, a Human Rights Act violation charge must be filed within 180 days after it was allegedly committed. 775 ILCS 5/7A—102(A)(1) (West 1992). Respondents assert that G.S. was refused treatment on September 22, 1986, and G.S. filed his complaint on March 20, 1987, 179 days after September 22, 1986. Petitioner asserts that he referred G.S. on or before September 9, 1986, and therefore, the complaint was filed more than 180 days after the alleged violation and is not timely. G.S. testified that the telephone call occurred on September 22, 1986, and he explained why the telephone call had such a substantial impact on him and why he remembered it so clearly. The record also contains letters written by G.S., which confirmed the September 22, 1986, date. This court may not determine the credibility of the witnesses or resolve conflicting evidence. Zaderaka v. Illinois Human Rights Comm’n, 131 Ill. 2d 172 (1989). There is substantial evidence in the record supporting the Commission’s finding that the alleged discriminatory act occurred on September 22, 1986; therefore, we find that the Commission’s finding that the complaint was timely filed was proper. IV PLACE OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION Finally, the critical issue raised by the parties is whether a dental office is a “place of public accommodation” under the Human Rights Act. This is an issue of first impression in the reviewing courts of Illinois.  The Human Rights Act provides: “It is a civil rights violation for any person on the basis of unlawful discrimination to: (A) *** Deny or refuse to another the full and equal enjoyment of the facilities and services of any public place of accommodation.” 775 ILCS 5/5—102(a) (West 1992). The Act’s definition of “place of public accommodation,” in its entirety, is as follows: “(1) Place of public accommodation means a business, accommodation, refreshment, entertainment, recreation, or transportation facility of any kind, whether licensed or not, whose goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages or accommodations are extended, offered, sold, or otherwise made available to the public. (2) By way of example, but not of limitation, place of public accommodation includes facilities of the following types: inns, restaurants, eating houses, hotels, soda fountains, soft drink parlors, taverns, roadhouses, barber shops, department stores, clothing stores, hat stores, shoe stores, bathrooms, restrooms, theatres, skating rinks, public golf courses, public golf driving ranges, concerts, cafes, bicycle rinks, elevators, ice cream parlors or rooms, railroads, omnibuses, busses, stages, airplanes, street cars, boats, funeral hearses, crematories, cemeteries, and public conveyances on land, water, or air, pubbc swimming pools and other places of pubbc accommodation and amusement.” 775 ILCS 5/5—101(A) (West 1992).  A dental office is not specifically enumerated as a “place of public accommodation” under the Human Rights Act; therefore, we must necessarily determine whether a dental office falls within the broad statutory definition of that term. In so doing: “[W]e must focus on the language of the statute itself. [Citation.] Legislative intent is the controlbng inquiry in construing a statute, and the statutory language is the best indication of that intent. [Citation.] Statutory provisions must be read as a whole, and no word or paragraph should be interpreted so as to be rendered meaningless.” Boaden v. Department of Law Enforcement, 267 Ill. App. 3d 645, 651 (1994), affd, 171 Ill. 2d 230 (1996). Respondents argue that a dental office falls under the plain language and broad definition of “public accommodation” found in subsection (A)(1) of the Human Rights Act (775 ILCS 5/5—101(A) (West 1992)), which provides that a “place of pubbc accommodation” includes a “business *** facility of any kind.” However, an interpretation of the phrase “business *** facility of any kind” as broad as respondents urge would render the Human Rights Act’s definition of “place of public accommodation” and the accompanying examples found in subsection (A)(2) surplusage. Had the legislature intended such an all-encompassing definition of a “place of pubbc accommodation” the definition would simply read “a ‘place of public accommodation’ is a business facility of any kind.” See, e.g., Isbister v. Boys’ Club of Santa Cruz, Inc., 40 Cal. 3d 72, 78-79, 707 E2d 212, 215-16, 219 Cal. Rptr. 150, 153-54 (1985). The words and structure of the statute indicate some limitation as to the type of “business” intended for inclusion and are not so broad as to automatically include every conceivable interpretation of a “business.” Thus, a dental office does not fall per se under the plain language of subsection (A)(1) of the Human Rights Act as a “business *** facility of any kind” and our analysis turns to further judicial interpretation of the statute. The Illinois Supreme Court has addressed this section of the Human Rights Act in Board of Trustees of Southern Illinois University v. Department of Human Rights, 159 Ill. 2d 206, 211 (1994) (SIU). There, in determining whether an academic program in a public institution is a “place of pubbc accommodation,” the supreme court interpreted the phrase “other places of public accommodation and amusement” in subsection (A)(2) (775 ILCS 5/1—101(A)(2) (West 1992)) and directed that it be construed under the doctrine of ejusdem generis. The doctrine of ejusdem generis provides: “[W]hen a statute lists several classes of persons or things but provides that the list is not exhaustive, the class of unarticulated persons or things will be interpreted as those ‘others such like’ the named persons or things.” SIU, 159 Ill. 2d at 211. Of significance, the supreme court did not focus upon the undisputedly public character of the academic endeavor, in a state-funded university, but focused upon the nature of the activity itself, education, and whether education was similar to the activities enumerated in the statute. It concluded it was not. In holding that an academic program in a public institution is not a “place of public accommodation,” the admittedly divided court stated: “The cited establishments are examples of facilities for overnight accommodations, entertainment, recreation or transportation. *** Thus, what was anticipated by the General Assembly is a restaurant, or a pub, or a bookstore.” 159 Ill. 2d at 212. Still, respondents urge that the Human Rights Act is a remedial statute to be interpreted broadly to effectuate its purpose and favors inclusion of a dental office as a “business *** facility of any kind.” Respondents, by their argument, urge our focus solely on a dental office as a “business *** facility of any kind” and appear to abandon the other definitions of “accommodation, refreshment, entertainment, recreation, or transportation facility of any kind.” Thus, our analysis, pursuant to the directive of the supreme court, concerns the nature of dental services, whether they are similar to the activities enumerated in the Human Rights Act and whether a dental office is a “business.” The nature of medical and legal services and whether those services and their distribution constitute “trade” and “commerce” has already been considered by Illinois courts in addressing another remedial statute, the Consumer Fraud and Deceptive Business Practices Act (Consumer Fraud Act) (815 ILCS 505/1 et seq. (West 1994)). The Consumer Fraud Act, its definitions and judicial interpretations are instructive. First, we note that the Consumer Fraud Act and the Human Rights Act are both remedial. The purpose of the Consumer Fraud Act is “to protect consumers, borrowers and businessmen against fraud and unfair or deceptive acts or practices in the conduct of any trade or commerce.” Lyne v. Arthur Anderson & Co., 772 F. Supp. 1064, 1068 (N.D. Ill. 1991). Second, we note that the Consumer Fraud Act and the Human Rights Act both have definitions of “trade” “commerce” or “business.” The statutory definitions of “trade” and “commerce” in the Consumer Fraud Act are the: “advertising, offering for sale, sale, or distribution of any services and any property, tangible or intangible, real, personal or mixed, and any other article, commodity, or thing of value wherever situated, and shall include trade or commerce directly or indirectly affecting the people of this State.” 815 ILCS 505/1(f) (West 1994). The definitions in the Consumer Fraud Act are broad, perhaps broader than those in the Human Rights Act, and assuming respondents’ argument, dental services could be subject to the “sale *** of any services” under the Consumer Fraud Act. However, Illinois courts have interpreted the definitions of the Consumer Fraud Act to exclude medical services and legal services. In Feldstein v. Guinan, 148 Ill. App. 3d 610 (1986), we held that the practice of medicine is not an ordinary commercial enterprise and the Consumer Fraud Act does not apply to the practice of medicine. In so holding, we relied on Frahm v. Urkovich, 113 Ill. App. 3d 580 (1983), in which we ruled that the actual practice of law was too distinct from commercial practices to be covered by the Consumer Fraud Act. In Godson v. Newman, 807 F. Supp. 1412 (C.D. Ill. 1992), the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois noted that there are significant differences between the medical profession and other service industries and that nonbusiness aspects of the medical profession are excluded from the Illinois Consumer Fraud Act. Godson, 807 F. Supp. at 1415. The district court found that the contract at issue was a business contract between a physician and a hospital and, thus, distinct from the practice of medicine. Similarly, in Doe v. Northwestern University, 289 Ill. App. 3d 39 (1997), we affirmed the dismissal of a Consumer Fraud Act claim against a dental school and a dental student by relying on Frahm and Feldstein and held that “the provision of dental services for educational purposes does not constitute trade or commerce within the meaning of [the Consumer Fraud] Act.” Doe, 289 Ill. App. 3d at 45. The supreme court affirmed the dismissal on other grounds without reaching the Consumer Fraud Act issue. Majca v. Beekil, 183 Ill. 2d 407 (1998). Finally and importantly, in Cripe v. Leiter, 184 Ill. 2d 185 (1998), the supreme court held that the Consumer Fraud Act does not apply to legal services or the billing of those services. Plaintiff sued an attorney and professional corporation under the Consumer Fraud Act for deceptive billing practices. The trial court granted the motion to dismiss the Consumer Fraud Act claim. The Third District Appellate Court, citing Gadson and Frahm, found that the Consumer Fraud Act, although not applicable to the actual practice of law, is applicable to the “commercial aspects” of a law practice, including billing for legal services and reversed the trial court. Cripe v. Letter, 291 Ill. App. 3d at 163. However, the Illinois Supreme Court found that although the “Consumer Fraud Act *** contains no language expressly excluding or including the legal profession within its ambit” (Cripe v. Letter, 184 Ill. 2d at 195), “the legislature did not intend the Consumer Fraud Act to apply to regulate the conduct of attorneys representing clients” (Cripe v. Letter, 184 Ill. 2d at 199), and affirmed the trial court. Each of these cases focused on the nature of medical, legal or dental services and whether they are a “trade,” “commerce” or a “business” and each case concluded that the legislature did not intend medical, legal or dental services to be included in the broad definitions of the Consumer Fraud Act. Thus, we conclude that the legislature did not intend to include a dental office as a “place of public accommodation” as that term is defined in the Illinois Human Rights Act. We conclude this based upon the supreme court’s directive to employ the doctrine of ejusdem generis in interpreting this section of the Human Rights Act, upon its holding that the legislative enumeration in section 5—101(A)(2) of the Human Rights Act anticipated a restaurant, pub, or a bookstore, which are obviously not similar to a dental office, and, further, upon judicial interpretations of a similar and arguably broader remedial statute, the Consumer Fraud Act, holding that medical, legal and dental services are not “trade” or “commerce,” words similar to “business” in the Human Rights Act. V CONCLUSION Accordingly, we reverse the order and decision of the Commission and need not consider petitioner’s other arguments. Reversed. O’BRIEN, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9737472 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:26:16.319099+00 ===

JUSTICE O’HARA FROSSARD, dissenting: The Human Rights Act prohibits unlawful discrimination. It in no way prohibits a dentist from refusing to treat a patient or referring a patient for legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons. Based on the facts of this case I cannot agree that petitioner’s dental office is exempt from the Act. The purpose of statutory construction is to effectuate the intent of the legislature which, under the Act, is to provide all individuals freedom from discrimination in places of public accommodation. 775 ILCS 5/1—102(A) (West 1992). As a remedial statute, the Act should be liberally construed to effectuate its purpose. Arlington Park Race Track Corp. v. Human Rights Comm’n, 199 Ill. App. 3d 698, 703 (1990). When interpreting a statute as part of a regulatory scheme, courts are not only to recognize the relationship between the statute and the regulatory agency enforcing the statute, but are to defer to that agency’s interpretation of the statute. City of Decatur v. American Federation of State, County & Municipal Employees, Local 268, 122 Ill. 2d 353, 361 (1988). Applying that principle, the conclusion of the Commission that petitioner’s dental office was a “place of public accommodation” should be accorded “substantial weight and deference.” Illinois Consolidated Telephone Co. v. Illinois Commerce Comm’n, 95 Ill. 2d 142, 152 (1983). Basic principles of statutory construction additionally support the Commission. Courts must interpret a statute within the plain meaning of the words used in the statute and “when the language is clear, it will be given effect without resort to other aids for construction.” Kunkel v. Walton, 179 Ill. 2d 519, 534 (1997). Petitioner cannot be exempt from the Act without holding that the legislature did not mean what the plain language of the Act says: “ ‘Place of public accommodation’ means a business *** of any kind *** whose *** services are *** made available to the public.” 775 ILCS 5/5—101(A)(1) (West 1992). No rule of statutory construction authorizes a court to conclude that the legislature did not mean what the plain language of the statute imports. Solich v. George & Anna Portes Cancer Prevention Center of Chicago, Inc., 158 Ill. 2d 76, 83 (1994). The majority’s claim that a broad interpretation of “place of public accommodation” would render some of the statutory language superfluous is unpersuasive. The Act lists a wide range of facilities that meet the statutory definition of a “place of public accommodation.” 775 ILCS 5/5—101(A)(2) (West 1992). The list is not meant to be exclusive, but illustrative. The prefatory language states “[b]y way of example, but not of limitation.” 775 ILCS 5/5—101(A)(2) (West 1992). These words undercut the majority’s conclusion that this list exempts businesses not specifically enumerated. The illustrations are examples of businesses, like petitioner’s office, that offer services to the general public, with no preconditions other than the ability to pay for the services. The majority further fails to note the exemptions to the Act, which include private clubs and private facilities. 775 ILCS 5/5—103 (West 1994). By these exemptions, the legislature recognizes that the prohibition against discrimination does not apply to facilities that by their nature are distinctly private. Petitioner’s office was not distinctly private, selective or exclusive. When interpreting such exemptions, our supreme court has stated, “It is established in statutoiy construction that the expression of certain exceptions in a statute will be construed as an exclusion of all others.” State of Illinois v. Mikusch, 138 Ill. 2d 242, 250 (1990). Under that rule of statutory construction, petitioner is not exempt. Had the legislature intended such an exclusion, it could have so provided. Neither statute nor case law supports the majority’s decision to create a judicial exemption. The majority further relies on the doctrine of ejusdem generis as applied in Board of Trustees of Southern Illinois University v. Department of Human Rights, where the supreme court decided that an academic program in a public university is not a place of public accommodation. However, that decision is consistent with the application of the Act to petitioner. A public university does not offer services to the general public as did petitioner. Only students who meet the admission guidelines, are accepted and pay tuition may participate in the academic programs. A public university selects individuals based on specific criteria, academic performance and test scores, and excludes those that fail to meet the criteria. In contrast, the petitioner did not impose any selection criteria, admission requirements or exclusions. The Commission found that petitioner’s dental services were offered and available to the public and petitioner accepted any person requesting dental services. Each of the 27 years that petitioner had been in business he advertised in the Yellow Pages. He sold his services to thousands of individuals and had about 3,000 active patients. He accepted at least 10 new patients every month. Under different facts, a dental office whose services are not offered and available to the general public may not constitute a place of public accommodation. However, petitioner’s doors are open to any member of the public who desires to become a new patient. Therefore, applying the doctrine of ejusdem generis, petitioner’s dental office, which offered its services to the public with no preconditions, is similar to the facilities listed in the Act and is subject to the Act. The majority analogizes to cases that have exempted the practice of law and medicine from the Consumer Fraud Act to support their conclusion that dental services are excluded from the Human Rights Act. See Cripe v. Leiter, 184 Ill. 2d 185 (1998); Gadson v. Newman, 807 F. Supp. 1412 (C.D. Ill. 1992). These cases provide little guidance as to whether a business that offers routine dental services to the general public is a “place of public accommodation” under the Act. The analogy is weakened by the fact that the two Acts are considerably different. Fraud perpetrated upon consumers is different from unlawful discrimination. Although both Acts are remedial, the Human Rights Act is much broader in nature, scope, and purpose than the Consumer Fraud Act. The protection afforded by the Consumer Fraud Act is limited to consumers, borrowers, and businessmen, while the Human Rights Act is designed to protect all individuals. The Consumer Fraud Act is limited to prohibiting fraud and deceptive acts or practices. The Human Rights Act is not so limited but prohibits all types of unlawful discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, age, marital status, physical or mental handicap, or unfavorable discharge from the military. The majority fails to recognize that the cases that it relies upon exempt the legal and medical professions from the Consumer Fraud Act because, in the context of fraudulent business practices, there are preexisting professional regulations that already provide remedies to the citizens of this state. See Cripe, 184 Ill. 2d at 197-98; Godson, 807 F. Supp. at 1420. The majority cites no body of professional regulations analogous to the professional regulations and available remedies relied upon by the courts in Godson and Cripe that regulate petitioner’s discriminatory conduct. The Consumer Fraud Act analogy does not support the majority’s conclusion in this case, but leads to the opposite conclusion. The reasoning of the courts in Cripe and Godson supports the conclusion that the Human Rights Act should apply to petitioner since it is the exclusive form of redress in Illinois for civil rights violations and no preexisting professional regulations make any other remedies available to citizens of this state for discrimination. Mein v. Masonite Corp., 109 Ill. 2d 1, 7 (1985). For the foregoing reasons, I respectfully dissent.

=== CASE 9737473 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:26:18.718642+00 ===

OPINION
MATTINGLY, Judge
Frank Nowicki filed suit against Cannon Steel Erection Company, claiming he received personal injuries and damages as a result of a Cannon employee’s1 negligent operation of a crane. The trial court dismissed Nowicki’s complaint for lack of subject matter jurisdiction. Nowicki raises a single issue which we restate as whether, for purposes of determining jurisdiction under the Worker’s Compensation Act, the trial court properly determined that Nowicki and the crane operator were co-employees.
We affirm.
*539FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
The facts most favorable to the trial court’s judgment are that Nowicki was employed as a carpenter by Custom Woodcraft-ers (Custom), a construction company which builds frames for houses and townhomes. At the time of Nowicki’s accident, Custom was working on a project which required the hiring of a crane service to lift roof trusses onto the townhomes. On August 4, 1993, Custom called Cannon to request a crane and a crane operator for the project. A Cannon secretary assigned James Battreall to report to the project the following day. Battreall did not have any further discussion with anyone from Cannon before he reported to the Custom project on August 5,1993.
On the day of the accident, Nowicki and four Custom employees were installing roof trusses on some of the townhomes under construction. The Custom carpenters hooked the crane cable around the tiuss, then advised Battreall when he could start lifting the truss. Battreall’s view of the spot where the truss was to be placed was blocked by a wall, so a Custom employee signaled Battreall so that Battreall could place the truss in the proper location on the building. Battreall moved the truss to within about a foot from the top of the wall. Nowicki and another Custom carpenter were preparing to nail it down when the tiuss was raised unexpectedly.2 Nowicki was holding the end of the truss and its movement caused him to fall off the wall. Additional facts will be provided as necessary.
STANDARD OF REVIEW
When determining whether an on-the-job injury claim should be dismissed for lack of subject matter jurisdiction, the trial court may consider the pleadings, affidavits, and any other evidence submitted. In addition, the court may weigh the evidence to determine the existence of the requisite jurisdictional facts and resolve factual disputes. Davis v. Central Bent-A-Crane, Inc., 663 N.E.2d 1177, 1179 (Ind.Ct.App.1996). Where, as here, the trial court considers evidence in addition to the allegations in the pleadings, we review the trial court’s resolution of factual disputes by determining whether its findings are clearly erroneous; that is, we consider the evidence most favorable to the judgment along with the reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom. Lawson v. Raney Mfg., Inc., 678 N.E.2d 122, 126 (Ind.Ct.App.1997), reh’g denied, trans. denied. We will not reweigh the evidence nor judge the credibility of witnesses. Id. A finding is clearly erroneous when the record lacks any facts or reasonable inferences to support it. Id.
Normally, the burden falls upon the party opposing jurisdiction to prove that the court does not have jurisdiction. However, public policy favors the inclusion of employees within the scope of the Worker’s Compensation Act, Davis, 663 N.E.2d at 1179, and the Act itself provides that it is the exclusive remedy for employment-related injuries which occur by accident. Laioson, 678 N.E.2d at 125. Thus, in a case involving an employee, once the defendant raises the issue of the exclusivity of the Act, the burden shifts to the employee to prove that the claim falls outside the scope of the Act. Davis, 663 N.E.2d at 1179. When reviewing the trial court’s determination that it lacks subject matter jurisdiction, we will affirm the judgment on any theory supported by the evidence of record. Id.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
The trial court found that Nowicki and Battreall were both employed by Custom, thus barring Nowicki’s claim as a result of the exclusivity provision of the Worker’s Compensation Act. Nowicki argues that Battreall was employed only by Cannon, and that an employer-employee relationship did not exist between Battreall and Custom. However, Battreall’s employment by Cannon does not exclude him from also being an employee of Custom. Where two employers so associate themselves together that both are in direct control of the employee and he is made accountable to both, he will be considered an employee of both employers. *540U.S. Metalsource Corp. v. Simpson, 649 N.E.2d 682, 685 (Ind.Ct.App.1995). The same person may act as an employee of one entity in certain aspects of a transaction and as an employee of another in a different part of the business. Id. An important question in the dual employment context is whether both employers possess a substantial, but not necessarily exclusive, right or power of control over the employee and the means, manner and method of his performance. Id.
Our supreme court has established, and the trial court applied, a seven-part test to determine whether such a relationship exists for purposes of the Worker’s Compensation Act. The seven factors are:
(1)the right to discharge; (2) the mode of payment; (3) supplying tools or equipment; (4) belief of the parties in the existence of an employer-employee relationship; (5) control over the means used in the results reached; (6) length of employment; and (7) establishment of the work boundaries.
Hale v. Kemp, 579 N.E.2d 63, 67 (Ind.1991). In order to support a determination that an employer-employee relationship exists between the parties, it is not necessary that all seven factors be present. Instead, if a majority of the factors is present, an employer-employee relationship exists. See Davis, 663 N.E.2d at 1180, citing Fox v. Contract Beverage Packers, Inc., 398 N.E.2d 709, 712 (Ind.Ct.App.1980), trans. denied.
The findings which supported the trial court’s conclusion that Battreall was an employee of Custom and that the Worker’s Compensation Board thus had exclusive jurisdiction over Nowicki’s claim were:
(1) Custom had at least an indirect right to discharge Battreall;
(2) Custom indirectly paid Battreall by reimbursing Cannon for Battreall’s services;
(3) Cannon provided Battreall’s tools and equipment;
(4) Custom had exclusive control and authority over Battreall pursuant to its contract with Cannon, indicating the parties’ belief that Battreall was a Custom employee;
(5) Custom controlled the manner and means of Battreall’s completion of the job;
(6) The length of employment was less than one day; and
(7) Custom established Battreall’s work boundaries.
1. Right to Discharge
The trial court’s finding that Custom had an “indirect” right to discharge Battreall was supported by testimony by Battreall that Custom could fire him at any time for any reason and by testimony from several Custom employees that if they were dissatisfied with Battreall’s performance, they would call Cannon and ask for a different crane operator.3 We addressed a similar “indirect” right to discharge in U.S. Metalsource, 649 N.E.2d at 685. There, Simpson’s employer, a trucking company, arranged with U.S. Metalsource for Simpson to haul some of Metalsource’s products. We determined Simpson to be an employee of both Metalsource and the trucking company. While Metalsource could not discharge Simpson from his employment with the trucking company, we noted that it could terminate Simpson’s employment with Me-talsource by calling the trucking company and instructing it to send a different driver.
Nowicki acknowledges the U.S. Metal-source result, but notes there was no evidence that Cannon would have acceded to a request to replace Battreall with a different operator, and appears to argue that Custom never “retained any right to discharge the operator,” Brief of the Appellant at 14, because there was no attempt to do so. It is not essential that a person actually be discharged before a right to discharge can be established. The trial court did not err in finding that Custom had an “indirect” right to discharge Nowicki.
*5412. Mode of Payment
The trial court found that Custom paid for Battreall’s services “indirectly by reimbursing Cannon Steel Erection Company for the services of the crane operator.” R. at 450.4 Indirect payment of this nature does not defeat the existence of an employment relationship. E.g., Davis, 663 N.E.2d at 1180 (crane operator was employee of lessee even though operator was not paid directly by lessee—instead, lessee paid lessor for operator’s services).
3. Supplying Tools and Equipment
There was testimony that Cannon provided most of the equipment used in the crane operation, but that Custom provided a tag line which was necessary for the lifts.5 Since most of the tools were provided by Cannon, this factor weighs against a co-employee relationship:
4. Mutual Belief in Existence of Employer-Employee Relationship
In Hale, our supreme court called the intent that an express or implied employment contract existed—that is, a mutual belief that an employer-employee relationship existed—the “primary consideration” in determining the status of a “loaned” employee. 579 N.E.2d at 67. The trial court here found that “[t]he belief of the parties is best determined from the terms of the contract, and the contract between Cannon Steel and Custom Woodcrafters provided that Custom Woodcrafters had exclusive control and authority over the crane operator.” R. at 451. The section of the crane rental agreement upon which the trial court relied is entitled “Indemnification,” and provides:
Lessee [Custom] agrees that the equipment and all .persons operating such equipment, including Lessor’s [Cannon] employees, are under Lessee’s exclusive jurisdiction, supervision and control and agrees to indemnify and save Lessor, its employees and agents harmless from all claims for death or injury to persons, including Lessor’s employees, and from all loss, damage or injury to property, including the equipment, arising in any manner out of Lessee’s operation. Lessee’s duty to indemnify hereunder shall include. all costs or expenses arising out of all claims specified herein, including all court and/or arbitration costs, filing fees, attorneys fees and' costs of settlement. Lessee shall not be required to indemnify Lessor for its sole negligence, but, Lessor’s liability for damage caused by the sole negligence of Lessor, its agents and employees hereunder shall be limited to the amount of Lessor’s liability insurance.
R. at 157.
Cannon asserts “the Crane Rental Agreement was an express contract of employment,” Brief of Appellee Cannon Steel Erection Company at 25. We disagree. While this contractual provision may properly have been considered as evidence of the belief of the parties, we decline to hold that this provision, by itself, establishes- that Custom had exclusive control and authority over Battreall for purposes of establishing an employment relationship.
This provision addresses only indemnification. An indemnification provision is one which covers the risk of harm sustained by third persons that might be caused by either party to the indemnity agreement. Such a provision shifts the financial burden for the ultimate payment of damages from the indemnitor to the indemnitor. Morris v. McDonald’s Corp., 650 N.E.2d 1219, 1222 (Ind.Ct.App.1995). Because such provisions are used primarily to allocate between the parties financial responsibility for damages claimed by a third party, they cannot, by themselves, determine employment status.
Thus, the statement in the indemnification provision before us to the effect that Custom had “exclusive jurisdiction, supervision and control” over Cannon’s crane operator does not establish that Cannon’s crane operator is necessarily an employee of Custom. However, the application of the indemnification provision of this contract is not necessary to a *542determination that an employment relationship existed between Battreall and Custom.
We have found implied employment contracts in circumstances where it “was understood by both parties that [the employee] would be expected to work, at least to the extent of one day, or a period during that day when [employee] was needed, at the plant of [employer].” Fox, 398 N.E.2d at 712. We found an implied contract in similar circumstances in Tapia v. Heavner, 648 N.E.2d 1202, 1206 (Ind.Ct.App.1995):
It was understood by both parties that Tapia would be expected to work, at least for part of her work day, at the offices of Ohlson & Associates. Indeed, in her deposition Tapia admitted that she “sort of’ felt as though she had “two separate employers.” Record at 22 (Deposition of Shab-nam Tapia).
Battreall testified that he believed himself to be a Custom employee. In addition, there was testimony that the relationship between Custom and the crane operator was the same regardless of whether the portion of the agreement containing the indemnification provision was signed.6 We cannot say the trial court’s finding that the parties believed there was an employment relationship was clearly erroneous.
5. Control over the Means Used in the Results Reached
An important question in the dual employment context is whether “both employers possess a substantial, but not necessarily exclusive, right or power of control over the employee and the means, manner and method of his performance.” Id., quoting Fox, 398 N.E.2d at 711. Cannon argues Custom’s right to control Battreall’s performance of his duties was evidenced by the fact that Custom personnel told Battreall what to lift, when to lift the trusses, and where to place them. There was evidence that Battr-eall could not begin a lift until signaled to by a Custom worker, and that after the lift started, Battreall was obliged to follow the signals of a Custom employee because Battr-eall’s view of the roof was obscured by a wall. Custom employees determined what specific work Battreall was to do, and where and when he was to do it.
In Davis, we found sufficient control to demonstrate an employment relationship when employees of a crane lessee “directed [the crane operator] and determined which loads he lifted and how he lifted them.” 663 N.E.2d at 1179. The crane operator there could refuse to perform any acts he thought were dangei’ous and the lessee’s employees could stop the crane operator if they felt his actions were improper. Id.
Nowicki argues that even if Custom exerted some control over Battreall, it was not “substantial” enough to support the trial court’s result. He describes evidence that Battreall was partly in control of how he did the lifts, and cites Sharp v. LaBrec, Inc., 642 N.E.2d 990 (Ind.Ct.App.1994) and Williams v. R.H. Marlin, Inc., 656 N.E.2d 1145 (Ind.Ct.App.1995) as authority for his argument that signaling a crane operator during a lift does not constitute “control” over the operator.
Sharp and Williams are distinguishable. Sharp involved the question of whether a crane operator had “exclusive control” sufficient to satisfy that element of the rule of res ipsa loquitur so as to support the giving of a res ipsa loquitor instruction. 642 N.E.2d at 995. We found that where the crane operator had lifted the load and had held it in a “locked down” position for several minutes before the load swung and hit the plaintiff, that was sufficient to show the crane operator had “exclusive control.”7 Id. at 994. In *543the present ease, the accident occurred during Battreall’s lowering of the load. As there was evidence that Custom employees directed Battreall when to raise or lower the load, this case, unlike Sharp, does not demonstrate the crane operator’s “exclusive control.”
In Williams, we stated that “[w]orkmen signaling to a crane operator with a ‘thumbs up’ hardly constitutes an assertion of control.” 656 N.E.2d at 1153. However, the issue being addressed in Williams was not one solely of control. It was, instead, whether the crane operator was a “borrowed servant” or co-employee of the plaintiff. In Williams, the crane company had no contract with the plaintiffs employer, the subcontractor. The evidence was that the plaintiffs employer used the crane only occasionally for the purpose of having the subcontractor’s employees lifted to the platform where they were working. There was no evidence of any “control” by the subcontractor other than its act of indicating when the employees should be raised.
In the present case, the Custom employees signaled Battreall what to lift, when to lift the trusses, and where to place them. In addition, Custom employees determined what specific work Battreall was to do, and where and when he was to do it. This is sufficient evidence to support the trial court’s finding that Battreall was under Custom’s control.
6. Length of Employment
The trial court determined that while Battreall was employed by Custom for less than one day, “[t]he length of employment ... was controlled by Custom Wood-crafters.” R. at 451. Nowicki appears to argue that this factor was improperly applied because Custom was using Cannon’s services on a “temporary basis” and for a very brief period. Brief of the Appellant at 19. However, our decisions suggest the actual length of the employment is not as important as the question of who controls the length of the employment. So, in Fox, we found that an employment relationship was indicated because “Contract [the ‘borrowing’ employer] determined the length of time Fox would be required to work at the plant.” 398 N.E.2d at 712. By contrast, in Hale, our supreme court found that the plaintiff was not an employee of an independent contractor when the plaintiffs employer instructed plaintiff to stop the work he was doing for the employer and to help the subcontractor when summoned by the subcontractor. The court characterized the plaintiffs work for the subcontractor as “casual.” 579 N.E.2d at 67.
In the present case, Custom determined how many trusses would need to be set and the length of time it would require to set those trusses. The trial court did not err in finding that the length of the employment was determined by Custom.
7. Establishment of Work Boundaries
The trial court found that Custom established Battreall’s work boundaries. Although Nowicki concedes that Cannon did not establish Battreall’s work boundaries, he asserts that Custom did not do so either. Rather, he argues “the work boundaries were inherently set by the general contractor as the framing of each town home progressed.” Brief of the Appellant at 20. Cannon argues the trial court’s conclusion was sufficiently supported by evidence that Custom set the hours Battreall would work and controlled all the boundaries of his work insofar as it determined where hé would be working and what he would be doing.
Our decisions provide little useful guidance for this factor, as those decisions which explicitly address it involve situations where the “borrowing” employer operated a plant or office where the “borrowed” employee was sent to work. E.g., Fox (temporary help agency employee assigned to plant) and U.S. Metalsource (truck driver assigned to haul product from steel plant). In U.S. Metal-source, we noted that on some days, “circumstances would require Metalsource to call [the driver] to change his route to accommodate different buyers. No approval from [the trucking company] was required for this change in route.” 649 N.E.2d at 685. We did not link that fact explicitly to the “work boundaries” factor.
To the extent neither Cannon nor Custom could be said to have established spatial boundaries for Battreall’s work, this factor *544may not be applicable here. Our decisions do not indicate whether temporal or other “boundaries” may be implicated as well. Boundaries other than spatial ones might more appropriately be analyzed under the “control” factor.8 That appears to be the approach we took in Williams, where, under the subheading “(7) Work Boundaries”, we stated only: “See supra (5) Control.” 656 N.E.2d at 1153. In light of the extent of Custom’s control of Battreall’s work at the Custom job site, we cannot say the trial court finding that Custom established Battreall’s work boundaries was clearly erroneous.
CONCLUSION
The trial court properly determined that Cannon’s crane operator was also an employee of Custom when Nowicki was injured, and its dismissal of Nowicki’s complaint is affirmed.
Affirmed.
FRIEDLANDER, J., concurs.
KIRSCH, J., dissents with opinion.
. Neither party argues on appeal that the crane operator was an independent contractor or that he was not a Cannon employee. At the hearing on Cannon's motion to dismiss, both parties' counsel characterized the crane operator as a Cannon employee. See, e.g., R. at 461, 464, 477.
. There is a question whether Battreall was signaled in error by a Custom employee to raise the truss or whether Battreall accidentally raised the truss.
. Nowicki represents the testimony of the Custom employees as being that they "universally denied they had the right to discharge the crane operator from the job site." Brief of the Appellant at 13. However, most of those employees also testified that if they were dissatisfied with Battreall's performance, they would call Cannon and ask for a different operator.
. Nowicki does not provide argument in his brief as to the effect of this factor.
. Neither does Nowicki provide argument in his brief as to the effect of this factor.
. For example, one Custom employee testified as follows:
Q. Irrespective of whether you have signed the top or bottom or both on those agreements that relationship did not change, correct?
A. Yes.
R. at 129-30.
Another employee testified as follows:
Q. So assuming you signed just the bottom or the top would the arrangement be any different between Cannon Steel and Custom Woodcraft-ers?
A. Nope.
Id. at 239-40.
. It should also be noted that the company that supplied the crane also supplied the employee who signaled the crane operator to raise and lower the load.
. The first Indiana decision to articulate the "establishing of work boundaries” as one of the indicia of an employment relationship appears to be Gibbs v. Miller, 152 Ind.App. 326, 330, 283 N.E.2d 592, 595 (1972). Gibbs cites to Lazarus v. Scherer, 92 Ind.App. 90, 174 N.E. 293 (1931) and to the Restatement (Second) of Agency § 220 (1958); however, neither authority explicitly mentions "work boundaries” as a factor. In Lazarus, we noted that the plaintiff was on the defendant's premises and engaged in work for the defendant’s benefit when the injury took place. We went on to state that the "decisive test” of an employment relationship was the right of control. 92 Ind.App. at 98, 174 N.E. at 295.
The Restatement does indicate that one factor to be considered in determining whether one acting for another is a servant or an independent contractor is who provides "the place of work for tire person doing the work.” Restatement (Second) of Agency § 220(2). Comment (1) to that section states in part:
If work is done upon the premises of the employer with his machinery by workmen who agree to obey general rules for the regulation of the conduct of employees, the inference is strong that such workmen are servants of the owner ... if, however, rules are made only for general policing of the premises, as where a number of separate groups of workmen are employed in erecting a building, mere conformity to such regulations does not indicate that the workmen are servants of the person making the rules.
So, like Lazarus, the Restatement suggests work boundaries are significant in a dual employment context only to the extent they evidence which entity exercises the greater control over the employee. And see, e.g., Thompson v. Travelers Indem. Co. of R.I., 777 S.W.2d 722, 722 (Tex.App.1989) (right to control the details of work "is shown by such matters as when and where to begin and stop work.”).

=== CASE 9737474 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:26:18.723495+00 ===

KIRSCH, Judge,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent.
My dissent is not from the majority’s statement of the law. The majority clearly, correctly and articulately analyzes the seven factors set forth by our supreme court in Hale v. Kemp, 579 N.E.2d 63 (Ind.1991), reviews the evidence on each of the factors and holds that the evidence is sufficient on a sufficient number of the factors to conclude that the trial court’s decision was not clearly erroneous.
Rather, my dissent is based on public policy concerns and what I believe to be a misapplication of such concerns by our courts. In its opinion, the majority iterates the oft-repeated statement that “public policy favors the inclusion of employees within the scope of the Worker’s Compensation Act,” citing Davis v. Central Rent-A-Crane, 663 N.E.2d 1177, 1179 (Ind.Ct.App.1996). The purpose underlying this policy was to insure that workers injured in workplace accidents in the course of their employment would receive the health and disability benefits mandated by the act. The purpose was not to immunize third-party tort feasors and their liability insurers from liability for negligence which results in serious injuries to one who is not in their employ. And yet, that is the result of the application of the foregoing policy to cases such as the one now before us.
It is from the application of this policy that the burden is shifted to the injured employee to prove that the claim falls outside the coverage of the act. Davis, 663 N.E.2d at 1179. Here, the trial court concluded that the employee had failed to meet his burden and the majority holds that conclusion was not clear*545ly erroneous. While there is clearly some evidence to support the trial court’s conclusions on each of the seven Hale factors, that evidence is not conclusive on any of the factors and, if the burden were not shifted to the injured employee, would clearly support a contrary conclusion.
By way of example, I point to the first two conclusions of the trial court, that Custom indirectly retained a right to discharge and indirectly paid the crane operator. The evidence supporting these conclusions was that Custom could have requested Cannon assign a different crane operator if it was dissatisfied with the one assigned and that Custom paid Cannon for the services of the operator and Cannon in turn compensated the operator. Virtually every independent contractor arrangement involves such indirect rights and obligations.
If it is the public policy of this state to allow third-party tort feasors and their liability insurers to use the Indiana Worker’s Compensation Act as a shield by which to immunize themselves from liability for their wrongful acts resulting in serious injuries to the employee of another, then it is a policy which should be re-examined. I would not apply the policy in this way, would not shift the burden to the injured employee, and would remand this case to the trial court for further consideration.

=== CASE 9737475 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:26:21.109863+00 ===

OPINION
STATON, Judge
Charles E. Lockert brings this interlocutory appeal from the denial of his third motion for speedy trial.
Lockert raises two issues on appeal, which we restate as:
I. Whether the trial court’s denial of Lockert’s third motion for speedy trial violated Ind.Crim. Rule 4(B)(1). ■
II. Whether Lockert’s right to a speedy trial under- Atiele I, § 12 of the Indiana Constitution or the Sixth Amendment of .the U.S. Constitution has been violated.
We affirm and remand with instructions.
In August, 1974, Lockert was charged with first degree murder, felony murder, accessory after the fact of felony murder, and murder while perpetrating a kidnaping. The first three charges were filed under Cause Number' 74-1091 and the murder while perpetrating a kidnaping charge was filed under Cause Number 74-108.2 In February, 1975, Lockert and the State reached a plea agreement under which Lockert pleaded guilty to felony murder under Cause Number 74-109 and received a life sentence. The other charges under Cause Number 74-109 were dismissed.
In addition, the plea agreement provided that Cause Number 74-108 would be continued, per Lockert’s request, unless and until Lockert (a) sought post-conviction relief; (b) appealed; or (c) escaped or left the jurisdiction of the Indiana Department of Correction.- Lockert agreed to waive his rights under Crim. R. 4 with respect to the continued cause. Lockert filed a petition for post-conviction relief (PGR) in 1977 and a second PCR in 1991. Lockert has also filed two appeals3 and a federal Habeas Corpus petition, none of which have been successful. The State has not sought a trial date for Cause Number 74-108.
*90On October 20, 1994, Lockert filed a motion for speedy trial pursuant to Crim. R. 4(B)(1) on the charge under Cause Number 74-108. The State objected to Lockert’s motion. On November 4, 1994, Lockert filed a motion to dismiss the charge based on the State’s failure to prosecute. Lockert’s motion for dismissal was denied on December 7, 1994 and his motion for speedy trial was denied on December 16,1994.
On October 30, 1995, Lockert filed a second motion for speedy trial pursuant to Crim. R. 4(B)(1). The State again objected. On February 8, 1996, Lockert again moved to dismiss the charge under Cause Number 74-108. The trial court denied Lockert’s second motion for speedy trial on February 9, 1996 and his second motion for dismissal on March 14,1996.
Lockert filed his third motion for speedy trial pursuant to Crim. R. 4(B)(1) on May 18, 1998. The trial court denied this motion on June 23, 1998. The trial court certified this interlocutory appeal on October 6, 1998. This Court accepted jurisdiction pursuant to App. R. 4(B)(6) on November 13,1998.
I.
Crim. Rule k-(B)(l)
Lockert contends that the trial court was required to follow the provisions of Crim. R. 4(B)(1) and set his trial within seventy days of his motion or discharge him.4 We disagree. Lockert’s plea agreement states, in relevant part:
(4) That I would request and do hereby request a continuance in Cause No. 74-108, that being a criminal action alleging the offense of murder while perpetrating a kidnapping.
(5) That I would further waive all rights and do hereby knowingly waive all rights to a trial setting under Criminal Rule of Procedure # 4.
(Record 14-15). Lockert expressly waived his right to a trial setting or dismissal pursuant to the rigid time constraints of Crim. R. 4. Therefore, the trial court’s refusal to set- a trial date did not contravene Crim. R. 4(B)(1).5
II.
Constitutional Speedy Trial Rights
Crim. R. 4 is intended to implement the constitutional right to a speedy trial. However, the rule itself is not a constitutional guarantee, and the rule is not co-extensive with constitutional guarantees. Shields v. State, 456 N.E.2d 1033, 1036 (Ind.Ct.App.1983). Lockert is entitled to a speedy trial under Article I, § 12 of the Indiana Constitution and under the Sixth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution, despite his waiver of rights under Crim. R. 4. In determining whether a *91defendant’s constitutional right to a speedy trial has been violated under either constitution, Indiana and federal courts apply the ad hoc balancing test established in Barker v. Wingo, 407 U.S. 514, 92 S.Ct. 2182, 33 L.Ed.2d 101 (1972). Sweeney v. State, 704 N.E.2d 86, 102 (Ind.1998), cert. denied, — U.S. -, 119 S.Ct. 385, 142 L.Ed.2d 318 (1998). The Barker analysis employs four factors: (1) the length of the delay; (2) the timeliness of the defendant’s assertion of his right; (3) the Reasons for the delay; and (4) prejudice to the defendant. Id. In analyzing these factors, the conduct of both the State and the defendant are weighed. Harrell v. State, 614 N.E.2d 959, 963 (Ind.Ct.App.1993), reh. denied, trans. denied.
The U.S. Supreme Court identified the length of the delay as “to 'some extent a triggering mechanism. Until there is some delay which is presumptively prejudicial, there is no neeéssity for inquiry into the other factors that go into the balance.” Sturgeon v. State, 683 N.E.2d 612, 616-17 (Ind.Ct.App.1997), trans. denied, (quoting Barker, 407 U.S. at 530, 92 S.Ct. at 2192). The charge of murder while perpetrating a kidnaping under Cause Number 74-108 has been pending agáinst Lockert for approximately twenty-five years. A delay of twenty-five years is presumptively prejudicial. See id. at 616 (eighteen month delay presumptively prejudicial). Thus, we must inquire into the other factors: (1) the timeliness of Lockert’s assertion of his right; (2) the reasons for the delay; and (3) prejudice to the defendant.
Lockert sought an indefinite continuance in the matter in February, 1975. Under the terms of the plea agreement, the State agreed to consent to this continuance unless Lockert (a) filed a petition for post conviction relief under Cause Number 74-109; (b) filed an appeal under Cause Number 74-109 or a motion to dismiss under 74-108; or (c) escaped or left the jurisdiction of the Department of Correction. Thus, under the terms of the agreement, the State was free to prosecutfe Lockert under Cause Number 74-108 at any time after he filed his first PCR petition in 1977. However, the State did not request a trial date and the cause remained pending pursuant to Lockert’s original request. Lockert did not request a trial date until October, 1994, when he filed his first motion for speedy trial. Thus, the first twenty years of delay are attributable to Lockert.6
Lockert first asserted his desire for a speedy trial in October, 1994. He continued to assert his right to trial for the next forty-four, months.7 The State, on the other hand, consistently opposed the setting of a trial date, and the trial court, relying on Lockert’s waiver of Crim. R. 4’s protections, refused to set the matter for trial. Lockert did indeed waive his rights under Crim. R. 4; however, he did not waive his constitutional rights to a speedy trial. Although the trial court was technically correct in denying Lockert’s Crim. R. 4 motions, the court should have proceeded to set a trial date. At the point when Lockert filed his first Crim. R. 4 motion, it was apparent that Lockert no longer desired the continuance he negotiated in his plea agreement. The delay in Lockert’s trial after he first filed a Crim. R. 4 motion is appropriately chargeable to the State.
The delay for which the State is responsible, forty-four months, is substantially less than the delay attributable to Lockert. Nevertheless, the State’s delay is a consider*92able length of time, which we must balance against the other factors, including prejudice to Lockert as a result of the State’s delay.8 Indiana courts have placed the burden of demonstrating actual prejudice on the defendant to prove a speedy trial deprivation.9 Sweeney, 704 N.E.2d at 103. Prejudice is assessed in light of the three interests that the right to a speedy trial is designed to protect: (1) to prevent oppressive incarceration; (2) to minimize anxiety and concern of the accused; and (3) to limit the possibility that the defense will be impaired. Id. at 103 (citing Barker, 407 U.S. at 532, 92 S.Ct. at 2193.).
Of these interests, the most serious is the last, because the inability of a defendant adequately to prepare his case skews the fairness of the entire system. If witnesses die or disappear during a delay, the prejudice is obvious. There is also prejudice if defense witnesses are unable to recall accurately events of the distant past. Loss of memory, however, is not always re-fleeted in the record because what has been forgotten can rarely be shown.
Barker, 407 U.S. at 532, 92 S.Ct. at 2193.
Although both Lockert’s and the State’s ability to present their cases has undoubtedly been affected by the passage of twenty-five years, Lockert has not alleged any specific prejudice with respect to his ability to defend the charge against him. He has not asserted that witnesses are unavailable, memories have faded, or that evidence has been lost due to the delay. Further, even if Lockert had made such allegations, he would be required to demonstrate that the prejudice to his defense was a result of the State’s delay and not of his own.
In addition to preventing impairment of an accused’s defense, speedy trial guarantees also serve to prevent oppressive incarceration and to minimize anxiety and concern of the accused. Sweeney, 704 N.E.2d at 103. Generally, the oppressive incarceration that speedy trial guarantees are intended to prevent is pre-trial incarceration for the pending offense, not incarceration for other convictions. Lockert is not incarcerated under Cause Number 74-108; he is in prison as a result of his conviction under Cause Number 74-109.
The dissent correctly cites Smith v. Hooey, 393 U.S. 374, 378-79, 89 S.Ct. 575, 21 L.Ed.2d 607 (1969), for the proposition that an accused incarcerated for another offense may also be subject to oppressive incarceration, anxiety and concern over the untried charge. (Opinion at 9-L-95, Bailey, J., dissenting). Further, we agree that the still-pending Murder charge under Cause Number 74-108 may be prejudicial to Lockert’s application for parole under Cause No. 74-109. (Op. at 95). However, we cannot ignore the fact that Lockert sat on his rights, never seeking trial until he became eligible *93for parole under Cause Number 74-109 in 1994. Too, we cannot conclude that Loc-kert’s anxiety and concern over the untried charge has prejudiced his ability to take advantage of his institutional opportunities. As the dissent points out, “Lockert’s record and accomplishments while in the custody of the Department of Correction have been exemplary.” (Op. at 95).
The State is responsible for forty-four months of delay in bringing Lockert to trial. While this is not an insubstantial length of time, we must balance it against Lockert’s responsibility for the first twenty years of delay, Lockert’s failure to assert his speedy trial rights until he became eligible for parole under Cause No. 74-109, and Lockert’s failure to demonstrate actual prejudice beyond the prejudice to his application for parole. After consideration of all of these factors, we conclude that Lockert has not demonstrated that the State has deprived him of his constitutional right to a speedy trial.
We wish to emphasize, however, that we can discern no valid reason for the State to have delayed the trial as it has done here. Lockert has a constitutional right to a speedy trial. Lockert has asserted that right and is entitled to a trial at the earliest available date.
We affirm and remand with instructions to the trial court to set Cause Number. 74-108 for trial.
FRIEDLANDER, J., concurs.
BAILEY, J., dissents with separate opinion.
. Cause Number 74-109 is now Cause Number 25C01-7410-CR-00109.
. Cause Number 74-108 is now Cause Number 25C01-7410-CF-00108.
.Lockert's first appeal, from the denial of his first petition for post-conviction relief, is published at 271 Ind. 226, 391 N.E.2d 613 (1979). His second appeal, from the denial of his second petition for post-conviction relief, is published at 627 N.E.2d 1350 (Ind.Ct.App.1994).
. Crim. R. 4(B)(1) provides, in relevant part:
If any defendant held in jail on an indictment or an affidavit shall move for an early trial, he shall be discharged if not brought to trial within seventy (70) calendar days from the date of such motion, except where a continuance within said period is had on his motion, or the delay is otherwise caused by his act, or where there was not sufficient time to try him during such seventy (70) calendar days because of the congestion of the court calendar. ■
. We recognize that Paragraph 3 of the plea agreement, which states that Lockert "would not file an appeal or a petition for post-conviction relief with respect to Cause No. 74-109 or Cause No. 74-108,” is arguably a waiver of post-conviction remedies. Plea provisions which waive the right to seek post-conviction remedies are void and unenforceable. Majors v. State, 568 N.E.2d 1065, 1067-68 (Ind.Ct.App.1991), reh. denied, trans. denied. However, the procedural history of this case reveals that the provision has never been enforced to restrict Lockert’s rights. In fact, Lockert has previously filed two petitions for post-conviction relief and two appeals, none of which were denied on the basis of waiver. Too, we emphasize that this provision is separate and distinct from the provisions dealing with Lockert's desire for, and the State's acquiescence in, a continuance in Cause No. 74-108. Paragraph 4 of the plea agreement evidences Loc-kert's desire for a continuance in Cause No. 74-108. In paragraph 6, the State agreed to consent to Lockert's continuance unless Lockert appealed or filed a PCR petition in Cause No. 74-109. This language did not restrict Lockert’s post-conviction rights. It merely imposed a condition on his ability to indefinitely postpone trial under Cause No. 74-108. Lockert was free to exercise his post-conviction rights at any time under this provision of the agreement. Thus, we conclude that Lockert’s arguably unenforceable waiver of post-conviction remedies does not affect the validity of Lockert's waiver of Crim. R. 4 provisions.
. The dissent posits that the first twenty years of delay "could be attributed to the State's lack of reasonable diligence or negligence,” since it could have prosecuted Lockert any time after he filed his first PCR in 1977. (Op. at 94, n. 11, Bailey, J., dissenting.) We disagree. When a defendant requests an indefinite continuance and later becomes dissatisfied that his trial has not been reset, he must take’ some affirmative action to notify the court that he now desires to go to trial. Wheeler v. State, 662 N.E.2d 192, 194 (Ind.Ct.App.1996). Wheeler dealt specifically with a defendant's rights pursuant to Crim. R. 4.
However, we believe the same analysis should apply here. Lockert sought a delay of his trial in 1975. This delay was to Lockert’s advantage. Lockert finally sought a trial date in 1994, when it became apparent that delay was no longer to his advantage. We think it unwarranted to hold the State responsible for the first twenty years of delay under these circumstances.
. The time period represents the period between October, 1994 and June, 1998, when Lockert's third motion for speedy trial was denied.
. In support of its argument that a forty-four month delay has not deprived Lockert of his speedy trial rights, the State argues that our supreme court has recently held that a comparable delay of thirty-nine months between arrest and trial was not a violation of the defendant's speedy trial rights. State’s brief at 11 (citing Sweeney, 704 N.E.2d at 86 (Ind.1998)). The State’s argument is misguided. In Sweeney, the court found that only 256 days of the thirty-nine month delay was chargeable to the State. 704 N.E.2d at 102-03.
. The dissent points to our determination that a delay of twenty-five years is presumptively prejudicial and argues that we are incorrect, in light of this determination, to place the burden of proving actual prejudice on Lockert. However, our determination that twenty-five years is presumptively prejudicial is merely the triggering mechanism that requires our inquiry into the other factors, including actual prejudice to the defendant, set forth in the Barker analysis.
The dissent also relies on Scott v. State, 461 N.E.2d 141 (Ind.Ct.App.1984), for the proposition that we should presume that Lockert suffered actual prejudice. In Scott, the entire delay was attributed to the State and occurred between the filing of an information and Scott’s arrest. Scott was wholly unaware of the pending charge for seven years. However, the court distinguished Scott’s situation from one where “ the defendant is aware he must face a charge of committing a crime on a particular date and, therefore, has the opportunity to avoid the particular prejudice of a memory fade or loss by making notes, identifying witnesses and memorializing their recollections, etc.” Id. at 144. Here, Lockert was aware of the pending charge and, thus, was not denied the opportunity to avoid prejudice. Too, we cannot overlook the fact that Lockert sat on his rights for twenty years, thus, inviting prejudice during that time. Accordingly, we hold that Lockert must demonstrate actual prejudice as a result of the State's delay.

=== CASE 9737476 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:26:21.115863+00 ===

BAILEY, Judge,
dissenting,
I respectfully dissent. The right of an accused to a speedy trial is a fundamental principle of constitutional law guaranteed by the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution and by Article I, § 12 of the Indiana Constitution. Crawford v. State, 669 N.E.2d 141, 145 (Ind.1996); Clark v. State, 659 N.E.2d 548, 551 (Ind.1995). The most fundamental consideration underlying the right to a speedy trial is that the State can neither incarcerate an accused, nor hold a pending charge over the defendant’s head, indefinitely. Poore v. State, 685 N.E.2d 36, 40 (Ind.1997). In other words, no Hoosier will be compelled to live with a Damoelean sword dangling oyer his head. See Woods v. State, 583 N.E.2d 1211, 1212 (Ind.1992).
The onus is on the State, not the defendant, to expedite prosecution. Jackson v. State, 663 N.E.2d 766, 769 (Ind.1996). The State has the duty to bring the defendant to trial as well as the duty of insuring that the trial is consistent with due process.. Id.; see also Crawford, .669 N.E.2d at .145 -(undue delay and resultant prejudice may constitute a violation of due process under tbe Fourteenth Amendment independent of a claim of a violation of speedy trial rights). While a delay resulting in presumptive prejudice cannot alone carry a Sixth Amendment claim, it is part of the ad hoc balancing test established in Barker v. Wingo, 407 U.S. 514, 92 S.Ct. 2182, 33 L.Ed.2d 101 (1972) and its importance intensifies with the length of the delay. Harrell v. State, 614 N.E.2d 959, 965 (Ind.Ct.App.1993), trans. denied.
The provision in Lockert’s plea agreement which provided that he waive his right to seek post-conviction relief was void and unenforceable as against public policy. See Majors v. State, 568 N.E.2d 1065, 1067-68, trans. denied. Obviously, this provision was not enforced against Lockert as he pursued post-conviction remedies in the late 1970s. See Lockert v. State, 271 Ind. 226, 391 N.E.2d 613, 615-16 (1979), cert. denied, 493 U.S. 897, 110 S.Ct. 251, 107 L.Ed.2d 201. Thus, this case involves the continued or independent yiability of Lockert’s request for a continuance and his waiver of C.R. 4 rights. While standing alone, there may be nothing inherently illegal about an agreement for indefinite continuances or the waiver of C.R.4 rights,10 the State nevertheless has an affir*94mative duty to insure that delay does not prejudice the defendant’s speedy trial and due process rights.11 Crawford v. State, 669 N.E.2d 141, 145 (Ind.1996).
The majority holds that the delay, however calculated, is presumptively prejudicial. (Op. at 91-92). Nevertheless, the majority places the burden on Lockert to demonstrate actual prejudice. (Op. at 92). This is incorrect. As stated in Scott v. State, 461 N.E.2d 141 (Ind.Ct.App.1984):
There is a general presumption against the mere passage of time as prejudicing a defendant. It is for this reason Indiana courts have placed the burden of demonstrating actual prejudice on the defendant to prove a speedy trial deprivation. However, a delay may be so prolonged the general presumption must fail and be replaced by a presumption of prejudice. The basis for this contrary presumption of prejudice is the prolonged delay itself deprives the defendant of the ability to prove prejudice.... At some point, then, we presume the defendant suffered actual prejudice....
(citations omitted). In Sweeney v. State, 704 N.E.2d 86, 103 (Ind.1998), cert. denied, — U.S. -, 119 S.Ct. 385, 142 L.Ed.2d 318, cited by the majority for the proposition that the burden of demonstrating actual prejudice is on the defendant, our supreme court held;
[bjecause we do not find that the delay in bringing defendant to trial was excessive, the ... standard of ‘presumptive prejudice’ is not applicable.
(citation omitted); See also Lahr v. State, 615 N.E.2d 150, 153 (Ind.Ct.App.1993).
However, these concerns, while ordinarily important to a speedy trial analysis, are of are of little importance here because Lockert has demonstrated actual prejudice. As noted by the majority, prejudice is assessed in light of the three interests which the right to a speedy trial is designed to protect: (1) to prevent oppressive incarceration; (2) to minimize anxiety and concern of the accused; and (3) to limit the possibility that the defense will be impaired. Op. at 92, citing Sweeney, 704 N.E.2d at 103. As stated in Smith v. Hooey, 393 U.S. 374, 378-79, 89 S.Ct. 575, 21 L.Ed.2d 607 (1969):
At first blush it might appear that a man already in prison under a lawful sentence is hardly in a position to suffer from ‘undue and oppressive incarceration prior to trial.’ But the fact is that delay in bringing such a person to trial on a pending-charge may ultimately result in as much oppression as is suffered by one who is jailed, without bail upon an untried *95charge. First, the possibility that the defendant already in prison might receive a sentence at least partially concurrent with the one he is serving may be forever lost if trial of the pending charge is postponed. Secondly, under 'procedures now widely practiced, the duration of his present imprisonment may he increased, and the conditions under which he must serve his sentence greatly worsened, by the pen-dency of another criminal charge outstanding against him.
And while it might be argued that a person already in prison would be less likely than others to be affected by ‘anxiety and concern accompanying public accusation,’ there is reason to believe that an outstanding untried charge (of which even a convict may, of course, be innocent) can have fully as depressive an effect upon a prisoner as upon a person who is at large. In the opinion of the former Director of the Federal Bureau of Prisons,
‘[i]t is in their effect upon the prisoner and our attempts to rehabilitate him that detainers are most corrosive. The strain of having to serve a sentence with the uncertain prospect of being [imprisoned upon a pending charge] at the conclusion interferes with the prisoner’s ability to take maximum advantage of his institutional opportunities. His anxiety and depression may leave him with little inclination toward self-improvement.’
(emphasis added; citations and footnotes omitted).12
Loekert began serving a life sentence in 1974. Therefore, he became eligible for parole in 1994, after serving twenty years. See Ind.Code § 11-13-3-2(3); Hendrix v. Duckworth, 442 N.E.2d 1058, 1060 (Ind.1982). Loekert started requesting a trial in 1994. The uncontradicted evidence shows that Loc-kert’s record and accomplishments while in the custody of the Department of Correction have been exemplary, but that, the Indiana Parole Board has refused to grant him parole, at least in part, on the basis of the pending Murder charge. (R. 54). Regardless of the weight to be given to this uncon-tradicted evidence, it is axiomatic that the mere existence of a- pending Murder charge would, as a matter of law, be prejudicial to an application for parole. Accordingly, Loekert has demonstrated prejudice- from the State’s delay in bringing him to trial.
Conclusion
Based on the above, I vote that we reverse and remand with instructions that the pending charges be dismissed with prejudice. See Strunk v. United States, 412 U.S. 434, 439-40, 93 S.Ct. 2260, 37 L.Ed.2d 56 (1973) (the only possible remedy for the violation of a defendant’s speedy trial rights is the vacation of any judgment and the dismissal of the indictment).
. However, the applicability of the rule prohibiting- the enforcement of terms in plea agreements which purport to waive a defendant’s right to review does not turn on fine distinctions between whether the operative terms in the plea agreement are express or implied. See People v. Ledrow, 53 Mich.App. 511, 220 N.W.2d 336, 337, 339-40 (1974) (condemning prosecutor’s practice of entering into plea agreements which called for the dismissal of remaining charges to *94take effect only after the time for taking an appeal had expired); People v. Ramos, 30 A.D.2d 848, 292 N.Y.S.2d 938, 939-40 (1968) (setting aside a plea agreement where prosecutor's promise to dismiss a pending robbery charge would not stand if defendant initiated an appeal from his conviction within thirty-one days after sentencing). Thus, the legality and enforceability of Lockert’s agreement to an indefinite continuance and waiver of C.R. 4 rights is suspect because these terms were used in an attempt to enforce the illegal waiver of post-conviction rights.
. In the present case, the plea agreement purportedly prohibited the State from prosecuting Lockert only so long as he did not pursue post-conviction relief from his Murder conviction. See Lockert, 391 N.E.2d at 616. Lockert breached the agreement, and triggered the State's ability to prosecute him on the pending charge, when, in the late 1970s, he filed for post-conviction relief. Ever since that time, the State has been under no obligation to honor Lockert’s earlier request for a continuance and has had absolutely no excuse for not bringing Lockert to trial. Considering that the State has an affirmative duty to bring an accused to trial, the last twenty years of delay could be attributed to the State's lack of reasonable diligence or negligence requiring dismissal without regard to whether Lockert can demonstrate actual prejudice. See Doggett v. United States, 505 U.S. 647, 655-56, 112 S.Ct. 2686, 120 L.Ed.2d 520 (1992) (814 year delay attributable to the government's negligence violated defendant's speedy trial rights even though the defendant could not demonstrate exactly how the delay had prejudiced him); Harrell, 614 N.E.2d at 964, 967 (specifically demonstrable proof of particularized prejudice is not essential to every speedy trial claim)...
Incidentally, to clarify, I would hold that it is the last, most recent twenty years of delay, measured from the time Lockert filed his post-conviction petition which repudiated the agreement to postpone the pending prosecution, for which the State must bear at least some of the responsibility, not the first twenty years as stated by the majority at slip op.-n. 6. Moreover, of these last twenty years, the majority concedes that tire last forty-four months of delay, measured from when Lockert first requested a trial in 1994, are entirely attributable to the State.
. These two factors should carry added weight in the Indiana courts because of our constitution's mandate that our penal code be founded on the principles of reformation, and not of vindictive justice. Ind. Const. Art. I, § 18.

=== CASE 9737477 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:26:22.67399+00 ===

OPINION
BAILEY, Judge
Case Summary
Appellants Jack Michael Walker (“Father”), and Jack L. and Stella Walker (“Grandparents”) appeal the granting of the petition for the adoption of Father’s natural son filed by Jennifer Renee and Kevin Eugene Campbell, the child’s mother and her husband (“the Campbells”). We reverse.
Issue
The dispositive issue may be restated as whether Indiana’s adoption statutes which have operated to establish Father’s irrevocable, implied consent to the adoption, without benefit of notice or hearing, are violative of Father’s constitutional due process rights as applied under the present circumstances where Father has made regular and substantial child support payments and has exercised, and has attempted to exercise, regular visitation with the child.1
Facts
The Campbells have accepted Father’s statement of the facts as set forth in his brief. (Appellee’s brief at 2). Father has characterized the Campbells’ conduct in procuring this adoption as a covert adoption by ambush. (R. 87, 90).
The facts in the light most favorable to Father, reveal that the child who is the subject of this dispute was born out of wedlock on November 29, 1991. (R. 9). Jennifer Renee Campbell is the child’s natural mother (“Mother”). (R. 10). Father is the child’s natural father. (R. 10). The child’s birth certificate names Father as the child’s natural father. (R. 55). The child was given Father’s last name. (R. 23).
Father’s paternity has never been established by formal court proceedings or otherwise. (R. 10). Nor had Father registered his paternity with the Putative Father Registry before these proceedings were initiated. (R. 56).
Nevertheless, Father and Grandparents exercised regular visitation with the child. (R. 26, 45, 91, 93). Father also paid child support to Mother in the amount of $60.00 per week until July 11, 1997. (R. 23). At that point, however, Mother destroyed the check representing Father’s July 19, 1997, payment and indicated that she would no longer accept payments. (R. 23). The Campbells rebuffed all further attempts of Father and Grandparents to exercise visitation with the child. (R. 23, 26).
Shortly afterward, on October 23, 1997, the Campbells filed a petition to adopt the child. In this petition they alleged:
That the natural father of said child is [Father] but that his consent is not required pursuant to:
*47(a) I.C. 31—3—1—6(g)(1) for the reason that the said [Father] has, for a period in excess of one (1) year, without justifiable cause, failed to communicate with said child when he was fully able to do so.
(b) I.C. 31—3—1—6(g)(2) for the reason that said child was born out of wedlock and his paternity has not been established by court proceedings.
(R. 10). The code sections cited in this pleading had been repealed at the time the petition was filed. P.L.1-1997 § 157. Although the pleading did not comply with the formalities prescribed by Ind. Trial Rule 11 for verifications, the signatures of the Camp-bells were notarized. (R. 11).
Even though the Campbells had been aware of Father’s whereabouts at all times and that he could be contacted through Grandparents, the Campbells filed an “Affidavit in Support of Service by Publication.” (R. 14, 45, 87). In this affidavit, the Camp-bells swore upon their oath that:
the natural father of the child ... is [Father], and that his whereabouts are unknown ...
(R. 14). The published notice provided Father read as follows:
Notice is hereby given to [Father] that [the Campbells] have filed a Petition for Adoption of [the child], and that said petition will be heard by the DeKalb Circuit Court and the judge thereof on the 29th day of December, 1997, at 11:45 A.M. If [Father] does not appear in person-or by counsel and file a response to said Petition for Adoption by such time, said petition will be heard in his absence and he will be considered in default and that said adoption may be granted by the Court.
(R. 17). This notice was published in the local newspaper on October 30th, November 6, and November 13,1997. (R. 18).
Father retained an attorney who filed an “Objection to the Adoption” on December 24, 1997, within the time prescribed by the notice published by the Campbells. (R. 23). Father’s attorney alone appeared for the December 29, 1997, hearing. (R. 6). Accordingly, the proceedings were continued. (R. 6).
On February 6, 1998, Father filed a verified petition to establish paternity in the present action. (R. 29). Father also registered his paternity in the Putative Father Registry administered by the Indiana State Department of Health. (R. 56). Grandparents also filed their “Verified Petition to Establish Grandparental Visitation and Request for Hearing” on February 6, 1998. (R. 26). Father and Grandparents are represented by the same attorney. (R. 26, 29).
On March 6, 1998, after the Campbells discovered that they had cited repealed code sections in their original petition, they filed an amended petition which read in pertinent part as follows:
A. The natural father of said child is [Father] but that his consent is not required pursuant to: I.C. 31-19-9-8(1) in that he abandoned and/or deserted said child for a period of at least six (6) months immediately preceding the filing of the petition for adoption.
B. He failed for a period of one (1) year without justifiable cause to communicate significantly with the child when able to do so.
C. He is the biological father of the child born out of wedlock but his paternity had not been established by a Court proceeding other than the adoption proceeding, nor had he executed a paternity affidavit pursuant to I.C. 16-37-2-2.1.
(R. 38).
On May 1, 1998, the trial court heard oral arguments made by the opposing attorneys on the issue of whether Father’s objection to the adoption proceedings should be dismissed. (R. 82, 83). Of the parties, only Father’s mother, Stella Walker, appeared in person. (R. 82). No evidence was taken at the hearing. (R. 70).2
The trial court overruled Father’s objection to the adoption, finding that Father *48was not entitled to notice of the adoption proceedings, nor was his consent required. (R. 73). The trial court ruled that Father had irrevocably and impliedly consented to the adoption by operation of Ind.Code § 31-19-9-1. (R. 73).3 Accordingly, the trial court granted the adoption over Father’s objection. (R. 73, 75). The trial .court also denied Grandparents’ petition for visitation. (R. 75). This appeal ensued.
Discussion and Decision
I. Agreement Regarding Visitation— Mootness Doctrine
During the pendency of this appeal, Father and Grandparents filed a pleading in this court which alleged in pertinent part as follows:
Satisfactory settlement regarding visitation has been reached between the parties, thereby making further appeal effort unnecessary.
(Appellant’s motion filed February 8, 1999). Ordinarily, we will dismiss an appeal upon motion where the parties have settled their dispute by compromise. See Felzien v. Felzien, 137 Ind.App. 435, 209 N.E.2d 524, 525 (1965).
The.motion describes a “settlement regarding visitation” but does not address the underlying issues in this appeal, namely, whether Father was entitled to notice of the adoption proceedings and whether Father’s consent was required. These core issues remain intact because an agreement to permit a putative father to exercise visitation with his child after the child has been adopted by another is entirely unenforceable. See Matter of Adoption of Topel, 571 N.E.2d 1295, 1298 (Ind.Ct.App.1991). Thus, the purported settlement regarding visitation does not, as a matter of law, confer any right, nor does it resolve any issue now before the court.4
*49The motion also requests “all other just and proper relief.” (Appellant’s motion filed February 8, 1999). It would be both unjust and improper to dismiss this appeal based on an illusory promise of visitation.
Moreover, although an appeal will ordinarily become moot when it is no longer ‘live’ or when the principal questions in issue have ceased to be matters of real controversy between the parties, we will nevertheless address the issues raised when the action involves a matter of great public interest and affects the public generally. Sowers v. Laporte Superior Court, 577 N.E.2d 250, 251 n. 1 (Ind.Ct.App.1991). Under the public interest exception to the mootness doctrine, we will decide an appeal despite its apparent mootness where the issue raised is of great public importance and is likely to recur. Board of School Trustees v. Barnell, 678 N.E.2d 799, 802 (Ind.Ct.App.1997) (the issue of whether certain statutory procedures satisfied due.process was a matter of great public importance which would be resolved despite mootness); Evans v. Tuttle, 613 N.E.2d 854, 857 (Ind.Ct.App.1993).
The issues and rights at stake in the present case with respect to the interpretation of Indiana’s statutes governing parent-child relationships are of monumental importance in the advancement of the best interests of Hoosier children and families. Quite simply, the present circumstances compel us to determine whether Indiana’s adoption statutes as applied here violate the constitutional due process rights of a putative father who has grasped the opportunity and responsibility of acting as father toward his child through the payment of regular and substantial support and the exercise of regular visitation. On remand, Father and Grandparents may yet abandon their claims. But even if Father and Grandparents should relinquish their rights with respect to this particular child, we would address the issues in this appeal under the public interest exception to the mootness doctrine,
II. Preservation of Constitutional Error
As an additional preliminary matter, we note that it is questionable whether Father has adequately raised or preserved the constitutional due process violation upon which this decision rests. However, again, the great public importance attached to this case has compelled us to decide this case under the following rationale:
[wjhen we deem it necessary, we may raise a fundamental issue sua sponte, although issues not raised or adequately briefed are normally treated as waived.... ‘The rule forbidding the discussion of points not originally suggested by appellant is made for the protection of the court, and only operates to excuse the court from considering questions that are not shown to have any material bearing upon the rights of the parties. Notwithstanding the failure of counsel to present the question, the court may consider and decide a question presented by the record, and may go outside the briefs of counsel for "reasons upon which to base the decision, in order to do justice to the parties.’ We are not required to close our eyes to that which is apparent on the record. Were we so limited, we would be frequently in the unhappy situation of ‘lending tacit approval to [precedent] palpably bad on its face, and this could only result in confusing the law and misleading the profession.’ We are here confronted with such a situation, and must discuss the issue we raise because of it.
Campbell v. Vencel, 594 N.E.2d 807, 809-10 (Ind.Ct.App.1992) (first internal citation from *50White v. White, 208 Ind. 314, 196 N.E. 95, 96 (1935); second internal citation from L.S. Ayres & Co. v. Hicks, 220 Ind. 86, 41 N.E.2d 195, 196 (1942)), pertinent portion summarily affirmed, 604 N.E.2d 601, 602.
III. Reconciliation of the Statutes Governing Parental Rights
Many competing rights and responsibilities, along with the public policies attendant to those interests, converge and compete in the present case. Included in the rights and responsibilities implicated here are those related to adoption, paternity, and the termination of parental rights. See Topel, 571 N.E.2d at 1298 (decree of adoption effects the termination of the parent-child relationship between the putative father and the child). Thus, inevitably, the several statutes governing and advancing these competing rights, responsibilities, and policies also converge and compete.
As stated in JKB, Sr. v. Armour Pharmaceutical Co., 660 N.E.2d 602 (Ind.Ct.App.1996), trans. denied:
When interpreting a statute, the foremost objective is to determine and effect legislative intent. Statutes must be construed to give effect to legislative intent, and courts must give deference to such intent whenever possible. Thus, _ courts must consider the goals of the statute and the reasons and policy underlying the statute’s enactment. Courts are to examine and interpret a statute as a whole, giving words their common and ordinary meaning, and not overemphasize a strict, literal, or selective reading of individual words. Words and phrases are taken in their plain, ordinary, and usual meaning unless a different purpose is manifested by the statute. Where possible, every word must be given effect and meaning, and no part is to be held meaningless if it can be reconciled with the rest of the statute.
Id. at 605. The meaning and intention of the legislature are to be ascertained not only from the phraseology of the statute but also by considering its nature, design, and the consequences which flow from the reasonable alternative interpretations of the statute. Clark v. Kenley, 646 N.E.2d 76, 78 (Ind.Ct. App.1995), trans. denied. Statutes relating to the same general subject matter are in pari materia and should be construed together so as to produce a harmonious statutory scheme. Id.; Sanders v. State, 466 N.E.2d 424, 428 (Ind.1984).
As should become clear below, Indiana’s statutory scheme becomes discordant when the policies favoring parental rights and the establishment of paternity conflict with those favoring adoptions. This conflict has been observed in Indiana and elsewhere previously. See M.L.V., 598 N.E.2d at 1056 (Indiana’s adoption statutes operate to extinguish the parental rights of putative fathers under certain circumstances in order to protect children and to shield all involved parties from unnecessary instability and uncertainty). As stated by Artis L. Campbell, Annotation, Rights of Unwed Father to Obstruct Adoption by Withholding Consent, 61 A.L.R. 5th 151,176-77 (1998):
Historically, the rights of unwed fathers to make any determination regarding their children have been curtailed by state laws justified by stated considerations of public policy and the best interests of children. These restraints have been applicable particularly to the adoption of illegitimate children ....
A. Policy of Strengthening Family Life— Best Interests of Children
Indiana’s General Assembly has announced that the policy of this state is to strengthen family life by assisting parents to fulfill their parental obligations. Ind.Code § 31-10-2-1(4). Our legislature has expressly stated that this public policy requires the provision of fair judicial procedures which recognize and enforce the legal rights of children and their parents. Ind.Code § 31-10-2-l(10)(A) & (B) (emphasis added). Moreover, the polestar of every statute governing the parent-child relationship is the best interests of the child. See E.P. v. Marion County Office of Family and Children, 653 N.E.2d 1026, 1032 (Ind.Ct.App.1995) (parents’ constitutional right to raise their child must at all times yield to the child’s best interest as determined by the courts of this state); B.G. v. H.S, 509 N.E.2d 214, 217 *51(Ind.Ct.App.1987) (the best interest of the child is the primary concern in an adoption proceeding); O.S. v. J. M., 436 N.E.2d 871, 873 (Ind.Ct.App.1982) (the sole purpose of the paternity statutes is to benefit children born out of wedlock by establishing the legal procedures necessary to enable them to have the proper care, maintenance, education, protection, support and opportunities as afforded to children born in wedlock).
B. Paternity
1. Policy in Favor of Establishing Paternity
In addition to the policies outlined above, Indiana’s General Assembly has specifically announced its support of the policy favoring the establishment of the paternity of children born out of wedlock. Ind.Code § 31-14-1-1. Indiana courts will serve as a strong fortress to protect the rights of a natural father with respect to his child. Matter of Adoption of Thomas, 431 N.E.2d 506, 513 (Ind.Ct.App.1982), trans. denied. This right is conferred by the positive law of the land and is consonant with the law of nature and dictates of common humanity. Id. As stated in Lehr v. Robertson, 463 U.S. 248, 261-62, 103 S.Ct. 2985, 77 L.Ed.2d 614 (1983):
The significance of the biological connection is that it offers the natural father an opportunity that no other male possesses to develop a relationship with his offspring. If he grasps that opportunity and accepts some measure of responsibility for the child’s future, he may enjoy the blessings of the parent-child relationship and make uniquely valuable contributions to the child’s development.
Moreover, and perhaps more importantly, a child’s interests in establishing paternity in his natural father can include the establishment of familial bonds, indoctrination into cultural heritage, knowledge of family medical history, inheritance rights, social security survivor benefits, employee death benefits, and life insurance proceeds. ‘Clark, 646 N.E.2d at 79.
2. Establishing Paternity
' If competent except for the person’s age, a child may file a paternity petition at any time before the child reaches twenty (20) years of age. Ind.Code § 31-14-5-2(a). A man alleging to be the child’s father must file a paternity action not later than two years after the child is born, unless the alleged father has provided support for the child. Id. (emphasis added). If the man has supported the child, the man must file the paternity petition not later than two years after he ceases paying support. Ind.Code § 31-14-5-3(e).
S. Paternity Affidavit
The “paternity affidavit” described in Ind. Code § 16-37-2-2.1 prescribes a procedure under which a mother and a man who “reasonably appears to be the child’s biological father” are provided an opportunity to execute an affidavit shortly after the birth of a child born out of wedlock which acknowledges the man’s paternity of the child. The execution of a “paternity affidavit” operates to create a legal presumption that the man is the child’s biological father. Ind.Code § 31-14-7-1(3). In paternity proceedings where a paternity affidavit has been submitted, an order establishing paternity and child support may be entered without the presentation of any additional evidence unless the putative father sets forth evidence rebutting his paternity. Ind.Code- .§ 31-14-11-1. Also, an attorney or agency that arranges an adoption may at any time request that the State Health Department search its records to determine whether a paternity affidavit has been executed with respect to any particular child subject to a prospective adoption. Ind. Code § 16-37-2-2(f).
L Putative Father Registry
The putative father registry is administered by the State Department of Health. Ind.Code § 31-19-5-2. The primary purpose of the registry is to determine the names and addresses of putative fathers and prescribe procedures for the provision of notice of adoption proceedings to be afforded to those putative fathers. The statutory scheme applies to putative fathers:
*52(1) whose name and address have not been disclosed by the mother of the child, on or before the date the mother executes a consent to the child’s adoption, to:
(A) an attorney; or
(B) an agency;
that is arranging the adoption of the child; and
(2) who may have conceived a child for whom a petition for adoption has been or may be filed to provide notice of the adoption to the putative father.
A putative father who files with the registry is entitled to notice of his child’s adoption under Ind. Trial Rule 4. Ind.Code § 31-19-5-4; Matter of Adoption of M.A.S., 695 N.E.2d 1037, 1040 n. 6 (Ind.Ct.App.1998). Indiana Code § 31-19-5-5 provides:
If, on or before the date the mother of a child executes a consent to the child’s adoption, the mother does not disclose to an attorney or agency that:
(1) is arranging; or
(2) may arrange;
an adoption of the child the name or address, or both, of the putative father of the child, the putative father must register under this chapter to entitle the putative father to notice of the child’s adoption.
Indiana Code § 31-14-20-1 provides:
(a) This section does not apply to a man whose paternity is established [under the procedures prescribed by Ind.Code § 31-14 (or the predecessor statutes)] before the filing of a petition to adopt the man’s child.
(b) A man who files or is a party to a paternity action under this article shall register with the putative father registry under IND. CODE § 31-19-5 within the period provided under IND. CODE § 31-19-5-12.
Indiana.Code 31-19-5-12 provides:
(a) To be entitled to notice of [an adoption], a putative father must register with the [putative father registry] not later than:
(1) thirty (30) days after the child’s birth; ór
(2) the date of the filing of a petition for the child’s adoption; whichever occurs later.
(b) A putative father may register under subsection (a) before the child’s birth.
However, Ind.Code § 31-14-20-2 goes beyond the putative father registry’s primary purpose of prescribing the procedures of providing notice by pronouncing that a putative father’s failure to register will work the forfeiture of his parental rights in adoption proceedings as follows:
(a) A man who fails to register with the putative father registry as required by [Ind.Code § 31-14-20-1 set out above], waives the right to notice of an adoption of a child who is the subject of the paternity action:
(1) if the adoption is filed before the man establishes paternity; and
(2) in which the child’s mother does not disclose to an attorney or agency arranging the adoption the name or address of the child’s putative father.
(b) A waiver under this section constitutes the man’s irrevocably implied consent to the child’s adoption.
(Emphasis added).
C. Adoption
1. Policy in Favor of Adoptions
The state has a strong interest in providing stable homes for children. B.G., 509 N.E.2d at 217. To this end, early, permanent placement of children with adoptive families furthers the interests of both the child and the state. Id.; Lehr, 463 U.S. at 264-65, 103 S.Ct. 2985; Quilloin v. Walcott, 434 U.S. 246, 98 S.Ct. 549, 553, 54 L.Ed.2d 511 (1978) (there exists a strong state policy of rearing children in a family setting). Adoption can provide stability and remove the stigma under which illegitimate children suffer. Caban v. Mohammed, 441 U.S. 380, 392, 99 S.Ct. 1760, 60 L.Ed.2d 297 (1979). Adoptions are encouraged in order to preclude the shifting of the primary responsibility for a child to the state. Campbell, 61 A.L.R.5th at 177.
*53¡2. Consummating an Adoption— Consents Required
Indiana Code § 31-19-9-1 sets out the following persons whose consent is necessary for an adoption to proceed.
(a) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a petition to adopt a child who is less than eighteen (18) years of age may be granted only if written consent to adoption has been executed by the following:
(1) Each living parent of a child born in wedlock.
(2) The mother of a child born out of wedlock and the father of a child whose paternity has been established by:
(A) a court proceeding other than an adoption proceeding, except provided in IND. CODE § 31-14-20-2; or
(B) a paternity affidavit executed under IND. CODE § 16-37-2-2.1; unless the putative father gives implied consent to the adoption under section 15 of this chapter.
(3) Each person, agency, or county office of family and children having lawful custody of the child whose adoption is being sought.
(4) The court having jurisdiction of the custody of the child if the legal guardian or custodian of the person of the child is not empowered to consent to the adoption.
(5) The child to be adopted if the child is more than fourteen (14) years of age.
(6) The spouse of the child to be adopted if the child is married.
(b) A parent who is less than eighteen (18) years of age may consent to the adoption without the concurrence of:
(1) the individual’s parent or parents; or
(2) the guardian of the individual’s person; unless the court, in the court’s discretion, determines that it is in the best interest of the child to be adopted to require the concurrence.
Thus, a child born out of wedlock may be adopted only if written consent to the adoption has been executed by the mother and the father whose paternity has been established by:
(A) a court proceeding other than the adoption proceeding, except as provided in IND.CODE § 31-14-20-2 [as set out above, this statute provides that a father’s failure to file with the putative father registry constitutes the man’s irrevocably im7 plied consent to the child’s adoption]; or
(B) a paternity affidavit executed under IND.CODE § 16-37-2-2.1.
Ind.Code § 31-19-9-1.
3. Consummating an Adoption—, Consents Not Required
On the other hand, Ind.Code § 31-19-9-8(a) provides that consent to adoption is not required from any of the following persons:
(1) A parent or parents if the child is adjudged to have been abandoned or deserted for at least six (6) months immediately preceding the date of the filing of the petition for adoption.
(2) A parent of a child in the custody of another person if for a period of at least one (1) year the parent:
(A) fails without justifiable cause to communicate significantly with the child when able to do so; or .
(B) knowingly fails to provide for the care and support of the child when able to do so as required by law or judicial decree.
(3) The biological father of a child born out of wedlock whose paternity has not been established:
(A) by a court proceeding other than the adoption proceeding;, or
(B) by' executing a paternity affidavit under IND.CODE § 16-37-2-2.1.
(5) The putative father of a child born out of wedlock if the putative father’s consent to adoption is irrevocably implied under [Ind.Code § 31-19-9-15].
(6) The biological father of a child born out of wedlock if the:
(A) father’s paternity is established after the filing of a petition for adoption in a court proceeding or by executing a paternity affidavit under IND.CODE § 16-37-2-2.1; and
*54(B) father is required to but does not register with the putative father registry established by IND.CODE § 31-19-5 within the period required by IND. CODE § 31-19-5-12 [set out in previous section],
(8) A parent after the parent-child relationship has been terminated under IND. CODE § 31-35 (or IND.CODE § 31-6-5 before its repeal).
(emphasis added).
Additionally, Indiana Code § 31-19-9-15 prescribes a procedure under which a putative father whose parental rights have not otherwise been extinguished, must file a paternity action to establish his paternity within thirty (30) days after receiving notice of the mother’s intention to make an adoptive placement of the child. If the putative father fails to file a petition to establish paternity within the thirty day period and fails to establish paternity within a reasonable time thereafter, his consent to the adoption is irrevocably implied without further court action. Ind.Code § 31-19-9-15.
D. Involuntary Termination of Parental Rights for Unfitness
In order for a termination of parental rights to satisfy the requirements of the Due Process Clause of the United States Constitution, the State must prove a parent’s unfitness by clear and convincing evidence. Tipton v. Marion County DPW, 629 N.E.2d 1262, 1265-66 n. 3 (Ind.Ct.App.1994) (citing Quilloin, 434 U.S. at 256, 98 S.Ct. 549). Parental unfitness must be proven, and cannot be presumed on the basis of the instigation of termination proceedings. See Stanley v. Illinois, 405 U.S. 645, 92 S.Ct. 1208, 31 L.Ed.2d 551 (1972); Tipton, 629 N.E.2d at 1268. The statutes promulgated under Title 31 of the Indiana Juvenile Code have been described as the “exclusive means for the State to effect the involuntary termination of a parent-child relationship.” Doe v. Daviess County Division of Children and Family Sevices, 669 N.E.2d 192, 194 (Ind.Ct.App.1996) (citing Ind.Code § 31-6-5-4(c) which has been repealed and replaced by Ind.Code § 31—35—2—4(b)(2)), trans. denied.
TV. The Due Process Rights of Unwed Fathers
A. Due Process Generally
The Due Process Clause of the United States Constitution and the Due Course of Law Clause of the Indiana Constitution prohibit state action which deprives a person of life, liberty, or property without the ‘process’ or ‘course of law’ that is due, that is, a fair proceeding. Indiana High School Athletic Association, Inc. v. Carlberg, 694 N.E.2d 222, 241 (Ind.1997) (citing Mullane v. Central Hanover Bank & Trust Co., 339 U.S. 306, 313, 70 S.Ct. 652, 94 L.Ed. 865, (1950)). The same analysis is applicable to both federal and state claims. Id.
‘An essential principle of due process is that a deprivation of life, liberty, or property be preceded by notice and opportunity for hearing appropriate to the nature of the case.’ Id. (quoting Cleveland Board of Education v. Loudermill, 470 U.S. 532, 542, 105 S.Ct. 1487, 84 L.Ed.2d 494 (1985)); Mullane, 339 U.S. at 313, 70 S.Ct. 652. Predicate to any analysis of whether the process provided was fair is a determination that the claimant had a protectable life, liberty, or property interest at stake. Id. (citing Board of Regents of State Colleges v. Roth, 408 U.S. 564, 571, 92 S.Ct. 2701, 33 L.Ed.2d 548(1972)). Only after the precise nature of the private interest threatened by the State has been identified can we properly evaluate the adequacy of the State’s process. Lehr, 463 U.S. at 257, 103 S.Ct. 2985.
In addition to guaranteeing fair process, the Due Process Clause also provides heightened protection against state interference with certain fundamental rights and liberty interests. Carlberg, 694 N.E.2d at 242 (quoting Reno v. Flores, 507 U.S. 292, 301-302, 113 S.Ct. 1439, 123 L.Ed.2d 1 (1993) and Planned Parenthood v. Casey, 505 U.S. 833, 851, 112 S.Ct. 2791, 120 L.Ed.2d 674 (1992)). The Due Process Clause will protect those rights and liberties ‘so rooted in the traditions and conscience of our people as to be ranked as fundamental’ and ‘implicit in the concept of ordered liberty,’ such that *55‘neither liberty or justice would exist if they were sacrificed.’ Id. (quoting Palko v. Connecticut, 302 U.S. 319, 325-26, 58 S.Ct. 149, 82 L.Ed. 288 (1937)).
B. Due Process. Protection of Parental Rights
The intangible fibers that connect parent and child have infinite variety and are woven throughout the fabric of our society, providing it with strength, beauty, and flexibility. Lehr, 463 U.S. at 257, 103 S.Ct. 2985. It is entirely settled that the right to raise one’s children is an essential, basic right, more precious than property rights, within the protection of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. See Matter of Paternity of Baby Girl, 661 N.E.2d 873, 877 (Ind.Ct.App.1996); E.P., 653 N.E.2d at 1031 (citing Pierce v. Society of Sisters, 268 U.S. 510, 45 S.Ct. 571, 69 L.Ed. 1070 (1925) and Meyer v. Nebraska, 262 U.S: 390, 43 S.Ct. 625, 67 L.Ed. 1042 (1923)); Wardship of Nahrwold v. Department of Public Welfare, 427 N.E.2d 474, 477 (Ind.Ct.App.1981) (parents have a fundamental right to raise their children without undue interference by the state). Parental rights are sufficiently vital that, under the appropriate circumstances, they merit constitutional protection which will supersede state law. Lehr, 463 U.S. at 257-58, 103 S.Ct. 2985.
The custody, care, and nurture pf children resides first in the parents, whose primary function and freedom include the preparation of the child for obligations that the state can neither supply nor hinder. Id. (citing Prince v. Massachusetts, 321 U.S. 158, 166, 64 S.Ct. 438, 88 L.Ed. 645 (1944)). As the paramount interest is the welfare of children, the rights of parents are a counterpart of the responsibilities they have assumed. Id. at 257, 103 S.Ct. 2985. In other words, parental rights are inextricably linked with parental duty. Id.
C. TJmved Fathers—Inchoate/Opportunity Interest
The United States Supreme Court has outlined the constitutional protection which must be afforded unwed fathers in four major cases decided since 1972. See Campbell, 61 A.L.R. 5th 151, 177-78; Stanley v. Illinois, 405 U.S. 645, 92 S.Ct. 1208, 31 L.Ed.2d 551 (1972); Quilloin, 434 U.S. 246, 98 S.Ct. 549, 54 L.Ed.2d 511, Caban, 441 U.S. 380, 99 S.Ct. 1760, 60 L.Ed.2d 297, Lehr, 463 U.S. 248, 103 S.Ct. 2985, 77 L.Ed.2d 614. These cases combine to-instruct that, while the biological link between a putative father and his child alone does not warrant significant constitutional protection, an unwed father nevertheless has a constitutionally protected inchoate or “opportunity interest” to form a relationship with his child. Lehr, 463 U.S. at 261-64, 103 S.Ct. 2985. However, once the father has grasped this opportunity by demonstrating a full commitment tó the responsibilities of parenthood by 'coming forward to participate in the rearing of his child, his parental rights with respect to that child ripen into an .interest which is entitled to substantial protection under the Due Process Clause. Id.; Caban, 441 U.S. at 392, 99 S.Ct. 1760; In re Adoption of Infant M.D., 612 N.E.2d 1068, 1074 (Ind.Ct.App.1993) (putative father’s due process rights were violated where trial court divested father of his parental rights despite his biological link, fitness, and parental commitment), trans. denied; B.G., 509 N.E.2d at 215.
V. Analysis
In the present case, the record on appeal reflects that Father has grasped the opportunity to undertake his parental responsibilities toward the child by paying-substantial and regular child support to Mother and exercising visitation. Under these circumstances, we hold that Father’s inchoate or opportunity interest in being the child’s parent has ripened into a fundamental, parental right entitled to substantial due process protection. Accordingly, we hold that Indiana’s adoption statutes which have operated to automatically extinguish Father’s rights without notice-or a hearing have violated Father’s rights to- due process and/or due course of law as guaranteed under the United States and Indiana Constitutions. Moreover, and perhaps most importantly, the due process protection recognized here afforded to safeguard the relationship .between the putative father and child is necessary to *56ensure that the rights and interests of the child, which may deviate from those of the prospective adoptive parents, are adequately protected. See Clark, 646 N.E.2d at 79 (child has significant interests in establishing paternity in natural father). After all, as stated above, the polestar of any analysis involving the rights of a child is the best interest of the child. See B.G., 509 N.E.2d at 217 (the best interest of the child is the primary concern in adoption proceedings).
To the extent that Father’s interest in parenting the child (and the child’s corresponding interest in establishing paternity in Father) must be afforded substantial due process protection, we hold that Father has i'etained the power to veto the proposed adoption under Indiana’s statutory scheme governing parental rights. Topel, 571 N.E.2d at 1298 (power to veto adoption retained because the statutes governing adoptions should not be so liberally construed that safeguards erected for the preservation of family relationships are destroyed); Baby Girl, 661 N.E.2d at 876 (putative father retains veto power over adoption unless the proponents of the adoption prove that the putative father has so violated his natural and legal obligations to the child that he comes within the statute authorizing waiver of consent of the natural parents); Ind.Code § 31-14-5-3(c) (where putative father has supported the child, his right to establish paternity in that child is not extinguished until two years after he ceases to pay support).
Our sister states have observed that an unwed father who has grasped the opportunity to establish a relationship with his child retains the right to block an adoption by withholding his consent. See generally, Campbell, 61 A.L.R. 5th 151 (1998); In Interest of E.C.B., 691 So.2d 687, 690-91 (La.Ct.App.1997) (father’s commitment to his child precluded termination of his parental rights/adoption without his consent), vacated, 692 So.2d 1075; Matter of Hood, 930 S.W.2d 575, 578-79 (Tenn.App.1996) (statute which permitted mother to make adoptive placement without putative father’s consent violated father’s substantive due process rights); Matter of Raquel Marie X, 76 N.Y.2d 387, 559 N.Y.S.2d 855, 559 N.E.2d 418, 426-28 (1990) (father sufficiently established a relationship with his child to have acquired the right to veto the proposed adoption; statute which required father to live with mother for six months as a prerequisite to obtaining power to veto adoption ruled unconstitutional), cert. denied, 498 U.S. 984, 111 S.Ct. 517, 112 L.Ed.2d 528; Matter of Kiran Chandini S., 166 A.D.2d 599, 560 N.Y.S.2d 886, 888 (1990) (putative father sufficiently demonstrated his manifestation of parental responsibility to establish his right to veto the proposed adoption); In re Adoption of B.G.S., 556 So.2d 545, 550, 552-55 (La.1990) (the due process rights of a father who had demonstrated his dedication to parental responsibilities were violated by statutes which purported to limit father’s right to prevent mother from making adoptive placement of child without father’s consent); Matter of Adoption of Baby James Doe, 572 So.2d 986, 989 (Fla.App.1990) (consent required of putative father who had provided child with support in a repetitive, customary manner); Wade v. Geren, 743 P.2d 1070, 1073 (Okla.1987) (putative father’s substantive due process rights attached where he had expended great amount of time, effort, and resources to take on the responsibility for rearing the child and for having the opportunity to develop an emotional bond with the child); Durr v. Blue, 454 So.2d 315, 320-21 (La.Ct.App.1984) (to hold that a father who had acted as a father to the children for as long as he lived with their mother had forfeited his parental rights would constitute an unconscionable violation of father’s due process rights), writ not considered; But see, In re Adoption of Reeves, 309 Ark. 385, 831 S.W.2d 607, 608-609 (1992) (adoption effected without notice to the putative father upheld despite fact that putative father had developed a substantial relationship with his child because father had failed to file in the putative father registry).
Conclusion
As set out above, we hold that the Indiana adoption statutes which, as applied under the present circumstances, operate to automatically extinguish the parental rights of a putative father who has regularly and substantial*57ly supported and exercised visitation with his child violate principles of procedural and substantive due process as guaranteed by the United States and Indiana Constitutions.
However, as noted earlier, no evi-dentiary hearing has yet been conducted in this case. Therefore, we must reverse and remand for consideration of all contested issues including whether Father has in fact demonstrated a commitment to the responsibilities of parenthood sufficient to invoke the attachment of substantial due process protection. If Father establishes his entitlement to substantial due process protection, his objection to (or veto of) the proposed adoption filed within the time prescribed by the Campbells in their pleadings is effective and fatal to the consummation of the proposed adoption. Nevertheless, Father’s rights continue to be subject to waiver should he fail to file a paternity action in another proceeding within thirty days and follow through in establishing paternity within a reasonable time as provided by Ind.Code § 31-19-9-15.
Finally, even if Father establishes his entitlement to substantial due process protection as outlined above, the Campbells must' be afforded the opportunity to litigate the allegations raised in their pleadings to the effect that Father has so violated his natural and legal obligations to the child that he comes within the statutory provisions authorizing the waiver of his consent. However, the harmonization of Indiana’s statutory scheme governing the termination of parental rights requires that the Campbells establish the grounds for overriding Father’s consent by clear and convincing evidence. See Stewart v. Stewart, 521 N.E.2d 956, 961 (Ind.Ct.App.1988), trans. denied.
Reversed.
NAJAM, J., concurs.
SHARPNACK, C.J., dissents with separate opinion.
. In Adoptive Parents of M.L.V. v. Wilkens, 598 N.E.2d 1054, 1058-59 (Ind.1992), our supreme court held that Indiana's adoption statutes which provide that an unwed mother may automatically veto an adoption while an unwed father must take affirmative steps to perfect that right were not violative of the Equal Protection Clause. But see, Caban v. Mohammed, 441 U.S. 380, 389-95, 99 S.Ct. 1760, 60 L.Ed.2d 297 (1979) (New York statutory scheme which permitted an unwed mother to block an adoption by withholding consent but did not permit an unwed father to do so violated equal protection). The M.L.V. court did not address the sufficiency of due process protection provided by the Indiana statutory scheme as analyzed in the present case.
. Although no evidence has yet been submitted in the present case, the facts as accepted by the Campbells suggest that their pleadings are permeated with fraudulent misrepresentations regarding Father’s relationship with the child and could be stricken as sham and false under Ind. Trial Rule 11. See Cua v. Ramos, 433 N.E.2d 745, 752 (Ind.1982) (trial court has discretion to *48strike false pleadings). Moreover, assuming that the Campbells’ pleadings in support of their petition for adoption are permeated with fraud, they have run a substantial risk that the adoption in the present case could be set aside on the basis that the Campbells engaged in an unconscionable plan or scheme to work a fraud upon the court. See Ind. Trial Rule 60(B)(3). Indiana courts have overturned adoptions obtained through fraud. See Caley v. Lung, 257 Ind. 116, 271 N.E.2d 891, 892-93 (1971); Matter of Paternity of K.M., 651 N.E.2d 271, 277 (Ind.Ct.App.1995); In re Paternity of Tompkins, 542 N.E.2d 1009, 1014 (Ind.Ct.App.1989); But see, M.L.V., 598 N.E.2d at 1057 (that putative father's consent to an adoption may have been obtained through fraud was of no moment where father's consent was not required under the adoption statutes).
Additionally, assuming that the Campbells' pleadings are permeated with fraud, they have in no way demonstrated substantial compliance, much less the strict compliance required, to effect an adoption under the procedures prescribed by Indiana’s adoption statutes. See Matter of Paternity of Baby Girl, 661 N.E.2d 873, 878 (Ind.Ct.App.1996) (adoption set aside where prospective adoptive parents failed to substantially comply with the procedures prescribed by the adoption statutes); Petition of Gray, 425 N.E.2d 728, 730 (Ind.Ct.App.1981) (adoption set aside where the prospective adoptive parents had made no meaningful attempt to comply with the prescribed procedural steps to obtain an adoption, had provided the natural parent with inadequate notice, and made no showing that natural parent had violated her natural and legal obligations to the child), trans. denied.
Finally, as noted above, the Campbells put Father on notice that his right to object to the adoption proceedings would expire on December 29,1997. (R. 17). Thus, the Campbells could be estopped from denying the efficacy of Father's objection to the proposed adoption filed within the time prescribed by the Campbells. See Shewmaker v. Etter, 644 N.E.2d 922, 931 (Ind.Ct.App.1994) (party is estopped from assuming a position in a legal proceeding inconsistent with one previously asserted), adopted, 659 N.E.2d 1021, 1030; Baby Girl, 661 N.E.2d at 878 (adoption set aside where the notice provided by prospective adoptive parents affirmatively misled Father regarding the steps he needed to take to preserve his rights).
Our resolution of the present case obviates the need to discuss these matters. We nevertheless have recorded our condemnation of the practice of filing false pleadings and note that we will simply not tolerate any unconscionable scheme to use the courts to deprive persons of their rights. See Matter of R.L.W., 643 N.E.2d 367, 370 (Ind.Ct.App.1994) (sanctions imposed where a natural mother refused to respond to natural father's petition to establish paternity).
. Trial court findings entered in conjunction with summary proceedings, while helpful, are merely advisory. See State of Indiana Department of Natural Resources v. Hensley, 661 N.E.2d 1246, 1250 n. 1 (Ind.Ct.App.1996).
. The parties’ visitation agreement cannot constitute an enforceable "postadoption contact privi*49leges” agreement because such privileges may only be granted to a birth parent who has:
(1) consented to the adoption; or
(2) voluntarily terminated the parent-child relationship.
Ind.Code § 31-19-16-1. Additionally, such privileges may only be granted at the time an adoption decree is entered upon court approval. Id.; Ind.Code § 31-19-16-2(2).
In the present case, Father neither consented to the adoption nor voluntarily terminated the parent-child relationship. Also, the purported agreement was entered into after the adoption was final at a point when the trial court would have lacked jurisdiction to approve it. See Southwood v. Carlson, 704 N.E,2d 163, 165 (Ind.Ct.App.1999) (noting that it is well-settled that the trial court is deprived of further jurisdiction over a case once the record is filed with the clerk of the Supreme Court and Court of Appeals).

=== CASE 9737478 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:26:22.680661+00 ===

SHARPNACK, C.J.,
dissenting
I respectfully dissent. Where an appellant moves to dismiss the appeal and there is no opposition by the Appellee or any cross-appeal pending, we should dismiss the- case. See G.C. Murphy Co. v. Review Bd. of the Indiana Employment Security Div., 137 Ind.App. 476, 477, 210 N.E.2d 51, 51 (1965) (granting appellant’s motion to dismiss where no cross-errors had been filed by the appel-lees and where no opposition was made to the motion to dismiss); Federal Tire Co., Inc. v. Wingler, 137 Ind.App. 527, 527, 210 N.E.2d 258, 258 (1965); Felzien v. Felzien, 137 Ind.App. 435, 436, 209 N.E.2d 524, 525 (1965) (granting appellant’s motion to dismiss where the controversy between the parties had been settled); State v. Chapius, 187 N.E.2d 105, 105 (Ind.Ct.App.1963). While the majority appears to characterize the motion as something other than a motion to dismiss, I have no reason to conclude that it is anything but a motion to dismiss indicating the appellant’s clear intention to have the entire case dismissed.
Furthermore, it is not for us to compel Appellants to continue litigation they wish to drop. I disagree with the majority’s speculation that the agreement reached between these parties is illusory. The motion to dismiss stating that the parties had reached a settlement on visitation issues is directly contrary to this conclusion and we have no other facts before us to indicate that this matter has not been resolved to the satisfaction of the parties. The majority also relies upon the public interest exception to the mootness doctrine in denying the motion to dismiss. However, two of the cases cited in support of this public interest exception involved appeals that became moot not through the parties taking affirmative steps to resolve their conflicts, but by mere natural expiration of the event that produced the conflict. See Board of Sch. Trustees of Muncie Community Sch. v. Barnell by Duncan, 678 N.E.2d 799, 801 (Ind.Ct.App.1997) (appeal by student against pchool for expulsion became moot when period for which student had been expelled had passed); Sowers v. Laporte Superior Court, No. II, 577 N.E.2d 250, 251 n. 1 (Ind.Ct.App.1991) (appeal by inmate whose request to perpetuate testimony under Ind. Trial Rule 27 was denied presented a potentially moot question because his claim against the State had either been approved, thereby providing him with compensation, or denied, *58allowing him to proceed with his lawsuit in which normal discovery was available to him). The third case cited, Evans v. Tuttle, held that promulgation of new regulations did not render an appeal moot because the new regulation only “alters the mechanism used to achieve the same result.” Evans v. Tuttle, 613 N.E.2d 854, 857 (Ind.Ct.App.1993). These cases do not support the application of the public interest exception to the case before us. Addressing issues that have become moot because relief can be no longer be fashioned does not necessarily affect the parties. However, to address questions made moot by a mutual resolution of the disagreement by other means denies the parties the opportunity to settle a matter on their own. Such a result is contrary to a policy that supports such settlements.
This appeal should be dismissed.

=== CASE 9737479 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:26:24.017033+00 ===

OPINION
KLAPHAKE, Judge.
Appellant Rent-A-Wreck obtained a writ of certiorari seeking review of the Minneapolis Commission on Civil Rights’ determination that Rent-A-Wreck discriminated against respondent Linda Paper by refusing to rent her a car. We reverse.
FACTS
Appellant Rent-A-Wreck, an auto rental company, requires rental applicants to provide either a major credit card or a verifiable work phone number and money deposit. With the exception of retirees, who are not required to provide work phone numbers, applicants who cannot meet these requirements are refused rentals. These requirements are consistent with Rent-A-Wreck’s liability insurer’s guidelines.
On June 10, 1988, respondent Linda Paper telephoned Rent-A-Wreck to rent a car. Paper had no major credit card, and when asked whether she had a work phone number, she replied that she was unemployed and was “on AFDC.” Based upon Paper’s inability to meet its rental requirements, Rent-A-Wreck refused to rent Paper a car and referred her to another car rental company.
Paper filed a discrimination charge with the Minneapolis Department of Civil Rights on June 20, 1988. The charge alleged Rent-A-Wreck refused to rent Paper a vehicle because of her status as a public assistance recipient in violation of Minneapolis, Minn., Code of Ordinances, § 139.40(h)(1) (1976), which prohibits discrimination with regard to public accommodations. The department determined probable cause existed. The Minneapolis Commission on Civil Rights (Commission) heard the case and found that Rent-A-Wreck discriminated against Paper, and ordered Rent-A-Wreck to provide a free rental vehicle to Paper for the value of $500, pay a $300 civil penalty to the City of Minneapolis, and implement less discriminatory rental requirements. Rent-A-Wreck appeals from this decision.
ISSUE
Did the Commission err in concluding that Rent-A-Wreck’s actions were discriminatory?
ANALYSIS
This court’s review of the Commission’s decision is governed by Minn.Stat. § 14.69 (1988). On review, the decision may be reversed if it is “affected by * * * error of law” or “[unsupported by substantial evidence in view of the entire record as submitted.” Minn.Stat. § 14.69(d), (e).
The Minneapolis civil rights ordinance prohibits any person providing public accommodations:
(1) To fail or refuse to provide to any person access to the use of and benefit from the services and facilities of such public accommodations; or
(2) To discriminate against any person with respect to the availability of such services and facilities, the price or other consideration therefor, the scope and quality thereof, or the terms and conditions under which the same are made available, including terms and conditions relating to credit, payment, warranties, delivery, installation and repair.
Minneapolis, Minn., Code of Ordinances § 139.40(h) (1976).
“Public accommodations” includes: all services or facilities, other than governmental, of any kind offered or located within the City of Minneapolis which are generally open or offered to the public or which generally solicit public patronage or usage, whether operated for profit or not.
Minneapolis, Minn., Code of Ordinances, § 139.20(w) (1976).
In analyzing discrimination cases, Minnesota has adopted the three-part test established in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S.Ct. 1817, 36 L.Ed.2d 668 (1973). See Potter v. LaSalle *300Court Sports & Health Club, 384 N.W.2d 873, 875 (Minn.1986) (Title VII analysis applies to Minneapolis civil rights ordinance). This test consists of the establishment of a prima facie case of discrimination, an answer, and a rebuttal. Hubbard v. United Press Int’l, Inc., 330 N.W.2d 428, 441 (Minn.1983). The elements of a prima facie case vary according to the facts of each case. Id. at 442.
Paper’s discrimination claim and the Commission’s decision were based on a theory of disparate impact. In order to establish a case of disparate impact, the claimant must “demonstrate that a facially neutral * * * practice actually operates to exclude * * * a disproportionate number of members of the protected class.” Schlemmer v. Farmers Union Cent. Exch., Inc., 397 N.W.2d 903, 908 (Minn.App.1986) (citing Griggs v. Duke Power Co., 401 U.S. 424, 431-32, 91 S.Ct. 849, 853-54, 28 L.Ed.2d 158 (1971) (seminal case on disparate impact)). The claimant must provide evidence, normally in the form of statistics, showing a practice has a disparate impact on the claimant’s protected class. See New York City Transit Auth. v. Beazer, 440 U.S. 568, 583, 99 S.Ct. 1355, 1365, 59 L.Ed.2d 587 (1979); Schlemmer, 397 N.W.2d at 908.
The evidence and the Commission’s findings in this case do not support a prima facie case of disparate impact discrimination. The record shows no evidence that Rent-A-Wreck’s practice of requiring a verifiable work phone number had an impact on public assistance recipients. Paper asks this court to take judicial notice of the fact that most public assistance recipients are unemployed. However, this fact was disputed by the parties and does not meet the criteria for judicial notice. See Minn. R. Evid. 201(b). As the evidence was insufficient to establish a prima facie case, the Commission erred in concluding that Rent-A-Wreck’s requirement had a discriminatory impact on public assistance recipients.
While we conclude in this case that the evidence was insufficient to show disparate impact, we are mindful that providers of public accommodations must carefully craft the terms and conditions of accommodation availability to avoid discriminatory impact against groups protected by this ordinance or similar laws. Rent-A-Wreck and other public accommodations have a legitimate interest in protecting their property and ensuring a legal recourse against customers who damage their property. However, to the extent possible, business policies must further these interests based on nondiscriminatory criteria.
Because we reverse the Commission on its finding of discriminatory impact, we decline to address other issues raised by Rent-A-Wreck on appeal.
DECISION
The Commission erred in determining Rent-A-Wreck discriminated against Paper by refusing to rent her a car.
Reversed.

=== CASE 9737480 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:26:24.021291+00 ===

GARDEBRING, Judge
(concurring specially).
I concur in the result in this case, but only because respondent provided no evidence of the percentage of public assistance recipients who are unemployed. I believe this evidence would demonstrate an extremely high correspondence between public assistance recipients and the unemployed.
That being so, a case of disparate impact could be established, particularly because a legitimate business need must be met through the least discriminatory practice. See Schlemmer v. Farmers Union Central Exchange, Inc., 397 N.W.2d 903, 909 (Minn.App.1986) (employee may prevail by showing an alternative practice that the employer could use to achieve its desired end without having the illegal disparate impact).
It is certainly legitimate for Rent-A-Wreck to establish economic criteria for automobile rental. However, a practice determining existence, amount or regularity of income, or examining credit history would meet Rent-A-Wreck’s needs with less discriminatory impact. There is simply *301no nexus between source of income and economic reliability, and the focus on source of income is disallowed by the ordinance.

=== CASE 9737481 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:26:25.48048+00 ===

CANE, P.J.
The state of Wisconsin appeals nonfi-nal orders1 suppressing 170 marijuana plants seized under a warrant. The warrant had been obtained in partial reliance on an earlier police seizure of one marijuana bud for testing, and the trial court determined that the earlier police seizure involved an impermissible fourth amendment violation of Lange's curtilage.
The state contends that the trial court erred by determining that the bud was seized within the curtilage of Lange's home and by suppressing evidence seized pursuant to a warrant independently supported by probable cause when all evidence of the questionable intrusion is excised. Lange contends that the trial court erred by determining that an aerial search of his property using vision-enhancing devices was permissible and urges that we deem this search a separate fourth amendment violation and an alternative ground for upholding the trial court's suppression order.
We conclude that the garden from which the marijuana bud was seized was within the curtilage of Lange's property under the Supreme Court's test in United States v. Dunn, 480 U.S. 294 (1987). We agree with the trial court that the visually-assisted aerial surveillance was not an infringement on Lange's fourth amendment rights. Finally, we hold that admissibility of evidence under the independent source doctrine is controlled by the test enunciated in Murray v. United States, 487 U.S. 533 (1988), and we remand this matter to the trial court to determine whether the investigating agent would have *615sought a search warrant if there had been no illegal intrusion.
In June of 1989, Darwin Krall, a conservation warden pilot for the state Department of Natural Resources, flew over William Lange's property while en route to Eau Claire. Lange's property includes a garden approximately thirty feet behind the house, surrounded on three sides by trees and dense undergrowth. Krall, using binoculars, noticed plants that he thought could be marijuana growing in the garden. Krall had received training in the aerial identification of marijuana plants. He did not act on the information at the time of his initial observation, but made a mental note of the location of Lange's farm.
In August 1989, the state Division of Criminal Investigation (DCI) enlisted Krall's aid in making flights aimed at drug eradication. On August 21, Krall again flew over Lange's property and programmed its location into his navigational computer. He also took photographs of the property, using a camera with a standard 50-mm. lens.
On August 22, Krall flew over the property a third time, accompanied by agent Jeffrey Kostner of the DCI. Both Kostner and Krall identified the plants growing in Lange's garden as marijuana. Krall again took photographs, this time using a telephoto lens. All three flights were in a fixed wing aircraft, and Krall never flew below an altitude 800-1,000 feet above the ground.
Later in the evening of August 22, Kostner, Krall and another DCI agent approached Lange's property through a cornfield. Kostner looked through an opening in the trees and observed seven-foot marijuana plants growing in the garden. Kostner testified that there was a snow fence, approximately four feet tall, extending partially along the east side of the garden, at the tree line.
*616Kostner then proceeded to enter the tree line and snip one of the marijuana buds. He testified that he clipped the bud while standing at the southeast end of the garden, south of the point where the snow fence ended. Lange testified that the nearest marijuana plant was located nine or ten feet beyond the snow fence. When Kostner returned to his office, he field-tested the sample bud, using the Duquenois-Levine test for tetrahydrocannabinols.
Kostner obtained a search warrant for Lange's house, outbuildings, curtilage and attached land. The warrant application stated that he was seeking marijuana, equipment used to grow and package marijuana, drug sales records, growing records, drying equipment and telephone toll records. In his affidavit in support of the warrant, Kostner indicated that his aerial and open field observations and the positive testing of the marijuana bud sample provided part of his probable cause basis for seeking the warrant.
Lange moved to suppress the evidence of the marijuana plants, which he contended were seized without a legal warrant. The trial court ruled that the aerial and open field observations that formed part of the basis for the warrant were permissible. It found that "up to that point, we had proper police conduct, and we had certainly, based on all evidence in front of this Court, sufficient evidence to support a warrant.” The court concluded, however, that the clipping of the marijuana bud was an unconstitutional invasion of Lange's curtilage and ordered the suppression of the marijuana plants seized pursuant to the warrant.
*617I. DETERMINATION OF CURTILAGE
The state contends that the trial court erred by determining that the bud was seized within the curtilage of Lange's home. There is some question as to the appropriate standard of review on this issue. Lange contends that the question whether a place is within the "curti-lage" of the house is a question of fact, citing Ball v. State, 57 Wis. 2d 653, 661, 205 N.W.2d 353, 356 (1973). Findings of fact by a trial court shall not be set aside on appeal unless clearly erroneous. Section 805.17(2), Stats.
More recent Wisconsin case, law, however, appears to call Ball's holding into question, and suggests that the issue of whether a place forms part of the "curtilage" of a home is a matter of constitutional fact. See, e.g., State v. Murdock, 155 Wis. 2d 217, 226, 455 N.W.2d 618, 621 (1990) (whether the facts satisfy the constitutional requirement of reasonableness and whether a particular place is an area from which a defendant might secure a weapon are matters of constitutional fact). Constitutional facts depend on findings of historical fact. The latter are reviewed under the great weight/clearly erroneous standard. State v. Griffin, 131 Wis. 2d 41, 62, 388 N.W.2d 535, 543 (1986), aff'd, 483 U.S. 868 (1987). An appellate court exercises independent appellate review of constitutional facts. Murdock, 155 Wis. 2d at 226, 455 N.W.2d at 621.
The line between historical fact and constitutional fact is "often fuzzy at best." Container Corp. v. Franchise Tax Bd., 463 U.S. 159, 176 (1983). The curti-lage concept originated at common-law to extend the same protection to the area immediately surrounding a dwelling house as that extended to the house itself. *618Dunn, 480 U.S. at 300. The concept of curtilage "plays a part... in interpreting the reach of the Fourth Amendment." Id. A constitutional fact is one whose determination is "decisive of constitutional rights." R. Aldisert, The Judicial Process 704 (1976) (citing W. Bishin & C. Stone, Constitutional Facts, Law Language & Ethics 365-70 (1972)).
We need not decide this issue because, under either standard, we affirm the trial court's finding that the tree line surrounding Lange's garden marked his curtilage. The United States Supreme Court has provided courts with a four-factor test to aid in the determination of curtilage questions. Dunn, 480 U.S. at 301. We analyze the trial court's findings in light of the Dunn factors.
First, we examine the proximity of the area claimed to be curtilage to the home. The trial court found that the garden was within ten yards of Lange's home. The state concedes on appeal that the proximity of the garden is one factor that might support a determination that the garden was within the curtilage of the house.
Second, we inquire whether the area is included within an enclosure surrounding the home. The trial court found that "it's completely surrounded by heavy, heavy tree line, not just some shelter belt, but thoroughly dense trees on the better part of three sides and scattered trees and brush along the remainder, that clearly delineates a living area." The state argues that Dunn requires the enclosure to surround both the house and the garden, and a three-sided enclosure does not suffice to meet this requirement. Whatever the merits of the state's interpretation of Dunn, the undisputed evidence demonstrates that the house and garden stood alone in the middle of farm fields, surrounded except for the driveway entrance *619on all four sides by trees, with the concentration of trees heavier on the three sides that also enclosed the garden.
The state also argues that the existence of a four-foot-high snow fence, constructed of spaced pickets and wire, between the house and the garden served to separate the areas and remove the garden from the curtilage of the house. We disagree. The undisputed evidence indicates that this fence did nothing to "screen" the garden from the house; in fact, vegetation behind the fence was clearly visible from the house's porch. The trial court's finding that the snow fence did not demarcate Lange's curtilage was not clearly erroneous.
Therefore, the trial court could correctly conclude that the garden here was included within an enclosure surrounding the home. Thus, the second factor of the Dunn test supports a determination that the garden is within Lange's curtilage.
Third, we ask the nature of the uses to which the area is put. Dunn directs that we examine whether the area "was . . . being used for intimate activities of the home." Id. at 302. Here, the state is in the anomalous position, after urging this court in its analysis of the second factor of the Dunn test to examine the entire area encompassing the home as well as that land claimed to be curtilage, of now asking that we examine only the uses to which the garden was put, i.e., growing marijuana. The trial court found it significant that laundry was hanging on a line even farther from the house than the garden. We agree. Lange testified at trial that the garden area itself contained, in addition to the marijuana, a variety of garden vegetables including corn, tomatoes and squash. The "use" factor weighs in favor of a determination that the garden is within Lange's curtilage.
*620Fourth, we determine the steps taken by the resident to protect the area from observation by people passing by. The trial court found:
You have a whole area that's open to farming and tillage, and here in the middle of this huge farmland, acres and acres of farmland, was an area that was intentionally planted to cordon off a living area, and within those tree lines, there is an interesting pattern of — between the buildings and trees and areas of a private area. That's what I think the ancient concept or medieval concept of curtilage is all about, and I think to find otherwise would do an injustice to the privacy of individuals.
The state argues that there is nothing in the record to indicate that Lange planted the trees in question. This is not dispositive of our inquiry into the fourth Dunn factor. Whether Lange planted the trees himself, or merely chose to live on the property because the trees afforded privacy, he took steps to protect the area from observation by people passing by. We conclude that an analysis of all the Dunn factors supports the trial court's determination that the garden was located within the curti-lage of Lange's home.
In its brief, the state argued that, even were the bud determined to be within the curtilage of Lange's home, the trial court erred by finding that Lange had a sufficient subjective expectation of privacy in the marijuana garden to warrant fourth amendment protection. At oral argument, the state conceded that where an area is clearly within the curtilage under the Dunn analysis, it is entitled to fourth amendment protection. The concession is appropriate, in view of our supreme court's holding in State v. Walker, 154 Wis. 2d 158, 184, 453 N.W.2d 127, 138 (1990) (warrantless arrest within the curtilage *621of a person's home is unlawful absent probable cause and exigent circumstances).
II. VISUALLY-ASSISTED AERIAL SEARCH
Lange contends that the aerial search of his property using vision-enhancing devices was impermissible and urges that we deem this search a separate fourth amendment violation and an alternative ground for upholding the trial court's suppression order. We decline to do so.
The Dunn factors do not address the reasonable expectation of privacy from aerial surveillance of the curtilage. A different body of United States Supreme Court case law controls this inquiry.
Minimum altitudes for fixed wing aircraft flying over Barron County is 500 feet above the terrain. The plane's altitude during Krall's three flyovers of Lange's property never fell below 800-1,000 feet above the ground. Krall used binoculars and a camera with a standard 50-mm. lens and a 90-250 zoom lens in making his observations. Lange testified that in the six years he resided on the property, he had never seen an airplane or helicopter overhead until a defense expert circled his property after charges were filed. He further testified that he did not expect anyone to fly over his residence. Lange argues that the use of vision-enhancing devices, coupled with the use of aircraft where overflights are not expected, combine to violate his reasonable expectation of privacy.
We first address Lange's challenge to the use of vision-enhancing devices during aerial surveillance. Naked eye observations from a fixed wing plane flying at 1,000 feet where agents used a 35-mm. camera to take *622photographs did not violate fourth amendment protections. California v. Ciraolo, 476 U.S. 207, 209-13 (1986). Naked eye observations from a helicopter 400 feet above a partially covered greenhouse located ten to twenty feet from a defendant's home did not amount to a search for fourth amendment purposes. Florida v. Riley, 109 S.Ct. 693, 696-97 (1989). Where an observation is made from a plane flying within navigable airspace for a fixed wing aircraft, a defendant does not have a reasonable expectation of privacy. Id. at 696 (plurality opinion).
The United States Supreme Court has stated that "[t]he use of bifocals [sic], field glasses or the telescope to magnify the object of a witness' vision is not a forbidden search or seizure, even if they focus without his knowledge or consent upon what one supposes to be private indiscretions." On Lee v. United States, 343 U.S. 747, 754 (1952); see also State v. Peck, 143 Wis. 2d 624, 640, 422 N.W.2d 160, 166-67 (Ct. App. 1987) (binoculars or other vision enhancement devices); State v. Vogel, 428 N.W.2d 272, 275 (S.D. 1988) (camera and zoom lens); United States v. Bassford, 601 F.Supp. 1324, 1328 (D. Me. 1985), aff'd, 812 F.2d 16 (1st Cir.), cert. denied, 481 U.S. 1022 (1987) (binoculars).
We agree with Lange's contention that "[t]here must be a limit to the degree the government can intrude upon a person's home and curtilage with 'high-tech' equipment." As Lange points out, while the use during aerial surveillance of expensive highly sophisticated equipment, including a magnifying map-making camera, has been held not to violate fourth amendment protections, see Dow Chemical Co. v. United States, 476 U.S. 227, 237-39 (1986), the Dow Court distinguished the level of constitutional protection extended to an indus*623trial property, like the one involved in Dow, from that afforded to protect an individual's home. Id. at 237-38. We specifically limit our holding here to approval of the use of standard binoculars and cameras equipped with generally available standard and zoom lenses.
We next address Lange's claim that the use of aircraft where overflights are not expected violated fourth amendment protections. Lange bases his claim on language in Justice O'Connor's concurring opinion in Riley: "If the public rarely, if ever, travels overhead at such altitudes, the observation cannot be said to be from a vantage point generally used by the public and [the defendant] cannot be said to have 'knowingly expose[d]' his [curtilage] to public view." Id. at 698-99 (O'Connor, J., concurring). Lange argues that the state offered no evidence to rebut his testimony that he had never seen flights over his property and that he did not expect anyone to fly over his residence.
Krall testified that his first flight over Lange's property was part of his flight plan en route to Eau Claire. He was not on a drug enforcement search mission in remote areas. The court could and did infer from this testimony that overflights of Lange's property were not rare. We conclude that Lange did not have a reasonable expectation of privacy from observations made in a fixed wing aircraft flying no lower than 800 feet, where overflights were not rare and the pilot was within navigable airspace specified by law.
III. INDEPENDENT SOURCE RULE AND MURRAY
The state contends that the trial court erred by not excising from the warrant application information relat*624ing to the illegal entry and then determining whether the warrant was valid. It finds support for its contention in both United States v. Karo, 468 U.S. 705 (1984), and State v. O'Brien, 70 Wis. 2d 414, 234 N.W.2d 362 (1975). In response, Lange argues that a more recent Supreme Court decision, Murray v. United States, controls.
In Murray, the Supreme Court held that evidence initially discovered during an illegal search, but subsequently acquired through an independent and lawful source, is admissible. Id. at 539. The Murray Court described the test to be applied as follows:
The ultimate question, therefore, is whether the search pursuant to warrant was in fact a genuinely independent source of the information and tangible evidence at issue here. This would not have been the case if the agents' decision to seek the warrant was prompted by what they had seen during the initial entry, or if information obtained during that entry was presented to the Magistrate and affected his decision to issue the warrant.
Id. at 542 (footnote omitted).
The state first attempts to distinguish Murray from this case by noting that, in Murray, the affidavit in support of the warrant failed to disclose the illegal intrusion while here, the affidavit informed the magistrate of the seizure and testing of the marijuana bud. Murray's rationale, however, covers both situations. The Court stated:
An officer with probable cause sufficient to obtain a search warrant would be foolish to enter the premises first in an unlawful manner. By doing so, he would risk suppression of all evidence on the premises, both *625seen and unseen, since his action would add to the normal burden of convincing a magistrate that there is probable cause the much more onerous burden of convincing a trial court that no information gained from the illegal entry affected either the law enforcement officers' decision to seek a warrant or the magistrate's decision to grant it.
Id. at 540 (emphasis added).
We acknowledge that the Murray Court needed only to address the standard to be applied when warrants are obtained after an illegal intrusion, but without disclosing that intrusion, in order to resolve the issue before it.2 Murray went further, however, to explicate a standard to be used whenever admissibility of evidence under the independent source doctrine is at issue. The decision of a court of last resort is not dictum, even if it is not decisive of the primary issue, if it is germane to that issue. State v. Lee, 119 Wis. 2d 355, 359, 351 N.W.2d 755, 757 (Ct. App. 1984), aff'd, 122 Wis. 2d 266, 362 N.W.2d 149 (1985).
The state next attempts to distinguish Murray on the grounds that we need not apply the independent source doctrine because we are confronted with facts "involving a single line of investigation in which probable cause exists prior to the allegedly illegal act, but the investigation proceeds through the allegedly illegal act." The state claims that in Murray, the exact point at which probable cause existed is not clear. We are not persuaded. While the facts recited by the Supreme Court may not clearly disclose when probable cause existed in the Murray case, those recited by the first circuit indicate that the police had probable cause to support a *626search warrant prior to their illegal intrusion. See United States v. Moscatiello, 771 F.2d 589, 595 (1st Cir. 1985); vacated and remanded on other grounds, 476 U.S. 1138 (1986), aff'd sub nom. United States v. Carter, 803 F.2d 20 (1st Cir. 1986), vacated and remanded sub nom. Murray v. United States, 487 U.S. 533 (1988). We cannot distinguish Murray on these grounds.
Because we conclude that Murray controls, we must apply its two-pronged test to determine the admissibility of evidence under the independent source doctrine. We first examine whether the agent would have sought the warrant if he had not made the illegal entry, and then inquire if information obtained during that entry affected the magistrate's decision to issue the warrant. Id. at 540. Lange contends that there is sufficient undisputed evidence in the record to invalidate the search on either of these two grounds. We do not agree.
First, with respect to whether the agent's decision to seek the warrant was prompted by what he had seen during the initial entry, Lange cites Kostner's testimony at the suppression hearing:
Q. Why not obtain a warrant between the time you saw it from the air and the time you went back to sample it?
A. Could you repeat the question? I missed the first part.
Q. Well, didn't you have time to get a warrant, a search warrant from the time you observed it with Pilot Krall? Why not do that, rather than go in there and sample it without a warrant?
A. I judged not to go and get the warrant immedi- . ately to protect the—
*627Q. Did you talk to the District Attorney before you made that decision?
A. No, I did not.
Q. What were you going to protect by not getting the warrant?
A. To protect in case it was not marijuana.
Q. I thought you said that you could tell for sure from the air that it was.
A. Not absolutely positive.
Q. Could you tell absolutely positively when you were standing in the cornfield looking into the garden . whether it was marijuana or not?
A. No, it appeared to be marijuana.
Q. Why not get a warrant, then, before you sampled it?
A. I chose not to.
Q. Why?
A. Because of my procedure. I just chose not to.
Q. No real reason?
A. I just chose not to get a warrant.
While Kostner's testimony reveals that he chose to pursue an "absolutely positive" standard rather than a "probable cause" standard to define the extent of his investigation, it does not address the critical inquiry described in Murray. It is possible that Kostner would have relied on a probable cause standard if absolute certainty could not be legally achieved. Because we do not make factual findings, the matter is remanded to the trial court to make an explicit finding as to whether *628Kostner would have sought a warrant if he had not clipped the bud. See id. at 542 n.3.
Second, with respect to whether information obtained during that entry affected the magistrate's decision to issue the warrant, Lange argues that because the judge who ruled to suppress the evidence and the magistrate who issued the search warrant are the same person, sufficient evidence exists in the record to enable us to determine as a matter of law that the magistrate's decision to issue the warrant was affected by the information obtained during the illegal search. On the contrary, we conclude that because the trial court found that "up to that point, we had proper police conduct, and we had certainly, based on all evidence in front of this Court, sufficient evidence to support a warrant," we conclude as a matter of law that the magistrate's decision to issue the warrant was not affected by information obtained during the illegal search.3 Accordingly, we do not remand to the trial court for a finding on this matter.
The order of the trial court is affirmed in part, reversed in part and remanded for an explicit finding as to whether Kostner would have sought a warrant if he had not clipped the bud.
By the Court. — Orders affirmed in part; reversed in part and cause remanded with directions.
The state appeals pursuant to sec. 974.05(l)(d)2, Stats.
Murray makes no reference at all to either Karo or O'Brien.
We understand the second prong of the Murray formulation to apply the objective test described in Karo and O'Brien. The inquiry is directed toward whether sufficient probable cause existed for a reasonable magistrate to have grounds for the issuance of a warrant absent the illegal intrusion.

=== CASE 2210949 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:00.017408+00 ===

247 Cal.App.2d 663 (1967)
ALALUNGA SPORT FISHERS, INC., Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
COUNTY OF SAN DIEGO et al., Defendants and Appellants.
Civ. No. 8110.
California Court of Appeals. Fourth Dist., Div. One.
Jan. 9, 1967.
Bertram McLees, Jr., County Counsel, and Lawrence Kapiloff, Deputy County Counsel, for Defendants and Appellants.
Walkoe, Dierdorff & Pyle and Albert E. Walkoe for Plaintiffs and Respondents.
WHELAN, J.
In each of two actions, the appeals in which have been consolidated by stipulations made at the time of oral argument, the owner of a sportfishing vessel of more than 50 tons burden recovered judgment for repayment of taxes assessed, levied and collected by the County of San Diego and the City of San Diego. The county and the city have appealed from the judgments.
The appeal in case No. 8110 was from the judgment in favor of the owner of "Alalunga"; in case No. 8111, from judgment in favor of the owner of "Betty Lou."
What is said herein with regard to "Alalunga" applies equally to "Betty Lou."
The actions were brought after denial by the board of supervisors of plaintiffs' verified claims for refund of taxes for the years 1961, 1962 and 1963.
"Alalunga" admittedly is a seagoing vessel of more than 50 tons burden, registered at the port of San Diego.
The other factual evidence is that sportfishing vessels generally: "... sell tickets to people who buy the tickets for the privilege of going fishing on this boat, they start out at whatever hours they are scheduled for. ... They otherwise give them some service in their sportfishing and they bring them back home again. ... they do not load them at one spot and discharge them at any other spot. They bring them right back to where they took them on."
A statement prepared by a deputy county assessor recites that such vessels:
"... are inspected periodically by marine inspection officers with regard to the seaworthiness of the vessel and safety of the passengers aboard. The Coast Guard designates the number of passengers they may carry, the range of their *665 operation at sea, as well as the necessary safety equipment and practices to be used. ... The boats furnish the necessary bait for fishing, a fishing space aboard, sleeping facilities as required, rest room facilities, and helpful fishing instructions. They also furnish, for an additional fee, light meals, liquid refreshments, and fishing tackle."
"Their operation normally begins in April and runs through September or October of each year, depending on the fishing conditions. The months of April through June are devoted principally to miscellaneous sportfishing in the vicinity of the Coronado Islands. July through September are devoted principally to albacore fishing in open waters off San Diego. This again, is dependent on fishing conditions. The passengers do not know their exact destination when they leave the dock."
"... There are ... various people who purchase reservations merely for the purpose of sightseeing."
Article XIII, section 4, California Constitution, provides: "All vessels of more than 50 tons burden registered at any port in this State and engaged in the transportation of freight or passengers shall be exempt from taxation except for state purposes."
The judgment is based essentially upon the court's finding that "Alalunga" is "engaged in the transportation of ... passengers" for hire.
Defendants attack that finding frontally. They contend additionally that the court erred in not permitting testimony concerning whether the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California deems the vessels in question to be common carriers and whether the commission regulates the activities of such vessels; and in not permitting the testimony of one James C. Potts concerning the number of vessels engaged in the same activities as the vessels in question and the very small number of such vessels that are over 50 tons burden.
Alleged Error In Exclusion Of Evidence
Defendants' argument may be summarized thus:
(a) The Public Utilities Commission, under section 701, Public Utilities Code, has the supervision and regulation of all common carriers ( 216), which includes the operation of a vessel engaged in the transportation of persons or property for compensation between points upon the inland waters of *666 this state or upon the high seas between points within this state. (Pub. Util. Code,  211.)
(b) If "Alalunga" is not being regulated by the commission, such fact would indicate that the vessel is not a common carrier within the meaning of the Public Utilities Code and is not a part of the shipping industry.
(c) Therefore, evidence to show whether "Alalunga" is so regulated is relevant and material.
[1] The argument overlooks the fact that in certain matters the power of the commission to regulate the activities of passenger carriers does not extend to vessels exempt from local taxation under article XIII, section 4. Section 4661, Public Utilities Code, adopted in 1963, reads as follows: "As used in this chapter, 'for-hire vessel' includes any vessel, by whatsoever power operated, carrying passengers for hire, except a seaplane on the water, and vessels exempt from taxation under Section 4 of Article XIII of the Constitution of the State of California."
Defendants' offer to show that most sportfishing vessels are of not more than 50 tons burden is irrelevant. The line of classification is between vessels of 50 tons burden or less and those of over 50 tons. It is not an unreasonable classification so far as the equal protection clause of the federal Constitution is concerned.
The offered evidence is without value to show the intention of the people to include or exclude sportfishing vessels from the constitutional exemption.
Is The Vessel One Engaged In The Transportation Of Passengers For Hire?
[2] The solution of the problem calls for application of the rule cited by defendants, that statutes offering exemption from taxes are to be construed strictly and narrowly in favor of the taxing agency and against the taxpayer. (Santa Fe Transp. Co. v. State Board of Equalization, 51 Cal.2d 531, 539 [334 P.2d 907]; Estate of Morris, 56 Cal.App.2d 715, 727 [133 P.2d 452]; Atlantic Coastline R.R. Co. v. Phillips, 332 U.S. 168 [91 L.Ed. 1977, 67 S.Ct. 1584, 173 A.L.R. 1].)
[3, 4] It calls also for application of the rule that: " '... if the words of an enactment, given their ordinary and popular signification, are reasonably free from ambiguity and uncertainty, the courts will look no further to ascertain its meaning' (23 Cal.Jur. 730,  109) and that 'Where a word, having a technical, as well as a popular meaning, is used in *667 the Constitution, the courts will accord to it the popular meaning, unless the nature of the subject indicates or the context suggests, that it is used in a technical sense.' " (County of Los Angeles v. Craig, 38 Cal.App.2d 58, 61 [100 P.2d 818].)
We accept defendants' contention that the purpose behind the adoption of the constitutional amendment was to assist the shipping industry in this state. (County of Los Angeles v. Craig, supra (1940) 38 Cal.App.2d 58, 61; Star etc. Boat Co. v. County of San Diego, 163 Cal.App.2d 534, 537 [329 P.2d 716].)
While such was the obvious purpose behind the adoption of the amendment, it is equally obvious that that purpose is not exclusively served by the language of the amendment itself. The interpretation for which defendants argue would require reading into the amendment the words "between different fixed points or termini."
The meaning of "transportation" and of "passenger" are involved in the problem. The following definitions are from Webster's New International Dictionary, Second Edition:
"Transportation: 1. Act of transporting, or state of being transported; carriage; removal; specif., systems and modes of conveyance of persons or goods from place to place."
"Transport: 1. To convey; esp., to carry or convey from one place or station to another, as by boat or rail. ..."
"Passenger: 2. A traveler by some established public conveyance, as a coach, omnibus, steamboat, railroad train, etc."
In Dragich v. County of Los Angeles (1939) 30 Cal.App.2d 397 [86 P.2d 669], exemption was denied a fishing vessel, not because it did not carry a cargo of fish, but because it did not carry it for hire. (Followed in Crivello v. County of San Diego, 50 Cal.App.2d 713 [123 P.2d 899].)
The court noted in Dragich that all vessels are used for the conveyance of either property or persons or both.
In Dragich, the court observed that the word "passenger" is quite generally used in contradistinction to the word "guest" (p. 399); that "passenger" is defined as "A traveler by some established public conveyance, as a coach, omnibus, steamboat, railroad train, etc.," that it implies carriage for hire.
In dealing with the distinction between one being carried in an automobile for compensation and one carried without *668 compensation, our courts have used the word "passenger" to denote the former, "guest" to denote the latter. (McCann v. Hoffman (1937) 9 Cal.2d 279, 282 [70 P.2d 909]; Sullivan v. Richardson (1931) 119 Cal.App. 367, 373 [6 P.2d 567].)
[5] Primarily, "Alalunga" is used for the conveyance of persons, other than its owner, officers and crew. The persons so conveyed are not guests, since they pay for being conveyed, but are passengers.
The amendment in its present form was adopted in 1954. The preceding section 4 of article XIII, adopted in 1932, was to expire by its terms on January 1, 1955.
It, in turn, succeeded the original section 4, adopted in 1914 (two years after the passage of the Panama Canal Act), which was to expire on January 1, 1935.
There was no express holding of an upper court prior to 1954 as to the meaning of "transportation of passengers" as contained in section 4 of article XIII. A trial court in Kiessig v. County of San Diego (1942) 51 Cal.App.2d 47 [124 P.2d 163], had found sportfishing vessels to be engaged in the transportation of passengers for hire but had denied the claim of exemption because the vessels were of less than 50 tons burden, contrary to the owner's contention. It was on that point that the trial court was upheld.  [fn. 1] The case is valuable as defining the meaning of "50 tons burden."
[6] The carriage of a passenger for hire in common parlance does not call for either (a) a scheduled fixed point of terminus other than the place of departure, or (b) the deposit of the passenger at such another place.
The judgments are affirmed.
Brown (Gerald), P. J., and Coughlin, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. Not reversed as plaintiffs assert.

=== CASE 9737536 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:28:06.788751+00 ===

T. M. Kavanagh, J.
Plaintiff Robert L. Evans, intervening defendants Arthur J. Koscinski and John R. Murphy, and seven other candidates, including Raymond A. Kosinski and J. J. Murphy, were candidates for office of judge of recorder’s court of the city of Detroit in the August 6, 1968, primary election.
The intervening defendants, Arthur J. Koscinski and John R. Murphy, requested and were granted by the Detroit election commission a ballot designation of “Former Judge of Recorder’s Court” to distinguish them — because of the similarity of their names — from candidates Raymond A. Kosinski and J. J. Murphy.
On July 2, 1968, the plaintiff filed a complaint for an order of superintending control in the Wayne county circuit court against the Detroit Election Commission alleging that candidates Arthur J. Koscinski and John R. Murphy had no right to such ballot designations. On July 3, 1968, Judge Martin in the Wayne county circuit court issued an order of superintending control enjoining the Detroit Election Commission from printing the designation “Former Judge of Recorder’s Court” under the names of Arthur J. Koscinski and John R. Murphy.
The intervening defendants filed a claim of appeal with an ancillary motion for emergency consideration. On July 5, 1968, the Court of Appeals entered an order vacating the order of Judge Martin and granting the requested designations.
*385On July 10, 1968, this Court granted the emergency application for leave to appeal and affirmed the Court of Appeals on authority of Sullivan v. Secretary of State (1964), 373 Mich 627, with Justice Adams dissenting and Chief Justice Dethmers not participating. 381 Mich 761.
In Sullivan the majority of this Court required the defendant "Wayne County Election Commission to provide hy its order a ballot designation as “former assistant attorney general” for plaintiff Joe B. Sullivan, a candidate for partisan nomination to the office of prosecuting attorney for the county of Wayne in the then impending primary election.
The defendant board at first had granted plaintiff’s request for a ballot designation as “assistant attorney general” but, on complaint of the other candidates, the hoard rescinded its previous action and instead granted both candidates named Sullivan ballot designations of their respective residence addresses.
Pursuant to section 561 of the Michigan election law1 plaintiff Joe B. Sullivan sought to have reviewed here this later action. The cited statute under consideration in Sullivan read as follows:
“The said ballots so prepared by the board of election commissioners in each county for use hy the electors of any political party at said primary election shall include the names of all candidates of said political party for the office of governor, lieutenant governor and United States senator, the names of all candidates of said political party for district offices, and, in each county, the names of all candidates of said political party for county offices: Provided, That if 2 or more candidates for the same office have the same or similar surnames, the board of election commissioners, upon the request of any *386such candidate filed in writing not later than 3 days after the last day for filing nominating petitions, shall print the occupation or residence of each of such candidates having the same or similar surnames on the ballot or ballot labels under their respective names. The term ‘occupation’ shall be construed to include political office, even though it is not the candidate’s principal occupation.
“The name of any candidate shall be printed showing the given name or abbreviation or initials of the given name of the candidate, and, in the case of a married woman, shall not be printed showing the husband’s given name.”
The current constitutional authority from which the legislature derived its power to enact such legislation is Const 1963, art 2, § 4, reading:
“The legislature shall enact laws to regulate the time, place and manner of all nominations and elections, except as otherwise provided in this constitution or in the constitution and laws of the United States. The legislature shall enact laws to preserve the purity of elections, to preserve the secrecy of the ballot, to guard against abuses of the elective franchise, and to provide for a system of voter registration and absentee voting. No laAV shall be enacted which permits a candidate in any partisan primary or partisan election to have a ballot designation except when required for identification of candidates for the same office who have the same or similar surnames.”
Justice Souris, writing for the majority of the Court in Sullivan, held that the legislative purpose of section 561, above quoted, was to provide an effective means of identifying to the electorate candidates for public office Avith the same or similar surnames. The Court concluded that the means used by the Wayne county election commission— that of designating the 2 candidates named Sullivan *387only by their respective residence addresses in a large metropolitan area like Wayne county — was inadequate to carry out the legislative purpose. Further, that their common occupation, since both were attorneys, did not suffice as ballot designations to identify them adequately from the standpoint of the elector seeking to cast an effective vote for the Sullivan of his choice.
Since neither of the alternatives expressly provided by our statute was suitable to its objective, this Court ordered that plaintiff Joe B. Sullivan be granted the only designation (“former assistant attorney general”) which would distinguish him effectively from his opponent bearing the same surname, notwithstanding the absence of express statutory provision for use of a former occupation for such purpose.
The Court’s justification, in ordering the designation “former assistant attorney general,” was based upon profound regard for a three-fold constitutional purpose, that of effecting a meaningful identification of candidates for partisan office, of preservation of the purity of elections, and of guarding the public against abuses of the elective franchise.
In the instant case neither of the statutory provisions as to residence or occupation would effectively distinguish the candidates bearing similar surnames.2 Applying the law of Sullivan to these facts, and drawing as Sullivan did upon Elliott v. Secretary of State (1940), 295 Mich 245, we conclude that the use of the designation “Former Judge of Recorder’s Court” is proper.
*388We affirm the decision of the Court of Appeals vacating the order of Judge Martin in the trial court and granting the requested designations.
No costs, a public question being involved.
Deti-imers, C. J., and Kelly, Black, and T. E. Brennan, JJ., concurred with T. M. Kavanagh, J.
OLS 1961, § 168.561 (Slat Ann 1956 Rev § 6.1561).
Note that subsequent to Sullivan v. Secretary of State (1964), 373 Mich 627, the statute was amended by PA 1967, No 36 (Stat Ann 1968 Cum Supp § 6.1561), effective November 2, 1967, to include candidates for nonpartisan offices.

=== CASE 2211975 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:14.132457+00 ===

91 Ill. App.3d 884 (1980)
413 N.E.2d 1381
GAIL KOUDELKA, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
THE VILLAGE OF WOODRIDGE, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 80-129.
Illinois Appellate Court  Second District.
Opinion filed December 22, 1980.
*885 Alfred P. Bianucci and Donald W. Forester, both of Oak Brook, for appellant.
Robert R. Verchota and Keith E. Roberts, both of Donovan & Roberts, P.C., of Wheaton, for appellee.
Judgment reversed.
Mr. JUSTICE LINDBERG delivered the opinion of the court:
Plaintiff, Gail Koudelka, was hired by the defendant, Village of Woodridge, in June 1975 as an assistant manager of the restaurant facility connected with the municipal golf course known as the "Village Greens." A week later the manager was terminated and plaintiff was told that she would have to assume the responsibilities of manager and was promoted to manager in September 1975.
In January 1977, plaintiff was informed that the village was closing the restaurant, and that all employees were being laid off. At the time of her termination, plaintiff had accumulated 1,594 hours of earned time due under an alleged village policy whereby managerial employees who were not entitled to overtime pay were allowed to take days off in return for their working more than 40 hours in a given work week. Plaintiff requested monetary compensation in the amount of $13,144.96 for the total accumulated hours not paid. The accumulated hours included earned time due but not taken, unused sick days, unused vacation days and unused holidays. The board of trustees and mayor recommended to the village administrator that, with respect to the unused sick days, accrued vacation time and unused holidays, plaintiff should be paid. However, with respect to plaintiff's claim for payment for earned time due, the mayor and board of trustees recommended to the village administrator that the claim be denied.
Subsequently, on March 10, 1977, plaintiff instituted the present action. After a bench trial, the trial court ordered that judgment be entered in favor of plaintiff for earned time due in the amount of $12,194.10 plus reasonable attorney's fees in the amount of $4,200 for a total sum of $16,394.10 plus costs of suit. Defendant appeals.
*886 I.
Defendant, Village of Woodridge, contends on appeal that plaintiff, Gail Koudelka, is not entitled to monetary compensation for the accrued earned time due which she did not use prior to her termination as manager. The defendant asserts that plaintiff is not entitled to such compensation in the absence of a valid contract or law authorizing such payment, and that there was in fact no such law or contract during the period of plaintiff's employment.
 1, 2 Generally, municipal employees are not entitled to compensation for overtime work in the absence of a valid contract or law authorizing it. (4 McQuillan, Municipal Corporations § 12.194a (3d ed. 1979).) Allowance of compensatory time off for extra hours worked does not necessarily authorize the payment of money in lieu thereof. (McQuillan, § 12.194a.) Although there are no Illinois decisions directly on point, a number of other State courts have dealt with the issue of whether an employee whose employment terminates is entitled to monetary compensation for accrued but unused compensatory time off. Generally, as McQuillan notes, the courts have found that absent a valid contract or statute regarding overtime, an employee's salary is payment in full for all of his services without regard to the number of hours worked. Riepe v. City of Independence (Mo. App. 1975), 525 S.W.2d 622; Rusk v. Whitmire (1975), 91 Nev. 689, 541 P.2d 1097; Campbell v. City of Troy (1972), 42 Mich. App. 534, 202 N.W.2d 547; Pootel v. City & County of San Francisco (1954), 125 Cal. App.2d 378, 270 P.2d 553; Kerr v. King County (1953), 42 Wash.2d 845, 259 P.2d 398.
In the instant case, there is no ordinance regarding the compensatory time off program and the mayor testified that it was an unwritten policy. Records were kept as to the accrued earned time due for each employee. However, on the employee check stub, no dollar amount was reflected for the earned time due worked during any particular pay period. Both the mayor and plaintiff testified that the concept of earned time due was a method whereby salaried employees who worked in excess of a 40-hour week could, with the approval and discretion of the village administrator, use the accrued time for personal reasons. There was testimony in the record that another salaried employee who had been terminated was given monetary compensation for his accrued earned time due. However, the witnesses were not definite in this regard. One of the witnesses, formerly a payroll clerk with the village, testified that she thought that at least one or two of the time slips for that employee were marked "earned time due." Plaintiff also testified that she knew of an employee who received monetary compensation for accrued but unused earned time due. However, plaintiff admitted that she did not have personal knowledge that that employee was in fact paid for his "accumulated but unused *887 earned time due," because she had never participated in preparing his time sheet or paycheck.
As it appears that the concept of earned time due was merely an unwritten informal policy of the village and that there was no ordinance regulating earned time due in effect during plaintiff's term of employment, the only other available basis upon which plaintiff may recover monetary compensation is if she had a valid contract regarding payment for her accrued but unused earned time due. (McQuillan, § 12.194a.) There was no written agreement in effect covering the employment of plaintiff with the village. The conditions of employment by the village are contained in its personnel rules and regulations and provide for overtime pay for nonsupervisory personnel. Plaintiff is not in this category. There is no provision for compensatory time off in the personnel rules and regulations. Further, plaintiff testified that her understanding of the compensatory time off or earned time due program was that hours worked in addition to regular hours would accumulate, and she could use the time when it was not busy. She agreed approval of her superior was required. There was no indication that during her term of employment plaintiff could have demanded cash in lieu of time off for the accrued hours. Neither is there any indication from her stated understanding that she would be paid in cash if she was terminated before using her accumulated hours, aside from her assertion that another village employee had been paid for his accrued unused hours.
Finally, there is no evidence in the record to support a finding that the defendant municipality had appropriated for the cash payment for accumulated but unused earned time due. The general appropriation for the golf course and restaurant operations provides for the customary line items of permanent and temporary wages and salaries and overtime but does not specifically recognize the type of extraordinary expense claimed here. It cannot fairly be concluded from the evidence and exhibits that the village budget provided appropriations for this expenditure, and such a finding is against the manifest weight of the evidence.
 3 Any contract which the municipality might have made for monetary compensation, absent an appropriation, would be null and void under section 8-1-7 of the Illinois Municipal Code (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 24, par. 8-1-7), which provides:
"No contract shall be made by the corporate authorities, or by any committee or member thereof, and no expense shall be incurred by any of the officers or departments of any municipality, whether the object of the expenditure has been ordered by the corporate authorities or not, unless an appropriation has been previously made concerning that contract or expense. Any contract made, or any expense otherwise incurred, in violation of the *888 provisions of this section shall be null and void as to the municipality, and no money belonging thereto shall be paid on account thereof. * * *" Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 24, par. 8-1-7.
This provision has consistently been held to deny liability of municipalities for contracts for services unsupported by prior appropriations. Chicago Patrolman's Association v. City of Chicago (1974), 56 Ill.2d 503, 309 N.E.2d 3, cert. denied (1974), 419 U.S. 839, 42 L.Ed.2d 66, 95 S.Ct. 68 (any municipal contract made without a prior appropriation is null and void); Hogan v. City of Centralia (1979), 71 Ill. App.3d 1004, 390 N.E.2d 595 (while city manager clearly had power to hire any employment offer is limited by city budget and void ab initio if no budget has been provided for it pursuant to section 8-1-7 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1979, ch. 24, par. 8-1-7)); Guerine v. City of Northlake (1971), 1 Ill. App.3d 603, 274 N.E.2d 625 (city not liable for lawyer fees for defense of two of its policemen absent an appropriation therefore notwithstanding certain oral assurances by mayor that lawyers would be compensated).
 4 In sum, the trial court erred in awarding plaintiff compensation for the accrued but unused time as there was no ordinance enacted by the village with respect to the alleged compensatory time off program and, in any event, there was no valid contract between plaintiff and defendant which contained such terms.
II.
 5 Although there is no common law principle in Illinois allowing an award of attorney's fees as costs or damages (Lites v. Jackson (1979), 70 Ill. App.3d 374, 375, 387 N.E.2d 1118, 1119), there is a statutory provision whereby a court may allow a reasonable attorney's fee:
"Whenever a mechanic, artisan, miner, laborer, servant, or employee brings suit for wages earned and due and owing according to the terms of the employment, and establishes by the decision of the court or jury that the amount for which he has brought suit is justly due and owing, and that a demand was made in writing at least 3 days before suit was brought, for a sum not exceeding the amount so found due and owing * * *." (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1979, ch. 13, par. 13.)
As the statute is in derogation of the common law, it is to be strictly construed. (Lites, 70 Ill. App.3d 374, 375, 387 N.E.2d 1118, 1119.) The statute requires a "* * * decision of the court or jury that the amount for which he has brought suit is justly due and owing * * *" before reasonable attorney's fees can be awarded. Since plaintiff is not entitled to money compensation for earned time due her claim for attorney's fees must fail.
*889 The judgment of the Circuit Court of Du Page County awarding plaintiff $12,194.10 for earned time due but not taken and $4,200 attorney's fees plus costs of suit is reversed.
Reversed.
SEIDENFELD, P.J., and VAN DEUSEN, J., concur.

=== CASE 2210634 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:56.011012+00 ===

260 Cal.App.2d 55 (1968)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
FRANK AVILA CRUZ, Defendant and Appellant.
California Court of Appeals.
Mar. 12, 1968.
J. D. Butterwick, under appointment by the Court of Appeal, and Hennigan & Butterwick for Defendant and Appellant.
Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, William E. James, Assistant Attorney General, and William L. Zessar, Deputy Attorney General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
KERRIGAN, J.
Convicted by a jury of the charge of selling heroin (Health & Saf. Code,  11501) and sentenced to state prison, defendant appeals.
On March 1, 1966, an undercover agent of the Riverside County Sheriff's Department purchased four bindles of heroin from the defendant for the sum of $12. Shortly after the sale, the officer observed the defendant inject a powder substance and fluid into his arm with a hypodermic needle. *58
Defendant did not testify in his own behalf, but did display his arms to the jurors.
Defendant attacks the judgment of conviction on the following grounds: (1) The evidence of the subsequent crime pertaining to the injection of heroin was improperly admitted inasmuch as it tended to prove an offense other than that charged in the information; (2) opinion evidence of a non- expert witness was improperly admitted; (3) evidence of a threat made by defendant against a prosecution witness was improperly admitted; and (4) the district attorney was guilty of misconduct.
[1] The undercover agent testified, without objection, that defendant injected himself with heroin shortly after he had sold heroin to the officer. Defendant maintains that error was committed in the admission of such evidence because it constituted a crime distinct from that charged in the information. However, defendant failed to object to the admission of the evidence of the later offense. Consequently, it is not incumbent upon us to decide whether the testimony regarding the subsequent offense, with which the defendant was not charged, represented admissible or inadmissible evidence inasmuch as the error, if any, is not of fundamental or constitutional proportions, and the failure to object constitutes a waiver of his right to raise the issue on appeal. (People v. Marsh, 58 Cal.2d 732, 747 [26 Cal.Rptr. 300, 376 P.2d 300]; People v. Beverly, 233 Cal.App.2d 702, 723-724 [43 Cal.Rptr. 743], cert. den. 384 U.S. 1014 [16 L.Ed.2d 1035, 86 S.Ct. 1937]; People v. Henson, 205 Cal.App.2d 636, 638 [23 Cal.Rptr. 149]; Witkin, Cal. Evidence (2d ed. 1966)  1284, 1285, pp. 1187, 1188.)
[2a] Defendant next maintains that the court erred in permitting a police officer to express an opinion as to why defendant's arm showed no "marks" indicating his use of narcotics at the time the defendant displayed his arms to the jury. The trial occurred in December 1966. When the prosecution presented its case-in-chief, the undercover agent testified that at the time of the sale and injection at Corona on March 1, 1966, the defendant's arms bore bruises, together with black and blue marks, indicating that the defendant had been using heroin over a period of several weeks, and that these impressions would result in permanent scarring. Thereafter, the only evidence offered by the defense was to permit the defendant to exhibit his arms to the members of the jury, and apparently no scars were then visible. When the defense *59 rested, the prosecutor requested a recess to obtain rebuttal medical testimony. The prosecutor then produced a Riverside sheriff's sergeant who, over objection, was allowed to testify as follows: "Q. Sergeant, in reference to this use of Heroin [sic], do you have an opinion as to whether or not the condition of an individual, today, December 20, 1966, would indicate whether or not on March 1, 1966 an individual had been using Heroin [sic] by way of intravenous injection?"
"...."
"A. I[t] would not necessarily, unless there was some recent injection."
Defendant contends that a medical doctor should have been produced by the prosecution for the purpose of expressing the opinion given, and that the sergeant should not have been permitted to render his opinion because he was not a qualified medical expert.
A person may render his opinion as an expert on a question of science when he is skilled therein. (Code Civ. Proc.,  1870, subd. 9.)  [fn. 1] The police sergeant testified that he had 10 years' experience in law enforcement; that he had been in charge of the narcotic and vice detail for four years; that he had worked with state narcotic agents for six months; that he had taken the narcotic program conducted by the County of Riverside; that he had studied narcotic investigation in two courses sponsored by the State Bureau of Narcotics; and that he had examined individuals who used heroin.
[3] A police officer familiar with narcotic substances, who also has experience with addicts, may be permitted to testify as to the narcotic character and nature of a substance. (People v. Nunn, 46 Cal.2d 460, 466-467 [296 P.2d 813]; People v. Flynn, 166 Cal.App.2d 501, 509-510 [333 P.2d 37].) [4] The determination of an expert's qualification is primarily the function of a trial court, and its ruling will not be disturbed in the absence of an abuse of discretion. (People v. Chapman, 207 Cal.App.2d 557, 576 [24 Cal.Rptr. 568]; People v. Chambers, 162 Cal.App.2d 215, 220 [328 P.2d 236]; People v. Smith, 142 Cal.App.2d 287, 292 [298 P.2d 540].) [2b] In the case under review, the trial court was justified in finding that the officer was an expert by reason of his knowledge, skill, experience, training and education in the field of narcotics. [5] The defendant's remaining contentions to the trial court's action in permitting the sergeant to render *60 an opinion are unmeritorious inasmuch as he failed to raise the precise or specific objections at the trial level which he now asserts and such failure constitutes a waiver. (People v. DeCasaus, 194 Cal.App.2d 666, 675 [15 Cal.Rptr. 521]; People v. Lint, 182 Cal.App.2d 402, 414 [6 Cal.Rptr. 95].)
[6a] Defendant also urges that the evidence of a threat made by him against the undercover agent was improperly admitted in evidence over his counsel's objection. Defendant's threat to kill the officer was made after the agent had completed his testimony and after the prosecution had rested its case. A threat made by a defendant against a prospective prosecution witness whom he expects to testify against him, with the evident purpose of intimidating the witness, is proper evidence. (People v. Chin Hane, 108 Cal. 597, 603 [41 P. 697]; People v. Rosoto, 58 Cal.2d 304, 350, 352 [23 Cal.Rptr. 779, 373 P.2d 867].) [7] Efforts of an accused to suppress testimony against himself indicate a consciousness of guilt. (People v. Kendall, 111 Cal.App.2d 204, 213 [244 P.2d 418].)
[6b] However, defendant maintains that the evidence of a threat against a prosecution witness is properly admissible only in situations where the threat is directed against a prospective witness, and that here the undercover agent had completed his testimony. While foreign authority exists for the proposition that evidence of a threat made after a witness has testified is admissible where the witness is still subject to recall (Sandlin v. State, 25 Ala.App. 311 [146 So. 82, 84], such precedent is not persuasive under the factual situation presented herein. In the case at bar, the testimony relating to the defendant's threat to kill the undercover agent was introduced after the trial court permitted the prosecution to reopen its case for the purpose of permitting evidence relating to the threat. Thus, there was no likelihood that the officer could be frightened or coerced from testifying against the defendant as he had already given his testimony to the effect that the defendant had sold heroin to him, and the evidence was therefore not admitted on the theory of intimidation. Thus, the prejudicial tendency and want of probative value of the threat should have rendered such evidence inadmissible. (See 2 Wigmore, Evidence (3d ed. 1964 Supp.)  278, p. 42.) While the undercover agent here might not have been formally excused as a witness because of his investigatory role in connection with this particular prosecution, and while it is apparent he still remained available for recall as a witness, no *61 legitimate purpose was served by permitting his testimony concerning the threat. Consequently, admission of the evidence of the defendant's subsequent threat against the officer constituted error. [8] Nevertheless, reversal for error is proper only when, after reviewing the entire record, it appears reasonably probable that a result more favorable to the defendant would have been reached in the absence of the error. (People v. Watson, 46 Cal.2d 818, 836 [299 P.2d 243].) [9] The evidence of defendant's guilt is conclusive. He sold heroin to a law enforcement agent. This eyewitness confirmed that the sale was effected by the defendant. At the time of his arrest, the condition of his arms reflected involvement in narcotic activity. The defendant did not testify or offer any defense--except to display his arms to the jury. The improper evidence of the threat in no manner contributed to his conviction.
[10] Finally, defendant maintains that the prosecutor was guilty of misconduct in connection with statements he made during his closing argument. The charge of misconduct is based on the district attorney's action (1) in producing evidence that defendant used heroin following the sale; (2) in presenting evidence to the effect that the defendant had threatened the undercover agent during the course of the trial; and (3) in endeavoring to glorify the undercover agent by arguing that such men live in constant danger by reason of the nature of their work, and that extensive investigation is required in order to obtain convictions of narcotic offenders. The first two grounds of purported misconduct have previously been reviewed. As to the remaining claims of misconduct, no objection was made and no admonition asked, and since none were so serious to be beyond cure by admonition (see People v. Perez, 58 Cal.2d 229, 249-250 [23 Cal.Rptr. 569, 373 P.2d 617, 3 A.L.R.3d 946]), the claim of prejudicial misconduct is deemed to have been waived. (People v. Campbell, 232 Cal.App.2d 712, 715 [43 Cal.Rptr. 71]; People v. Johnson, 99 Cal.App.2d 717, 730-731 [222 P.2d 335].)
The judgment of conviction is affirmed.
McCabe, P. J., and Tamura, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. Now Evidence Code, section 720.