=== CASE 2223257 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:57.778814+00 ===

332 Mich. 1 (1952)
50 N.W.2d 716
TEETER
v.
TEETER,
Docket No. 96, Calendar No. 45,275.
Supreme Court of Michigan.
Decided January 7, 1952.
*3 John Wendell Bird, for plaintiff.
Sigler & Anderson, for defendant.
BUTZEL, J.
In a bill of complaint filed July 13, 1950, Kenneth H. Teeter, plaintiff and appellant, seeks cancellation of a written agreement made on December 9, 1942, with his mother, Edith M. Teeter, defendant, and a discharge of any further liability to her. The agreement provided for a sale of defendant's interest in a business in which her deceased husband and plaintiff were copartners and which interest she had inherited from her husband. Plaintiff agreed to pay her for her interest the sum of $50 a month until her death and further to provide in his will for the continuance of the payments should he predecease her. Although defendant claimed in a previous action at law that she inherited a 2/3 interest, we will assume for the purpose of this opinion that it was only a 1/2 interest, as claimed by plaintiff. The written agreement, executed by both parties, is clear, unambiguous and of such a nature as to be easily and readily understood by a layman of ordinary intelligence. It requires no interpretation from sources other than the instrument itself.
The judge below granted a motion to dismiss the bill of complaint. Therefore, all of the well-pleaded and material allegations of fact in the bill will be assumed to be true in our consideration of the case. Their legal effect, however, is for us to determine.
The main contentions of plaintiff in his bill are as follows:
*4 (a) Plaintiff claims that he understood at the time of making the agreement that a later agreement would be made by way of evaluating defendant's interest and determining just how much should be paid for it; that his understanding that his liability to defendant would not extend beyond the fair valuation of her interest in the business was the inducement to his entering into the contract. There is nothing in the written agreement that sustains this claim or the others hereinafter referred to. Misunderstanding by the plaintiff alone does not present a reason for the intervention of a court of equity. Mutual mistake or fraud must be the basis of the cancellation sought by plaintiff and neither is shown in the bill. Plaintiff does not allege that the misunderstanding was mutual. Neither is there an allegation that his misunderstanding resulted from the acts of defendant or her attorney, by misrepresentation or otherwise. Indeed, plaintiff avers in his bill that the agreement was designed "primarily for the assistance and support of defendant," a purpose not consistent with an intent to stop payments at any time before the death of defendant.
(b) Plaintiff further claims that his misunderstanding was caused by the defendant, since at the time of the agreement defendant was represented by an attorney and plaintiff was not. The agreement was not of a complex nature, the type that requires the services of an attorney to understand. There is no allegation that defendant employed an attorney for the purpose of misleading plaintiff, or that the attorney misled him.
(c) Plaintiff also claims that by July, 1949, he had paid complete consideration for the value of defendant's interest in the copartnership, and that to require him to pay any further sum would be inequitable and result in an inadequacy of consideration by defendant. However, there is no inadequacy of *5 consideration here that would justify the interposition of a court of equity. Plaintiff seeks to escape an unprofitable bargain. If defendant had died shortly after the agreement was entered into, or if the business under plaintiff's management had become very profitable, he would have made an extremely favorable bargain. There is no allegation that the agreement was not a fair one at its inception; it cannot be attacked because the plaintiff 7 years later feels he agreed to pay too large a sum.
(d) By way of relief, plaintiff wishes to affirm his contract up to 1949, but to have the operation of the instrument declared legally fraudulent and void and cancelled from that time on; or, as he states in the bill of complaint, "that the enforcement of the said agreement should be confined to the consideration as understood and interpreted by the plaintiff herein at the time he placed his signature on said instrument." Plaintiff thereby seeks to affirm the contract in its operation up to 1949 and to declare its operation subsequent thereto completely void. This cannot be done. In the guise of reformation or cancellation, we have no power in equity to make a new contract for the parties. Wood v. Truax, 39 Mich. 628; Nash v. Burchard, 87 Mich. 85; Amick v. Hickey, 254 Mich. 37; Engel v. State Mutual Rodded Fire Ins. Co., 257 Mich. 245; Goldberg v. Cities Service Oil Co., 275 Mich. 199; E.R. Brenner Co. v. Brooker Engineering Co., 301 Mich. 719.
In his brief on appeal, plaintiff-appellant argues that the trial court erred in declaring on its own motion that the bill of complaint stated no cause of action. The trial court, although admitting that such reason as a reason for dismissal does not appear in the written motion on file, stated, "it is the court's duty to raise jurisdictional matters upon its own motion if they have not been raised by counsel."
*6 See, to that effect, Bradley v. Board of State Canvassers, 154 Mich. 274; In re Estate of Fraser, 288 Mich. 392; Lehman v. Lehman, 312 Mich. 102. Plaintiff does not deny that this is the correct rule, but contends that there was nothing on the face of the bill or the pleadings in the cause to show a lack of jurisdiction as such. As has been stated heretofore, however, we find nothing on the face of the pleadings to justify the interposition of a court of equity. In the absence of such a showing, the court lacked equitable jurisdiction and properly dismissed the bill on its own motion. In any event, this is an equity case which we hear de novo and we find, upon reading the record, that the bill of complaint should have been dismissed.
We find no other claims that merit further discussion. On motion, the trial judge entered an order dismissing plaintiff's bill of complaint. The order is affirmed, with costs to defendant.
NORTH, C.J., and DETHMERS, CARR, SHARPE, and REID, JJ., concurred with BUTZEL, J.
BUSHNELL and BOYLES, JJ., concurred in the result.

=== CASE 2223259 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:57.813814+00 ===

50 N.W.2d 592 (1951)
LIVINGSTON et al.
v.
DAVIS et al.
No. 47905.
Supreme Court of Iowa.
December 13, 1951.
*594 Messer, Hamilton, Cahill & Bartley, of Iowa City, for appellants.
William L. Meardon, of Iowa City, for appellees.
GARFIELD, Justice.
Three inhabitants of a Class A Residence District in Iowa City brought this action in equity to enjoin defendants from operating in the district a private preschool or nursery school as a claimed violation of the city zoning ordinance and a nuisance. Following trial the court held there was no violation of the ordinance but certain practices of defendants made operation of the school a nuisance. Defendants were enjoined from certain uses of driveways leading to their property and given 65 days to remedy *595 other conditions held to be objectionable and to meet certain requirements. Both sides have appealed.
I. During pendency of the appeal one plaintiff (Mrs. Evans), next door neighbor of defendants, died and the property formerly occupied by her as a life tenant has been conveyed by the remainderman to third persons who have not been substituted as parties. Based on these facts defendants have moved to dismiss the appeal of Mrs. Evans and affirm their cross appeal as to her. We think the motion is good.
The present owners could have been substituted for Mrs. Evans. Section 686.17, Code, 1950, I.C.A.; Rules 15, 16, Rules of Civil Procedure, 58 I.C.A. There has been ample opportunity for such substitution. Apparently the present owners do not desire to be substituted as plaintiffs.
Of course the deceased Mrs. Evans no longer has any right it is necessary to protect by injunction although she may have had at the time of trial. See Rider v. Narigon, 204 Iowa 530, 215 N.W. 497; Davis & Shangle v. Boyer, 122 Iowa 132, 135, 136, 97 N.W. 1002; Faucher v. Grass, 60 Iowa 505, 15 N.W. 302. See also Price v. Baldauf, 90 Iowa 205, 209, 57 N.W. 710.
II. In their opening brief plaintiffs argue only that operation of defendants' preschool is a violation of the zoning ordinance. They do not argue it amounts to a nuisance. We may therefore assume that contention is waived so far as plaintiffs' appeal is concerned. Rule 344(a)(4) (Third), Rules of Civil Procedure; Tuttle v. Nichols Poultry & Egg Co., 240 Iowa 199, 210, 35 N.W.2d 875, 880, and citations; Carlson v. Bankers Trust Co., Iowa, 50 N.W.2d 1, 4. It is true in reply to defendants-cross-appellants' brief plaintiffs seek to sustain the limited relief granted them on the nuisance issue.
III. The area in question is commonly known as Woodlawn Addition at the east end of Iowa Avenue in Iowa City, a tract about 674 feet east and west by 615 feet north and south. The lots, 240 feet deep north and south, front on each side of a private drive extending east from the end of Iowa Avenue. Six residences are on the south, five on the north side of the drive. Defendants own the fourth house from the west facing north on the drive. The two remaining plaintiffs own the second and sixth homes respectively also facing north. Thus one residence separates defendants from each plaintiff. One such residence was Mrs. Evans'.
Woodlawn is in a Class A residence district under the city zoning ordinance. Permissible uses in the district are stated in 12 subsections of section 395 of the ordinance, one of which is, "(e) Public schools, Colleges, University Buildings and Uses, and Private Elementary Schools, taking only children up to and not exceeding the age of 14." The vital question upon plaintiffs' appeal is whether, as the trial court held, defendants are operating such a private elementary school as the ordinance permits.
Defendants purchased their property in the summer of 1946 for $13,000. Their house is large, with two stories, nine rooms and bath downstairs. October 1, 1946, they started operating their nursery school for children aged two to five in the downstairs, with a playground about 150 by 82 feet (width of their lot) at the rear. Children are brought to the school usually by parents in automobiles between 8 and 9:30 a. m., stay until 4:30 to 5:30 p. m. when their parents call for them. Children do not come on Sundays or holidays and leave at noon Saturdays. Largest attendance has been 50 children at the time of trial. There are fewer in the summer35 in 1950.
Defendants, husband and wife, are college graduates and experienced teachers. They employ two other young ladies as teachers and a full-time registered nurse who carefully looks over the children each morning for skin rash and condition of eyes, ears and nose. None of the teachers has a certificate to teach in public schools in Iowa. Children are told stories, taught singing, drawing, painting, coloring, numbers with blocks and some other things. Records are played, "movies" shown, and there is regular supervised play. The school has regular schedules and rules. Report cards are issued about every eight weeks. Defendants charged $30 a month *596 per child which had been increased to $35 at the time of trial.
There is expert testimony from professors at the state university that the age limit for schools is being pushed down, preschools are part of the public school system in some other states, are regarded by people in educational work as part of an elementary school, "there is a definite trend toward including the preschool in the regular school program," children who attend preschool are generally more advanced than others when they enter kindergarten and grade school, defendants' school is an elementary school. This evidence, while of course not controlling, seems worthy of consideration. Witnesses, apparently disinterested and informed, say defendants' school is an excellent one. The state university also operates a preschool in Iowa City.
We agree with the trial court that defendants are operating such a private elementary school as the zoning ordinance permits in a Class A Residential District.
Like many other courts, we have said zoning is an exercise of the police power delegated by the state to the municipality and such delegated power must be strictly construed. Downey v. City of Sioux City, 208 Iowa 1273, 227 N.W. 125; Granger v. Board of Adjustment, 241 Iowa 1356, 1363, 44 N.W.2d 399, 402. Like decisions include City of Little Rock v. Williams, 206 Ark. 861, 177 S.W.2d 924, 925; Langbein v. Board of Zoning Appeals, 135 Conn. 575, 67 A.2d 5, 7; Kass v. Hedgpeth, 226 N.C. 405, 38 S.E.2d 164. And see cases cited next below.
A zoning ordinance should not be extended by implication to prevent a use not clearly prohibited. See Jones v. Board of Adjustment, 119 Colo. 420, 204 P.2d 560, 565; Landay v. MacWilliams, 173 Md. 460, 196 A. 293, 114 A.L.R. 984, 988; 440 East 102d St. Corp. v. Murdock, 285 N.Y. 298, 34 N.E.2d 329, 331, and citations; Luedke v. Carlson, S.D., 41 N.W.2d 552, 554; 58 Am. Jur., Zoning, section 11; 62 C.J.S., Municipal Corporations, § 226(16)a, p. 480.
There can be little doubt defendants' place is a school. An accepted definition of school is "a place for instruction in any branch or branches of knowledge." See Webster's New Intl. Dict., 2d Ed.; Alexander v. Phillips, 31 Ariz. 503, 254 P. 1056, 52 A.L.R. 244, 246, 247 (holding stadiums for athletic games are included within the term "schoolhouses"); Langbein v. Board of Zoning Appeals, supra, 135 Conn. 575, 67 A.2d 5, 8.
Another common definition of school is "a place where instruction is imparted to the young." People v. Levisen, 404 Ill. 574, 90 N.E.2d 213, 215, 14 A.L.R. 2d 1364; Board of Education v. Ferguson, 68 Ohio App. 514, 39 N.E.2d 196, 198; 47 Am. Jur., Schools, section 2. Our conclusion that defendants operate a school finds support especially in the Langbein and Levisen cases, supra, and in People v. Collins, 191 Misc. 553, 83 N.Y.S.2d 124.
If defendants' place is a school certainly it is a private school, organized and managed by individuals, not by the public as an institution of the state. See 47 Am.Jur., Schools, section 2, page 298; 56 C.J., Schools and School Districts, section 3. The only debatable question is whether it is an "elementary" school "taking only children up to and not exceeding the age of 14."
"Elementary" means "pertaining to * * the elements, rudiments, or first principles of anything; initial; rudimental." Webster's New Intl. Dict., 2d Ed. Other definitions include "primary; simple." 29 C.J.S. p. 662. An elementary school has been defined as "a school for the elementary education of children, * * *." 56 C.J., Schools and School Districts, section 5. Defendants' school seems to fall squarely within the above definitions.
It is somewhat significant this zoning ordinance specifies only the maximum age limit of children who may attend permissible private elementary schools. The entire ordinance goes into much detail and was evidently intended to be specific. Had it been the purpose to impose a minimum age limit for such schools that purpose could easily have been expressed.
It is true, as plaintiffs argue, a statute pertaining to our public school system provides that persons between 5 and 21 shall *597 be of school age, section 282.1, Code, 1950, I.C.A. Code section 286.2 in the chapter on Supplementary Aid to School Districts states that for the purposes of this chapter an elementary pupil is one of school age attending public school who has not entered the ninth grade. A like statute is section 286A.2. And section 260.5 in the chapter on Board of Educational Examiners says, "For the purposes of this act the elementary school field shall be construed to include the kindergarten and grades one to eight * * *."
These statutes relate only to our public school system in which there are no nursery schools. They do not purport to define or describe private elementary schools. As stated in People v. Collins, supra, 191 Misc. 553, 83 N.Y.S.2d 124, 125, "* * * there is not necessarily any relationship between the Education Law definition of a school and the zoning ordinance definition."
Although public elementary schools include only kindergarten and the first eight grades we see no reason why private elementary schools may not include such a school as defendants operate. Public elementary schools include the first school the public provides for beginnerskindergarten. Why may not private elementary schools likewise include the first school they provide for beginnersthe nursery school?
Plaintiffs argue that because defendants make a charge for children attending their school it is a business and therefore, they say, it is not permitted in this Class A Residence District. If the use defendants make of their property is permitted by subsection e of the ordinance it is not material whether they are engaged in a business. Characterization of use as business or no business is not the test of uses permitted by the ordinance. See Jones v. Board of Adjustment, supra, 119 Colo. 420, 204 P.2d 560, 564. Of course there is a considerable element of business in the operation of any school. Defendants are no more engaged in business than if they operated a kindergarten and the first eight grades which admittedly would be permitted.
Section 295 of the ordinance (which includes subsection e) does not purport to prohibit all business in a Class A district. On the contrary it expressly permits several businesses or uses for profit such as municipally owned utilities; concessions incident to publicly owned country clubs; farming, truck gardening and nurseries and sale on the premises by members of the family of goods raised thereon; accessory uses incident to any permissible use, including professional offices, but not any retail or wholesale business or manufacture. And the next section of the ordinance expressly prohibits hospitals, sanitariums, rest cures, retreats and funeral homes in a Class A district.
It does not seem reasonable this zoning ordinance was intended to restrict such a use as defendants make of their property to an Industrial District. Certainly that would not be a suitable place for it. Yet this is the necessary result if plaintiffs' argument should be accepted. The only uses permitted in a Class B Residence District or a Business District (only districts into which the city is zoned other than Class A and Industrial) are those specified for Class A and certain designated additional uses none of which includes a school.
Schools have usually been held suitable in a residence zone, not detrimental thereto, and courts have frowned on efforts to remove them therefrom. Yokley, Zoning Law and Practice, section 161, pages 317, 318; Langbein v. Board of Zoning Appeals, supra, 135 Conn. 575, 67 A.2d 5, 7.
IV. On the issue of nuisance, as stated, the trial court in effect ordered defendants to eliminate certain conditions held to be objectionable and to meet some other requirements. Defendants have appealed from this part of the decree and plaintiffs seek to sustain it. One such requirement is that defendants refrain from using a loudspeaker in directing the children at play. Defendants do not object to this requirement and therefore we need not consider it.
The court required defendants to lower to not more than 40 inches and otherwise rebuild a 6-foot wood fence *598 built around their playground at a cost of over $500 about two months before this suit was started. The fence replaced one of wire. The court found the new fence is unsightly. We cannot sustain this requirement.
There is no complaint in plaintiffs' petition regarding this fence. The petition specifies in detail wherein it is claimed defendants have created a nuisance. Nor does the evidence justify the order pertaining to it. One of the two remaining plaintiffs as a witness says in effect her only complaint is the noise incident to the school. Another witness for plaintiffs, the nurse in the public schools who lives in Mrs. Evans' former home next to defendants, testifies she told defendant Davis she approved of the fence and would like one similar to it put in her backyard. Pictures of the fence have been certified to us.
Relief should not be granted which is outside the issues and without support in the evidence. Paintin v. Paintin, 241 Iowa 411, 41 N.W.2d 27, 16 A.L.R. 2d 659, and citations; 30 C.J.S., Equity, § 604; 19 Am.Jur., Equity, section 408.
Further, that a thing is unsightly or offends the aesthetic sense does not ordinarily make it a nuisance or afford grounds for injunctive relief. Parkersburg Builders Material Co. v. Barrack, 118 W.Va. 608, 191 S.E. 368, 192 S.E. 291, 110 A.L.R. 1454, 1460, and citations; 39 Am.Jur., Nuisances, section 29; 66 C.J.S., Nuisances, § 111b, p. 873. See section 657.2, Code, 1950, I.C.A. as to what are deemed nuisances. 22 Am.Jur., Fences, section 43, page 547, states, "Conversely, a fence erected without the motive of spite or malice cannot be enjoined even though the adjoining proprietor may be annoyed thereby."
As a further condition to denial of injunctive relief to plaintiffs defendants were required to file within 65 days a written report of the local board of health as to sanitary and health conditions of their school and of any recommendations, also a written report of the chief of the city fire department as to proper fire protection of their school and of any recommendations. Defendants say in argument they were unable to procure such reports until nearly 90 days after the decree. The record does not show their contents. Plaintiffs do not argue there is anything unfavorable to defendants in either report, if they were filed. We find no basis in the pleadings, proof or findings of the court for imposition of this condition.
Defendants' registered nurse testifies, "The school is very clean and exceptionally sanitary. As far as health is concerned there is definitely no reason why young children shouldn't get along there perfectly well." Defendant Mrs. Davis says, "We have been inspected by the fire inspector and know the rules. We have fire extinguishers." We find no evidence contrary to the above. The court found "the evidence indicates there are no fire or health hazards existing." The burden was upon plaintiffs to plead and prove wherein defendants created a nuisance. Plaintiffs made no attempt to show the health of the children was endangered or they were exposed to fire hazards. We need not consider whether such a showing would entitle plaintiffs to relief.
Further, our attention is called to no law which requires either the local board of health or fire chief to furnish such a report even if it would be entirely favorable to defendants. Nor would such reports be competent evidence against defendants. Denial of injunctive relief to plaintiffs should not have been conditioned upon defendants' procuring reports from third persons, not parties to the suit, under no legal duty to furnish them.
The remaining condition the decree imposed is to limit enrollment in defendants' school to 50 children. We think this condition is unwarranted. The effect of the decree is that upon compliance with the other conditions therein the nursery school with 50 children would not be a nuisance but a larger attendance would necessarily make it one. The record does not support such conclusion. Plaintiffs make no attempt to justify this condition beyond the statement the court did not exceed its authority in imposing it.
*599 If defendants in any respect operate their school in the future so it becomes a nuisance plaintiffs will have their remedy. See Dawson v. Laufersweiler, Iowa, 48 N.W.2d 228. An anticipated nuisance will not be enjoined unless it clearly appears a nuisance will necessarily result from the act (here the attendance of more than 50 children) it is sought to enjoin. Relief will usually be denied until a nuisance has been committed where the thing sought to be enjoined may or may not become such, depending on its use or other circumstances. Amdor v. Cooney, 241 Iowa 777, 784, 43 N.W.2d 136, 141, and citations.
V. We have referred in Division III hereof to the gravel drive extending east from the end of Iowa Avenue through the center of Woodlawn Addition. There is also a gravel drive or alley half the width of the center drive, extending east along the south side of the addition from Muscatine Avenue which in turn goes southeast from the end of Iowa Avenue along the west side of the south half of Woodlawn. This south drive is at the rear of the south row of lots in Woodlawn, including those of the parties hereto.
The trial court enjoined defendants and their patrons from using any vehicles on either of these drives to take children to and from defendants' school and from permitting the children to walk to the school along the south drive. The children are permitted to walk to the school on the center drive or the sidewalk adjacent thereto in the custody of attendants of the school or other adult. This requires the children to walk 355 feet from the entrance to Woodlawn to the northwest corner of defendants' lot. It is about 190 feet from the entrance to the south drive to defendants' southwest corner.
Heretofore automobiles taking children to and from school have used mainly this south drive which goes along the rear of plaintiff Livingston's property. The other plaintiff lives at the east end of Woodlawn and admits she has not been affected by the dust from the traffic to defendants' school. There is no entrance to or exit from Woodlawn on the east. Cars enter from the west, go to their destination, turn around and leave Woodlawn at the same place.
Under the original dedication the drives in Woodlawn are private drives, not public streets. Each lot owner owns the portion of the south drive, and of the middle drive to the center thereof, that abuts his lot, subject to the right of other lot owners in Woodlawn to use the drives in connection with the use of their own properties. Thus each owner has an easement in both drives.
The injunction against vehicular use of the drives by defendants and their patrons in transporting the children seems to be based in considerable part upon the trial court's belief the drives could be used only as incident to the property in Woodlawn as homes and for no other purpose. We cannot share this belief. This matter was also outside the issues. Plaintiffs sought no relief based on any claimed violation of restrictions in defendants' title or their easement in the drives. Further, there is no restriction in the dedication of Woodlawn or the title to defendants' property that it must be used for residential purposes. Nor is use of the drives or amount of traffic thereon restricted to that incident to the lots as homes.
Defendants are therefore entitled to make any lawful use of their property not prohibited by the zoning ordinance and not a nuisance and to use the drives for any purpose to which their property may reasonably be devoted. See McDonnell v. Sheets, 234 Iowa 1148, 1154, 15 N.W.2d 252, 255, 15 A.L.R. 1043, 1047; 17 Am.Jur., Easements, section 101. The injunction against use of the drives can be justified, if at all, only on the theory the dust and noise from patrons' cars along the south drive is so offensive to plaintiff Livingston as to amount to a nuisance.
We are clear the prohibition against the children walking over the south drive cannot be upheld. What little annoyance might result to the Livingstons from such use of the south drive would plainly not amount to a nuisance. As previously *600 indicated, it requires a walk of only about 190 feet over the south drive to reach defendants' premises rather than 355 feet over the center drive. And the center drive is mostly upgrade to defendants' property while the south drive is nearly level.
Heretofore 40 or more automobiles used the south drive to deliver the children to defendants' premises in the morning and to get them in the evening. Since there is no passageway from Woodlawn to the east and no means of going from the south drive to the center one, each car must pass the rear of the Livingston home twice on each tripin all 160 times within about two hours each day. Such use of the gravel drive doubtless results in some annoyance to the Livingstons in the way of dust and noise and, to some extent, inconvenience in their own use of the drive and access to their own property.
While plaintiffs Mr. and Mrs. Livingston and the deceased Mrs. Evans testify the dust caused by patrons' use of the south drive was unbearable, less interested witnesses do not corroborate them nor does the whole record warrant such conclusion. A witness for plaintiffs on her direct examination (a member of the faculty of the state university who lived in Mrs. Evans' home) gives what we think is a fair appraisal of the situation when she says: "There is a good deal of dust when the weather is dry and when the wind blows in our direction. I have not noticed the dust blow into the Evans' home or our apartment in particular. I have not paid too much attention to the lawn because I don't go out very often. But on a few occasions when I have gone out to empty the garbage in the back, I could see that it is very dusty near the road."
We are cited to no authority which sustains the proposition that such annoyance as plaintiffs experienced because of patrons' vehicular use of the drives amounts to a nuisance entitling plaintiffs to injunctive relief. We think defendants and their patrons are entitled to use the drives to take the children to and from school. Casteel v. Town of Afton, 227 Iowa 61, 287 N.W. 245; Ness v. Independent School District, 230 Iowa 771, 298 N.W. 855, tend to support our conclusion.
VI. In view of the conclusions heretofore reached it becomes unnecessary to consider defendants' contention plaintiffs are barred from maintaining this action by unconscionable conduct, laches and estoppel.
VII. Defendants complain that the trial court taxed all costs in that court to them. In an equity action the trial court has a large discretion in the matter of taxing costs and we will not ordinarily interfere therewith. McGarry v. Mathis, 226 Iowa 37, 46, 282 N.W. 786, and citations. However, in view of our disposition of the case it seems clear all the costs should not be taxed to defendants.
Plaintiffs have failed in their attempt to enjoin operation of the nursery school as a violation of the zoning ordinance, as a nuisance or as a violation of chapter 237, Code, 1950 (a matter it has been unnecessary to consider herein). Only very limited relief has been finally awarded them and defendants do not challenge such relief in this court. Upon their appeal plaintiffs have been wholly unsuccessful while defendants have succeeded in substantial part upon theirs. We think four fifths the costs in both courts should be taxed to plaintiffs, one fifth to defendants. See in this connection McDonnell v. Sheets, supra, 234 Iowa 1148, 1157, 15 N.W.2d 252, 256, 156 A.L.R. 1043, 1049.
The appeal of plaintiff Mrs. Evans is dismissed. Upon the appeal of the other plaintiffs, the case is affirmed. Upon defendants' appeal the case is affirmed in part, reversed in part, and remanded.
All Justices concur.

=== CASE 2223268 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:57.955707+00 ===

331 Mich. 490 (1951)
50 N.W.2d 137
PEOPLE
v.
LOSINGER.
Docket No. 87, Calendar No. 44,792.
Supreme Court of Michigan.
Decided December 3, 1951.
Certiorari denied March 24, 1952.
Glen Earl Losinger, in pro. per.
Frank G. Millard, Attorney General, Edmund E. Shepherd, Solicitor General, and Daniel J. O'Hara and Harry W. Jackson, Assistants Attorney General, for the people.
Certiorari denied by Supreme Court of the United States March 24, 1952.
BUTZEL, J.
On May 10, 1945, in the circuit court for the county of Montcalm, before Judge Paul R. Cash, defendant Glen Earl Losinger pleaded guilty in open court to an information charging that on or about March 20, 1945, he did then and there set fire to and burn a dwelling house located in Reynolds township, Montcalm county, Michigan, the property of one Fred I. Chase. At the time of the arraignment and plea, defendant in reply to direct questions propounded by the judge categorically stated that he was guilty, that his plea was voluntary, that no one had promised him anything, and that he had made a mistake and wanted to pay the penalty. After a recess, the prosecutor moved for sentence. The judge thereupon stated that he had talked with defendant and denied his request to be let off on probation; that he told defendant that he had offered nothing to recommend probation; that defendant had caused the sheriff's department, as well as other sheriffs' departments, much trouble; that he had once been put on probation and that did not do any good; that he had served some time in the army jail. He also told him that he was fortunate *494 that a supplemental information had not been filed against him as a second offender, so as to subject him to an additional term of imprisonment. He sentenced him to a minimum term of 5 years and a maximum of 20 years. The maximum term for arson of a dwelling house was in accordance with section 72 of the penal code, PA 1931, No 328 (CL 1948, § 750.72 [Stat Ann § 28.267]). The maximum term for arson in the case of real property other than a dwelling house is 10 years. Penal code, PA 1931, No 328, § 73 (CL 1948, § 750.73 [Stat Ann § 28.268]).
This is a brief but complete resume of the entire stenographic record of the circuit court proceedings at the time of the plea and sentence. Other facts developed at the hearings on the various motions will appear in our further discussion of the case. Successive motions for leave to file delayed motions to vacate defendant's plea of guilty and the sentence imposed and granting a new trial and a petition for habeas corpus were all denied. These and the proceedings that followed are incorporated in and made part of a voluminous document that constitutes the record filed in this Court.
It might be said at the outset that the defendant has shown considerable ability in acting without counsel. Notwithstanding very serious shortcomings and infractions of the law and very unfortunate behavioristic tendencies, defendant has had a very hard life. He has been very industrious and frugal, had for a time some standing in the community, and enlisted the interest of the solicitor-general to the extent that he made a motion that defendant be given another opportunity to present an additional motion to set aside the plea of guilty and vacate judgment and sentence and have counsel appointed for him, as the question of whether the building that was set on fire was a dwelling house within the meaning of the statute had never been passed on in *495 this State. Defendant also raised other questions.
Judge Archie D. McDonald, in denying the motion, found that there were really only 3 reasons and grounds claimed, viz.: Whether defendant's plea of guilty was free and voluntary; whether it was a burning within the meaning of the statute; and whether the building burned was a dwelling house. Upon denial of the motion, leave to appeal to this Court was granted upon the recommendation of the solicitor general, who, while willing to afford defendant an opportunity to present his claims of error, contends that they are without merit.
Defendant claims that his plea of guilty should be vacated on the ground that he was arrested without warrant. It is true that the warrant was not issued and read to him until very late the day following his arrest and after he had been in custody 32 hours during which time he had made a complete confession which was taken down stenographically, transcribed and signed by defendant, and witnessed by 4 parties. It was not sworn to by defendant. The conviction was based on defendant's plea of guilty in open court, not on the confession, which was not introduced in evidence. At the time of the hearing on the first motion that was denied, in a supporting affidavit, defendant claims he was "without the benefit of counsel" and was otherwise not properly informed of his rights in the premises and had permitted himself to be talked or tricked into a plea of guilty for a crime which he did not commit. Defendant makes the strange statement that he considered it was legitimate for him to "lie" when not under oath, but that he would not do this when under oath. However, on the hearing on a later motion, defendant stated after being sworn that he had made up his mind to plead guilty, that he wanted it to appear he was guilty. With only a *496 $100 tax assessment on the entire property, he felt that it was the best thing to do. He further stated:
"If I beat the rap it would have cost me quite a lot. I don't have money to hire an attorney; I spent a lot of cash for other things and I don't have money for an attorney."
He evidently did not want an attorney appointed for him as he further added, "a State attorney is worse than none."
Defendant stresses the fact that he was arrested without warrant or without valid reason therefor, and he was kept an unreasonable length of time before warrant was issued. On the other hand, it was brought out that, when they made the arrest, the officers knew that the fire was incendiary and believed that defendant was the only person who might have a motive and the opportunity to set the building on fire; that there were footprints from defendant's home to the property burned; that the officers thus held reasonable grounds to believe a felony had been committed, and that the defendant had committed it. Code of criminal procedure, PA 1927, No 175, ch 4, § 15 (CL 1948, § 764.15 [Stat Ann § 28.874]). People v. Orlando, 305 Mich. 686; People v. Bommarito, 309 Mich. 139. As the arrest was followed by a complaint and warrant and defendant was bound over to the circuit court for trial, at which he pleaded guilty, even if there were merit to defendant's claim that the arrest was irregular, it would not affect the trial. People v. Miller, 235 Mich. 340; In re Van Dyke, 276 Mich. 32.
Defendant further claims that he did not have a preliminary examination before a magistrate, as provided for by CL 1948, § 766.4 (Stat Ann § 28.922). He waived this examination, as shown by the return of the examining magistrate. CL 1948, § 767.42 (Stat Ann § 28.982), provides that no *497 information should be filed until the accused shall have had a preliminary examination as provided by law, but it further states, "unless such person shall waive his rights to such examination." Defendant makes no showing that there was not a waiver as stated in the return of the examining magistrate. The statute does not provide that such waiver must be in writing. Further, a plea of guilty upon arraignment to an information in the circuit court waives a preliminary examination. People v. Tate, 315 Mich. 76; In re Reno, 321 Mich. 497.
Defendant further claims that he was denied some constitutional or statutory rights because of the speedy arraignment, plea and sentence, denial of counsel, or failure to have explained to him his rights in the premises. Twenty days did elapse between the time defendant was bound over to the circuit court for trial, and the return of the examining magistrate and the information were filed but shortly before the arraignment at which defendant pleaded guilty. Defendant had ample time during the 20 days in which to consult friends or counsel. He evidently did not want any counsel.
Defendant further claims that prior to the sentence being pronounced the trial judge obtained from police officers certain information regarding defendant's record. There was no stenographic record introduced, if there was one, as to what took place during the recess before the sentence. In a typewritten statement of facts signed by defendant in support of a motion previously filed on April 17, 1946, and accompanying it, he stated that he did tell the judge that he had been arrested or paid a fine once each in Ionia, Kent and Mecosta counties. On the hearing of the instant motion, defendant admitted that he had been found guilty of breaking and entering, a felony. He, however, claims that he believed it was only a misdemeanor *498 and that he had gone into a vacant building that was open and he thought he had only been charged with larceny from a vacant building. He states he was fined a small amount but was placed on probation for 3 years, and subsequently an additional 2 years. Undoubtedly the judge was familiar with the official records when he stated that defendant could have been charged with a second felony by supplemental information and given an additional sentence. Defendant in 1916, when a soldier in the United States army, was convicted of violating certain articles of war and sentenced to a dishonorable discharge, forfeiture of pay and confinement at hard labor for 3 years which the reviewing authority directed to be the United States penitentiary at Leavenworth, Kansas. See In re Losinger, 329 Mich. 47, where defendant raised an entirely different question. The latter case was decided in this Court a number of years prior to the conviction in the instant case, but it was quite evident that the judge knew the facts when he referred to them in sentencing defendant. There was no error in the judge's considering public records and defendant's admissions.
Defendant further claims that the journal entries are incorrect. We find no merit to this claim. Evidently defendant means that the statement is incorrect in stating that defendant's plea of guilty was free and voluntary.
Defendant claims that at the time of the arrest he had very serious troubles with various members of his family, including his wife; that he was distracted and despondent and did not fully realize what he was doing; that he had no money to prepare a proper defense; that his nerves were shattered; that if he pleaded guilty he would go to prison and study; and that if he did not get a sentence he would go some place else and work to pull himself together; that there was no place he wanted to go to, did not *499 know what to do, so he just made up a story and pleaded guilty. He claims, however, that he was tricked and lured into making a confession which preceded the issuance of a warrant. He claims that a Mr. Steinmetz had shown him a Federal statute and told him that the fire was within the Manistee Forest Reserve and to form his own conclusions as to who he was. An officer of the State police corroborated the statement in regard to the statement that Steinmetz had made, that the property was within the boundaries of the Manistee Forest Reserve, but there were no Federal statutes at the police headquarters and he did not hear Steinmetz tell defendant that the penalty under Federal law would be 40 years. The police officer stated that he did not hear Steinmetz make any promise of leniency, nor would he have any authority to make such a promise. Defendant claims that he told Steinmetz that if the sentence would not be over a year, he would make up a story and plead guilty and get probation, and that Steinmetz definitely spoke up and stated he would go to the judge and recommend probation if defendant would help clear up the fire. Defendant, however, admits that Steinmetz, after a short interval, told defendant that he was not the judge and could not guarantee what the judge would do, and if the latter thought that the confession was given because of the promise, he would not accept the plea of guilty, but would find him guilty and it would be mandatory for him to give a sentence of from 10 to 30 years. There is no corroborative proof as to Steinmetz making this statement. His name was indorsed on the information but when defendant pleaded guilty, no witnesses were called. Defendant describes Steinmetz as a special investigator for the State Fire Prevention Bureau, but defendant was led to believe he was a Federal detective.
*500 Judge Cash, at the hearing on defendant's motion for leave to file delayed motion for a new trial, held October 31, 1945, stated that immediately after defendant's plea of guilty, as hereinbefore set forth, and prior to sentence, he distinctly told defendant that he would not place him on probation, and that if he wanted to withdraw his plea of guilty, he would permit him to do so. Defendant did not ask to withdraw it.
The court, on the hearing of the present motion, found there was no substance to defendant's claims of coercion. The record does not support defendant's claim that he did not have the mental capacity to understand what he was doing. Through his own mental processes defendant makes some kind of claim that he is entitled to a specific performance of an alleged promise that he would get off on probation or with a short term. There is no merit at all to this claim.
Defendant further states that the Chase property was assessed at only $100 and for this reason he thought he would be sentenced to a short term. There is no legal basis for this claim. The maximum term for burning a building that is a dwelling house, whatever may be its value, is 20 years. The judge was bound to follow the statute.
Defendant further claims that he was not sworn prior to his plea of guilty. The plea was made on arraignment in open court and an oath was not necessary. Defendant further claims that the examining magistrate did not swear to the return filed in the circuit court. Proper certification by a magistrate need not be sworn to.
Defendant's chief objection is that the building burned was not a dwelling house within the meaning of the statute. The building is described as a cottage but more frequently as a cabin. Mr. Chase stated that he had built a foundation in the rear of *501 the cabin on which he some day expected to build a house. It is true that it was a one-story building and was not partitioned off. The building itself appears, from the photograph, to have brick or composition walls and roof; however, it was described in the proceedings as having walls made of a brick roll. It had an air-tight wooden floor built over a cement foundation. Mr. Chase testified that it contained 3 beds with inner-spring mattresses and box springs, with bedding, curtains on the windows and between the beds. It contained some furniture, a kerosene cooking stove, cooking utensils, groceries and canned milk in the cupboards, some personal possessions, clothing, a heating stove and fuel and all equipment necessary so that occupants could move in and immediately have the facilities of a furnished dwelling house. Mr. Chase testified that he lived there during the hunting season the previous fall and had been there every month of the year, including the winter months, of each year, but was not certain that he was there after December 1, 1941, and before the fire. He, however, had never lived there for 90 days in succession because of his work in Lansing, but he planned to use the cottage when he retired. He had used the premises as a home, had slept in it, had lived in it steadily for periods of 3 weeks at a time and in addition had been there over night on many other occasions. He further testified that it was occupied during the fishing season and during the summer of 1942 he was there practically all the time and that his uncle had lived there a part of a previous winter. A 1-car garage next to the building was completely destroyed by the fire in question.
The term "dwelling house" has never been defined by this Court but the meaning appears very plain. In People v. Handley, 93 Mich. 46, the Court held that the crime of burning a dwelling house was an offense *502 against a habitation and not against fee title, but the Court based its decision on the fact that the person charged in the information to be the owner never dwelt in or occupied the building. That is far different from the instant case. It has been held, however, that it was arson to burn a dwelling house during a temporary absence of its owner. Stupetski v. Transatlantic Fire Insurance Co., 43 Mich. 373 (38 Am Rep 195). Section 72 of the penal code, supra, provides for punishment of any person who willingly and maliciously burns any dwelling house, either occupied or unoccupied, whether owned by himself or another.
In State v. Blair, 112 W Va 655 (166 S.E. 369, 85 A.L.R. 424), a somewhat similar situation arose although the size of the house is not stated in the opinion. It was used by the owner and his family as a place of residence during vacation time and on week ends, particularly in summer. It was held that it was a dwelling house though temporarily unoccupied. In 2 Gillespie, Michigan Criminal Law & Procedure, § 819, it is stated:
"The term `dwelling house' has a broader meaning than a house that is actually occupied as such. It means any house intended to be occupied as a residence, and would include any such residence, even though not occupied by the complaining witness at the time of the burning."
We hold that the building was a dwelling house within the meaning of the statute. Mr. Chase used it frequently, even though at intervals, and he intended to return to make it his home when he retired. Defendant further claims that inasmuch as the fire did not destroy the property but only part of its contents, there was not such a burning as contemplated by the statute. It slightly damaged the building. *503 The statute does not provide that the entire property must be destroyed.
Other questions are also raised but they are so trivial and without any merit whatsoever, that they do not even require further discussion.
Defendant further complains of the severity of the sentence in being given the maximum of 20 years for the burning of a dwelling house which was assessed at $100 for tax purposes. The maximum sentence was such as is prescribed by statute. It is unnecessary to discuss defendant's litigation with, and intense dislike for, Mr. Chase, nor defendant's statement immediately after the fire that he expected to be blamed for it, and many other incidents set forth in the lengthy record. Defendant has already served the minimum of 5 years and, if he is entitled to further relief, it must come from either the parole board or the governor.
We have examined the record with meticulous care and come to the conclusion that the judge properly denied defendant's motion. We find no error.
REID, C.J., and BOYLES, NORTH, DETHMERS, CARR, BUSHNELL, and SHARPE, JJ., concurred.

=== CASE 2223269 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:57.974301+00 ===

905 N.E.2d 939 (2009)
329 Ill. Dec. 101
Edwin A. BURNETTE, the Public Defender of Cook County in His Official Capacity, and the Office of the Cook County Public Defender, Plaintiffs-Appellees,
v.
Todd H. STROGER, President, Cook County County Board of Commissioners, in His Official Capacity, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 1-08-2908.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, First Division.
March 30, 2009.
*941 Odelson & Sterk, Ltd. (Robert Wilder, Burton S. Odelson and Michael J. McGrath, of Counsel), Evergreen Park, IL, for Defendant-Appellant.
*942 Holland & Knight, LLP (Victor P. Henderson and Christopher W. Carmichael, of Counsel), Chicago, IL, for Plaintiffs-Appellees.
Presiding Justice ROBERT E. GORDON delivered the opinion of the court:
In March 2007, the Cook County board of commissioners approved a budget amendment that included laying off personnel in the office of the Cook County public defender. The term "layoff" is used because the possibility of return was left open. The amendment listed only the types of positions to be reduced. Plaintiffs allege that 34 assistants and other employees were selected for termination with the "advice and approval" of defendant Todd E. Stroger, the president of the Cook County board of commissioners (the president), and without consulting Edwin A. Burnette, the Cook County public defender (the public defender). In addition, in April 2007, the president directed designated personnel in the public defender's office to take unpaid "furlough" days.
On November 16, 2007, plaintiffs Edwin A Burnette, the public defender of Cook County, and the office of the Cook County public defender filed this suit against the president, contesting both the president's selection of personnel to be laid off and his imposition of furlough days. The Public Defender Act[1] provides that the county board has the right to fix the compensation and number of the assistant public defenders and their staff; and that the public defender has the right, within the numbers fixed by the county board, to hire and fire individuals to serve as assistant public defenders and staff members. 55 ILCS 5/3-4008.1 (West 2006). The Act provides that the assistant public defenders "serve at the pleasure of the Public Defender." 55 ILCS 5/3-4008.1 (West 2006).
In response to the public defender's complaint, the president moved to dismiss, claiming that the public defender did not have standing to bring this suit and that the president acted within his authority. On May 20, 2008, the circuit court of Cook County denied the president's motion in part, and granted it in part.
On October 14, 2008, the trial court certified four questions for interlocutory review by this court. The questions concerned the public defender's standing to bring this suit and the scope of the president's authority.
BACKGROUND
On August 17, 2007, Richard Devine, the State's Attorney of Cook County, filed a petition with the trial court seeking appointment of a special state's attorney to represent the public defender. The petition stated: "The Public Defender of Cook County, Edwin A. Burnette, is currently involved in administration issues for his office following receipt of various directives from the Office of the President of the Cook County Board which require the analysis, interpretation, and advice of legal counsel." The petition stated that the public defender had asked the state's attorney for the appointment of a special state's attorney, and the state's attorney agreed. On August 27, 2007, the trial court granted the petition and appointed a special state's attorney to represent the public defender in this matter.
On November 16, 2007, plaintiffs filed a four-count complaint. The first count concerned the layoff of 34 employees; the second and third counts concerned the furlough *943 days; and the fourth count sought declaratory relief to establish the public defender's appointment authority. The original defendants were: Todd H. Stroger, president of the Cook County board of commissioners; Lance Christopher Tyson, chief of staff of the Cook County board of commissioners; Jonathan A. Rothstein, acting chief of human resources of Cook County; and Joseph M. Fratto, the comptroller of Cook County. Other than the president, the other defendants were dismissed without prejudice in an agreed order in the trial court on January 28, 2008.
The first count sought the reinstatement and reimbursement of the 34 laid-off employees, as well as injunctive relief barring defendants from taking retaliatory action for the filing of this complaint, and barring defendants from making further layoffs or terminations "without the independent decision" of the public defender. The count alleged that the termination letters, dated between March 29, 2007, and April 11, 2007, affected "approximately 17 attorneys and approximately 17 support staff members, all of whom were considered to be performing their duties adequately to exceptionally at the time of their termination."
The second count sought: the end of furlough days; restitution for any employee who had already taken them; and prevention of retaliation for failing to comply with the furlough-day directives. The count alleged that on April 5, 2007, the president issued a memorandum to the public defender, as well as to all other Cook County bureau chiefs and department heads, entitled "Reduced Work Schedule Days." The April 5 memorandum required designated members of the public defender's office to take a certain number of unpaid furlough days by the end of the fiscal year. On July 11, 2007, the public defender issued a memorandum to his office to cease taking furlough days. A memorandum dated August 23, 2007 from the president reduced the mandatory furlough days from 10 to 5 days, and threatened disciplinary action against anyone who failed to comply.
Count III sought full compensation for assistant public defender supervisors, as fixed by the county board; reimbursement for supervisors who had taken furlough days; and a declaration that defendants could not reduce the compensation of supervisors, below the amounts fixed by the county board, through furlough days or any other means. The count alleged that, on February 23, 2007, the county board passed an annual appropriations bill for fiscal year 2007, which fixed the number and compensation of assistant public defender supervisors.
Count IV sought a declaration that the public defender had "exclusive power to appoint assistants and other employees/staff"; that defendants must "honor the independence" of the public defender; and that defendant may not take "unilateral employment related actions."
In November 2007, petitions to intervene were filed by the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, Council 31, as the bargaining representative for assistant public defenders, investigators and support staff; and Laura B. Simon, the public defender's chief of staff. On July 24, 2008, the trial court entered an order staying the petitions to intervene, pending the outcome of the interlocutory review of the four certified questions.
On January 10, 2008, defendants moved to dismiss the complaint, pursuant to section 2-619 of the Code of Civil Procedure. 735 ILCS 5/2-619 (West 2006). The motion sought dismissal of all counts on the grounds that: (1) "the public defender does not have the power to institute civil *944 litigation"; and (2) "the complaint is void because the special state's attorney lacks authority to file this litigation." The motion also sought to dismiss: count I, because "the public defender lacks standing to assert the rights of laid-off or terminated employees"; counts II and III, because "the president of the county board has the power to delay, restrict, or terminate the expenditure of any appropriation": and count IV, because "the court lacks the power to restrict the president of the board from controlling county expenditures."
On May 30, 2008, the circuit court of Cook County heard argument on two motions filed by the president: (1) a motion to restrict the appointment of the special State's Attorney to represent the public defender; and (2) the motion to dismiss, filed on January 10, 2008. Also present was an attorney representing the union and Laura Simon, both who were seeking to intervene.
During the argument on the president's motion to restrict, the special state's attorney representing the defender noted that the president is also represented by a special state's attorney. The trial court stated that it would not "restrict the special state's attorney's ability to maintain a cause of action on behalf of the public defender"; and thus the president's motion to restrict was denied.
Also on May 30, 2008, the trial court denied in part and granted in part the president's motion to dismiss. During argument on the dismissal motion, the president's attorney conceded, in essence, the standing of those seeking to intervene, when he stated: "Certainly those individuals who have potentially lost their positions or  have lost their positions, they have standing to bring a case." The president's attorney also asserted that if "the defendant indigents" had been harmed, "they are entitled to bring this case."
In a written order dated May 30, 2008, the trial court granted the motion to dismiss count I; denied the motion to dismiss counts II and IV; and denied the motion to dismiss count III but struck "plaintiff's request for additional relief." The order also gave defendant 28 days both (1) to respond to the petitions to intervene; and (2) "to file an answer or otherwise plead" to plaintiffs' complaint.
On June 3, 2007, the president moved to certify an interlocutory appeal; and the public defender opposed the motion. On October 14, 2008, the trial court certified the following four questions for appeal, pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 308 (155 Ill.2d R.308):
"1. Whether the Cook County Public Defender is an entity that can sue or be sued;
2. Whether or not the Cook County Public Defender has standing to assert claims to prevent interference with his statutory authority under 55 ILCS 5/3-4000 et seq., and whether the Public Defender may assert the rights of Cook County employees who were required to take furlough days during the year 2007 or the indigent accused;
3. Whether or not the President of the Cook County Board has the authority to alter or terminate the existing appropriations for the Cook County Public Defender after the fiscal year appropriations' budget has been passed by the Cook County Board by means of unpaid furlough; or whether the President may not alter existing appropriations for the Cook County Public Defender, pursuant to 55 ILCS 5/6-24001, 5/3-4006.1, and 5/3-4008.1.
4. Whether or not the President of the Cook County Board of Commissioners has the authority to hire, terminate, replace, discipline, or direct the assignments *945 of any assistant public defender, clerk or employee of the Cook County Public Defender, or whether the Public Defender is vested with that sole authority, pursuant to 55 ILCS 5/3-4008.1."
On October 24, 2008, the public defender petitioned this court for leave to appeal pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 308. 155 Ill.2d R. 308. On December 1, 2008, this court granted the petition, and this appeal followed.
On December 2, 2008, the public defender moved the trial court for leave to file an amended complaint. The proposed amended complaint contained only two counts: count I, for injunctive relief; and count II, for declaratory relief. Count I asked this court to "permanently enjoin" the president "(1) from hiring, terminating, laying-off, or otherwise making specific personnel decisions" within the public defender's office; and "(2) from directing, assigning or managing any of the personnel or affairs" of the public defender's office. Count II asked this court to declare that (1) the public defender had the sole authority to manage his office and make personnel decisions for it; and that (2) the president is not permitted to alter the appropriations for the public defender's office or to reduce the salaries of the public defender's staff that were fixed by the county board.
On December 29, 2008, the president moved to stay the proceedings in the trial court. On January 14, 2009, the trial court ordered that action on plaintiff's motion to file an amended complaint was stayed pending the outcome of this appeal. The record on appeal was first filed on March 11, 2009; and oral arguments were held on March 18, 2009.
ANALYSIS
Standard of Review
In the case at bar, our standard of review is de novo. The certified questions require us to interpret sections of the Public Defender Act (55 ILCS 5/3-4000 et seq. (West 2006)) and other provisions of the Counties Code (55 ILCS 5/1-1001 et seq. (West 2006)). Questions of statutory interpretation are reviewed de novo. People ex rel. Devine v. Sharkey, 221 Ill. 2d 613, 617, 304 Ill. Dec. 348, 852 N.E.2d 804 (2006); see also Burnette v. Terrell, 232 Ill. 2d 522, ___, 328 Ill. Dec. 927, 905 N.E.2d 816 (2009) ("a dispute between two public officials over the scope of the authority granted to each by constitution and statute" was reviewed de novo).
Interlocutory Appeal
This appeal is an interlocutory appeal, permitted by Supreme Court Rule 308. 155 Ill.2d R. 308. Supreme Court Rule 308(a) provides:
"When the trial court, in making an interlocutory order not otherwise appealable, finds that the order involves a question of law as to which there is substantial ground for difference of opinion and that an immediate appeal from the order may materially advance the ultimate termination of the litigation, the court shall so state in writing, identifying the question of law involved. Such a statement may be made at the time of the entry of the order or thereafter on the court's own motion or on motion of any party. The Appellate Court may thereupon in its discretion allow an appeal from the order." 155 Ill.2d R. 308.
Supreme Court Rule 308, quoted above, permits this court "in its discretion to allow an appeal from the order," which in the case at bar was the dismissal order. We exercise the discretion given to us by Rule 308, and choose not to review the dismissal order for two reasons. First, the parties in their appellate briefs did not *946 brief the propriety of the trial judge's order. Second, plaintiffs are seeking to amend their complaint to eliminate the parts that were dismissed by the trial court.
Pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 308, the trial court certified four questions for our review. In essence, we must decide: (1) whether the public defender is an entity capable of suit; (2) whether the public defender has standing; (3) whether the president had the authority to impose unpaid furlough days on designated members of the public defender's staff; and (4) whether the president had the authority to select whom to fire among the public defender's assistants and staff members. The first two questions concern the public defender's standing and capacity to bring this suit; the last two questions concern the scope of the president's authority over the public defender's staff.
Question No. 1: Defender's Capacity for Suit
The first certified question asks:
"1. Whether the Cook County Public Defender is an entity that can sue or be sued[?]"
Thus, we must decide whether the public defender is an entity capable of suit. As a preliminary matter, we note that the circuit court in the case at bar already acknowledged the public defender's capacity to sue, by appointing a special state's attorney to represent the public defender. None of the certified questions contests the propriety of this order.
The president contends in this appeal that the public defender is not capable of suit, because there is no statute that explicitly states that the public defender is an entity that can sue or be sued.
First, the statutory scheme does contemplate that the public defender is an entity capable of suit. Statutes permit both indemnity and partial immunity for public defenders, thus presuming their capacity for suit. Indemnity is provided by a statute that requires the county to indemnify the public defender for "any judgement recovered against him" as the result of the performance of his duties. 55 ILCS 5/5-1003 (West 2006). Immunity is provided by the Public and Appellate Defender Immunity Act for professional malpractice, other than wilful and wanton misconduct. 745 ILCS 19/5 (West 2006). There would be little need for either indemnification or partial immunity, if the defender could not be sued.
Second and more importantly, it would make no sense to create an entity that could not even defend its right to exist. For this reason, our supreme court has repeatedly permitted public defenders to sue, in order to protect and define the scope of their statutory authority. For example, in Maloney v. Bower, 113 Ill. 2d 473, 101 Ill. Dec. 594, 498 N.E.2d 1102 (1986), our supreme court permitted the public defender of Bureau County to file a complaint with the supreme court for a writ of prohibition. Maloney, 113 Ill.2d at 476, 101 Ill. Dec. 594, 498 N.E.2d 1102. The public defender had been ordered to represent an indigent defendant in a civil contempt proceeding. Maloney, 113 Ill.2d at 476, 101 Ill. Dec. 594, 498 N.E.2d 1102. The supreme court held that the chief judge exceeded his authority when he directed trial judges to start appointing public defenders in contempt cases. Maloney, 113 Ill.2d at 478-79, 101 Ill. Dec. 594, 498 N.E.2d 1102. Granting the writ, the supreme court found that the chief judge's directive went beyond the statutory responsibilities required of public defenders. Maloney, 113 Ill.2d at 479, 101 Ill. Dec. 594, 498 N.E.2d 1102. The court observed that public defender offices were already "overburdened and struggl[ing] to fulfill their *947 statutory obligations." Maloney, 113 Ill.2d at 479-80, 101 Ill. Dec. 594, 498 N.E.2d 1102. Thus, the public defender was allowed to sue to prevent this `stick from breaking the camel's back.' See also Burnette v. Terrell, 232 Ill.2d at ___, 328 Ill. Dec. 927, 905 N.E.2d 816 (2009) (our supreme court granted the Cook County public defender leave to file a petition to protest a trial judge's interference with the assignment of an assistant public defender to the judge's courtroom); Doherty v. Caisley, 104 Ill. 2d 72, 83 Ill. Dec. 361, 470 N.E.2d 319 (1984) (our supreme court granted the Cook County public defender leave to file a complaint for writs of mandamus and prohibition to stop appointments in civil suits); Kirwan v. Karns, 119 Ill. 2d 431, 433, 116 Ill. Dec. 573, 519 N.E.2d 465 (1988) (our supreme court granted the state appellate defender leave to file a petition for a writ of mandamus, to object to his appointment in a civil case); Alexander v. Pearson, 354 Ill.App.3d 643, 647, 290 Ill. Dec. 416, 821 N.E.2d 728 (2004) (trial court had no authority to order the state appellate defender to represent a defendant in a habeas corpus petition).
In support of its argument that the public defender is not a suable entity, the president cites four federal cases, three of which are unreported decisions. Unreported decisions have no precedential value. Official Reports Advance Sheet No. 15, (July 16, 2008), R. 23, eff. May 30, 2008 (unpublished order has no precedential value and "may not be cited"); People v. Moore, 243 Ill.App.3d 583, 584, 183 Ill. Dec. 598, 611 N.E.2d 1246 (1993) ("the decision was unreported and of no precedential value"). This is even more true for decisions from foreign jurisdictions. West American Insurance Co. v. J.R. Construction Co., 334 Ill.App.3d 75, 82, 267 Ill. Dec. 807, 777 N.E.2d 610 (2002) (a "foreign unreported decision" is of "no precedential value"); Lyons v. Ryan, 324 Ill.App.3d 1094, 1107 n. 11, 258 Ill. Dec. 414, 756 N.E.2d 396 (2001) ("unreported federal court orders" are not "any kind of authority before an Illinois court"); Sompolski v. Miller, 239 Ill.App.3d 1087, 1093, 180 Ill. Dec. 932, 608 N.E.2d 54 (1992) ("we decline" to follow "an unreported Federal district court decision").
In addition, in one of the unreported decisions, Woidtke v. County of St. Clair, No. 02-CV-0225-DRH, 2002 WL 31553528 (S.D.Ill. November 8, 2002), the plaintiff did not dispute the issue; and the trial court accepted his concession. In another, Rankins v. Winzeler, No. 02 C 50507, 2003 WL 21058536 (N.D.Ill. May 9, 2003), the trial court held only that the public defender's office was not a suable entity under 42 U.S.C. § 1983.
In the one reported decision, Clay v. Friedman, 541 F. Supp. 500 (N.D.Ill.1982), the federal district court held that the Cook County public defender, could be sued in his "individual and supervisory" capacity for decisions with respect to "[h]iring, firing and monitoring attorneys." Clay, 541 F.Supp. at 502-03. See also Branti v. Finkel, 445 U.S. 507, 508, 100 S. Ct. 1287, 1289, 63 L. Ed. 2d 574, 577 (1980) (assistant public defenders sued public defender to prevent their termination). This holding actually undermines the president's argument.
Thus, for the foregoing reasons, we find that the public defender has the capacity to sue to contest the president's selection of staff to lay off and his imposition of furlough days.
However, we cannot find any Illinois authority for the proposition that the office of the public defender  as separate and distinct from the public defender in his official capacity  has the capacity to sue. The president cites Clay, in which a federal district court held that the "Office of the *948 Public Defender" was not an entity that could be sued separately from the public defender. Clay, 541 F.Supp. at 503. The public defender argues in its appellate brief that the public defender has the capacity to sue, but does not cite authority to support the proposition that the office has a separate and distinct capacity to sue. Thus, we find that the office of the public defender does not have a separate capacity to sue, apart from the public defender in his official capacity.
Question # 2: Defender's Standing
The second certified question asks:
"2. Whether or not the Cook County Public Defender has standing to assert claims to prevent interference with his statutory authority under 55 ILCS 5/3-4000 et seq., and whether the Public Defender may assert the rights of Cook County employees who were required to take furlough days during the year 2007 or the indigent accused [?]"
On appeal, the public defender has withdrawn his request for the relief described in part of the above question. The second question asks, in part: "whether the Public Defender may assert the rights of Cook County employees who were required to take furlough days during the year 2007 or the indigent accused." However, in its appellate brief, the public defender states:
"While the complaint contains requests for relief on behalf of employees and the indigent, that relief was stricken and it has been repeatedly stated by the Public Defender that such relief is not requested."
In light of the public defender's concession, we will not consider the second part of the second question. See 155 Ill.2d R. 308(a) (purpose of an immediate, interlocutory appeal is solely to "materially advance the ultimate termination of the litigation").
With the second part eliminated, the second certified question now asks this court whether the public defender has "standing to assert claims to prevent interference with his statutory authority." Even though this question does not specify the president by name, we interpret the question as asking whether the public defender has standing to contest the specific acts of interference at issue in this lawsuit: namely, the president's selection of staff to lay off; and his imposition of furlough days on designated employees. See 155 Ill.2d R. 308(a) (purpose of an immediate, interlocutory appeal is solely to "materially advance the ultimate termination of the litigation").
On the issue of standing, the president cites federal cases; and the public defender cites Lynch v. Devine, 45 Ill.App.3d 743, 4 Ill. Dec. 185, 359 N.E.2d 1137 (1977) and its progeny, such as In re Estate of Burgeson, 125 Ill. 2d 477, 126 Ill. Dec. 954, 532 N.E.2d 825 (1988) and In re Marriage of Rodriguez, 131 Ill. 2d 273, 137 Ill. Dec. 78, 545 N.E.2d 731 (1989). Both lines of cases were rejected by our supreme court, a decade ago, in Glisson v. City of Marion, 188 Ill. 2d 211, 242 Ill. Dec. 79, 720 N.E.2d 1034 (1999). In Glisson, our supreme court stated both that "this court in Greer rejected federal principles on standing" and that "[w]e reject the Lynch test for the same reason." Glisson, 188 Ill.2d at 221-22, 242 Ill. Dec. 79, 720 N.E.2d 1034, discussing Greer v. Illinois Housing Development Authority, 122 Ill. 2d 462, 491-92, 120 Ill. Dec. 531, 524 N.E.2d 561 (1988). Our supreme court could not have been more clear.
Not only does the president rely extensively on federal cases for this issue and for other issues throughout his brief, but a number of these cases are unreported decisions. As previously discussed above, *949 unreported federal decisions have no precedential value.
The principles of standing in Illinois are well-established. Under Illinois law, the defendant has the burden to both plead and prove the plaintiff's lack of standing. Chicago Teachers Union v. Board of Education, 189 Ill. 2d 200, 206, 244 Ill. Dec. 26, 724 N.E.2d 914 (2000). A plaintiff is not required to allege in his or her complaint the facts that establish his or her standing. Chicago Teachers Union, 189 Ill.2d at 206, 244 Ill. Dec. 26, 724 N.E.2d 914.
Our standing doctrine is "intended to assure that issues are raised only by those parties with a real interest in the outcome of the controversy." Chicago Teachers Union, 189 Ill.2d at 206, 244 Ill. Dec. 26, 724 N.E.2d 914, citing Glisson, 188 Ill.2d at 221, 242 Ill. Dec. 79, 720 N.E.2d 1034. For a plaintiff to have standing, his or her claimed injury must be: "(1) distinct and palpable; (2) fairly traceable to defendant's actions; and (3) substantially likely to be prevented or redressed by the grant of the requested relief." Chicago Teachers Union, 189 Ill.2d at 207, 244 Ill. Dec. 26, 724 N.E.2d 914, citing Glisson, 188 Ill.2d at 221, 242 Ill. Dec. 79, 720 N.E.2d 1034.
In the case at bar, we are asked to consider two distinct injuries: (1) the president's unauthorized selection of which public defenders and staff to fire or lay off; and (2) his imposition of furlough days on designated employees.
The president's unauthorized selection of whom to layoff is an injury that satisfies all three of the requirements for standing. First, it is a distinct and palpable injury to the public defender's statutory authority to "appoint" assistant defenders to serve at his "pleasure." 55 ILCS 5/3-4008.1 (West 2006); Burnette v. Terrell, 232 Ill. 2d 522, ___, 328 Ill. Dec. 927, 905 N.E.2d 816 (2009) (public defender has "statutory authority" to "hire and manage his staff"). In addition, the public defender has a statutory duty to render effective representation to the indigent defendants of Cook County. 55 ILCS 5/3-4000, 3-4006 (West 2006). If he is unable to select whom to lay off and whom to retain, this interference with his ability to direct the affairs of his own office is a distinct and palpable injury to his ability to carry out his statutorily appointed duty of effective representation. Second, the injury is directly traceable to the president's alleged action in usurping the public defender's statutorily assigned power to select whom to fire or layoff. Burnette v. Terrell, 232 Ill. 2d 522, ___, 328 Ill. Dec. 927, 905 N.E.2d 816 (2009) (trial judge's assignment of specific cases to specific assistant public defenders "usurp[ed] the statutory authority of the public defender to hire and manage his staff"). Third, the requested relief, namely a declaration by this court, will redress the problem, by restoring to the public defender his statutory right to select whom to lay off when the county board exercises its statutory authority to cut the number of his assistants. Burnette v. Terrell, 232 Ill. 2d 522, ___, 328 Ill. Dec. 927, 905 N.E.2d 816 (2009) (granting declaratory relief to prevent future interference by a trial judge with the public defender's authority to hire and manage his staff).
The president's imposition of furlough days on designated employees is also an injury that confers standing. First, it is a distinct and palpable injury to the public defender's ability to carry out his statutorily appointed duty of effective representation. Furlough days reduce both the compensation of assistants, as well as the number of assistants available to work on any given day. Reduction in the compensation *950 and number of assistants undoubtedly reduces the public defender's ability to provide effective representation to indigents, as the statute requires. 55 ILCS 5/3-4000, 3-4006 (West 2006). Second, the injury is directly traceable to the president's action in imposing the furlough days. Third, the requested relief, namely a declaration by this court, will redress the problem by preventing unauthorized reductions in the public defender's daily available workforce and their compensation. Burnette v. Terrell, 232 Ill. 2d 522, ___, 328 Ill. Dec. 927, 905 N.E.2d 816 (2009) (granting declaratory relief to prevent future interference by a trial judge with the public defender's authority to hire and manage his staff).
Thus, the public defender has standing to contest both the selection of whom to fire and the imposition of furlough days on designated employees. In addition, we note that the petitions of those seeking to intervene are stayed, pending our ruling on these questions; and the president has not disputed their standing to contest terminations or furlough days.
Question No. 3: President's Authority to Impose Furlough Days
The third certified question asks:
"3. Whether or not the President of the Cook County Board has the authority to alter or terminate the existing appropriations for the Cook County Public Defender after the fiscal year appropriations' budget has been passed by the Cook County Board by means of unpaid furlough; or whether the President may not alter existing appropriations for the Cook County Public Defender, pursuant to 55 ILCS 5/6-24001, 5/3-4006.1, and 5/3-4008.1."
The third certified question is overly broad. The complaint alleges that the president imposed furlough days on "designated members of the Defenders [sic] office." We will interpret this question to ask only whether the president had the authority to impose furlough days on designated employees. See 155 Ill.2d R. 308(a) (purpose of an immediate, interlocutory appeal is solely to "materially advance the ultimate termination of the litigation").
Both the third and fourth certified questions ask us to define the scope of the president's power: specifically, whether he had the power to make layoff selections and to impose furlough days on designated employees. Power over the public defender's staff is divided between the county board and the public defender. 55 ILCS 5/3-4008.1 (West 2006). The county board has the right to fix the number and compensation of the assistant public defenders and their staff, while the public defender has the right, within that fixed number, to hire and fire individuals to serve as assistant public defenders and staff members. 55 ILCS 5/3-4008.1 (West 2006). Specifically, the Public Defender Act provides the public defender with the right to "appoint" attorneys to serve as assistant public defenders, who then "serve at the pleasure of the Public Defender." 55 ILCS 5/3-4008.1 (West 2006); Burnette v. Terrell, 232 Ill. 2d 522, ___, 328 Ill. Dec. 927, 905 N.E.2d 816 (2009) (statute provides public defender with the sole authority to hire and manage his staff); Doherty v. Caisley, 104 Ill. 2d 72, 79, 83 Ill. Dec. 361, 470 N.E.2d 319 (1984) (statute shows legislative intent "to establish autonomous public-defender positions").
Section 3-4008.1 of the Act governs the hiring, firing and compensation of assistant public defenders, and it provides in full:
"Assistants in counties over 1,000,000. The Public Defender in counties with a population over 1,000,000 shall appoint assistants, all duly licensed practitioners, *951 as the Public Defender shall deem necessary for the proper discharge of the duties of the office, who shall serve at the pleasure of the Public Defender. The Public Defender shall also, in like manner, appoint clerks and other employees necessary for the transaction of the business of the office. The compensation of and the appropriate number of assistants, clerks, and employees shall be fixed by the County Board and paid out of the country treasury." 55 ILCS 5/3-4008.1 (West 2006).
The statute, quoted above, does not provide the president of the county board with authority over the public defender's staff. Burnette v. Terrell, 232 Ill. 2d 522, ___, 328 Ill. Dec. 927, 905 N.E.2d 816 (2009) (statute provides public defender with the sole authority to hire and manage his staff). As noted above, the power to hire, fire, fix the number of, or set the compensation of assistant public defenders is divided solely between the board and the public defender.
With respect to the furlough/compensation issue in Question No. 3, the president makes only one argument: that section 6-24007 of the Counties Code (55 ILCS 5/6-24007) (West 2006)) gives the power to restrict the compensation of assistant public defenders, to either him or the county board but not to the public defender. The president makes no arguments that this power belongs to him, as opposed to the county board, almost conceding the third certified question, that he lacked the authority to impose furlough days on designated employees.
Section 6-24007 provides in relevant part:
"For purposes of controlling expenditures, the expenditure of or incurring of obligations against any appropriation may be delayed, restricted, or terminated with regard to any object or purpose for which appropriations were made in the appropriation bill or resolution. A monthly schedule for the year of proposed expenditure, including any limitations or conditions against appropriations for each program, subactivity, and the agency or department, shall be made within 30 days of the adoption of the annual appropriation bill, and such schedule, as amended by the President of the County Board, shall be binding upon all officers, agencies, and departments, and such schedule of expenditure or of incurring obligations may not be exceeded, provided that any such schedule may be revised after three calendar months have elapsed since the last schedule." (Emphasis added.) 55 ILCS 5/6-24007 (West 2006).
The president's appellate brief argues that although the first line quoted and emphasized above is "not a model of clarity," it "appears to grant either the President or the Board with essentially unfettered authority to restrict or terminate any appropriation for any reason." The president claims that this provision "does not clearly specify the appropriate mechanism by which an appropriation may be restricted or terminated."
In response, the public defender argues, first, that the provision does specify a mechanism, in the sentence that immediately follows, namely the monthly schedule. The statute quoted above requires the monthly schedule, to be "made within 30 days of the adoption of the annual appropriation bill." 55 ILCS 5/6-24007 (West 2006) Since the president's furlough action occurred outside the 30-day window provided by statute, this action was invalid under the statute, even if the first sentence was interpreted to give him the power to restrict compensation.
Second and more importantly, even if the first sentence gave the president, as opposed to the county board, the general power to restrict appropriations, *952 another section of the Code specifically gave budgeting power over the public defender's office solely to the county board. As previously discussed, the Counties Code gave to the county board, alone, the power to "fix[]" the number of and compensation of assistant defenders and other staff members. 55 ILCS 5/3-4008.1 (West 2006). Words in a statute are given their "plain and ordinary meaning." Devine, 221 Ill.2d at 617, 304 Ill. Dec. 348, 852 N.E.2d 804. Webster's defines the word "fix" as "(a:) to make firm, stable, or stationary" and "(b:) to give a permanent or final form to." Webster's Tenth New Collegiate Dictionary 467 (1998). It would not make sense for one section of the Counties Code to specify that the county board could "make firm" the compensation of assistant defenders, and then to interpret another section as allowing the president to override that right entirely. Statutes must be construed "as a whole." Devine, 221 Ill.2d at 617, 304 Ill. Dec. 348, 852 N.E.2d 804. Thus, we find that section 6-24007 does not provide the president with authority to impose furlough days on designated members of the public defender's office.
Question No. 4: President's Authority to Lay Off Specific Employees
The fourth certified question asks:
"4. Whether or not the President of the Cook County Board of Commissioners has the authority to hire, terminate, replace, discipline, or direct the assignments of any assistant public defender, clerk or employee of the Cook County Public Defender, or whether the Public Defender is vested with that sole authority, pursuant to 55 ILCS 5/3-4008.1."
There is no evidence in the record and no allegation in the complaint that the president disciplined or directed the assignments of any assistant public defender or staff member. In addition, our supreme court has already ruled that "the public defender has the sole statutory authority to make work assignments to the assistant public defenders." Burnette v. Terrell, 232 Ill. 2d 522, ___, 328 Ill. Dec. 927, 905 N.E.2d 816 (2009). Thus we will consider this question as asking us whether the president had the power to encroach on the public defender's appointment authority, by selecting whom to hire, retain or fire. See 155 Ill.2d R. 308(a) (purpose of an immediate, interlocutory appeal is solely to "materially advance the ultimate termination of the litigation").
The president argues that (1) the public defender's complaint failed to allege that the president selected whom to fire; and that (2) the public defender lacks standing to raise this issue. The president does not make any arguments that he had the authority to select whom to fire. First, the complaint did allege that assistant public defenders and other staff members received termination letters, sent with the president's "advice and approval," and with "the full authority and effect" of his office, and without consulting the public defender.[2] Second, the question of the public defender's standing is a question separate and distinct from the question of the president's authority; and we already found that the public defender had standing, as discussed above.
In the preceding section, we explained that power over the public defender's staff was divided between the public defender and the county board, with the public defender receiving the power to hire and fire, and the county board receiving the power to fix the compensation and number of assistant defenders and other staff members. None of the president's arguments with respect to Question No. 4 dissuades *953 us from that conclusion. Thus, we find that the president lacked the authority to select whom to hire, fire or retain among the public defender's staff. See Burnette v. Terrell, 232 Ill. 2d 522, ___, 328 Ill. Dec. 927, 905 N.E.2d 816 (2009) (trial judge lacked the authority to select specific defenders to assign to specific cases).
CONCLUSION
This interlocutory appeal asked us to decide in essence: (1) whether the public defender is an entity capable of suit; (2) whether the public defender has standing; (3) whether the president had the authority to impose unpaid furlough days on designated members of the public defender's staff; and (4) whether the president had the authority to select whom to hire, fire and retain among the public defender's staff.
In sum, we find (1) that the public defender is an entity capable of bringing a suit to contest the president's selection among the public defender's staff of whom to hire, fire and retain, and to contest the president's imposition of furlough days on designated members of the public defender's staff; (2) that the public defender has standing to contest both the president's interference with the public defender's ability to select his own staff, and the president's imposition of furlough days on designated members of that staff; (3) that the president lacked the authority to impose unpaid furlough days on designated members of the public defender's staff; and (4) that the president lacked the authority to select whom to hire, fire or retain among the public defender's staff.
Certified questions answered.
WOLFSON and HALL, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Sections 3-4000 through 3-4011 of the Counties Code is commonly called the Public Defender Act (hereinafter, the Act).
[2]  Although these allegations were part of count I which was dismissed, they were also incorporated by reference into count IV, which still stands.

=== CASE 2223273 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:58.027851+00 ===

260 Wis. 310 (1951)
STATE, Appellant,
vs.
PETROLEUM TRANSPORT, INC., Respondent.
Supreme Court of Wisconsin.
November 9, 1951.
December 4, 1951.
For the appellant there were briefs by the Attorney General, Stewart G. Honeck, deputy attorney general, William J. McCauley, district attorney of Milwaukee county, and Ben J. Wiener, assistant district attorney, and oral argument by Mr. Honeck, Mr. William A. Platz, assistant attorney general, and Mr. Wiener.
*311 John Falk Murphy and Philip H. Porter, both of Madison, for the respondent.
FRITZ, C. J.
The complaint charges the defendant, Petroleum Transport, Inc. (hereinafter referred to as "Transport"), with violating secs. 85.01 and 194.48, Stats., by unlawfully operating on April 27, 1950, a tractor and trailer upon a public highway in this state, without having registered the tractor and trailer as a contract carrier with the motor vehicle department of Wisconsin; without having received from said department a distinguishing number; and without having paid to the department the tax on such operation, contrary to the statute in such case made and provided. Transport is a Wisconsin corporation, organized under the laws of this state, and is engaged in transporting petroleum products for hire in interstate commerce between East Chicago, Indiana, and various points in Illinois and Wisconsin.
Sec. 85.01, Stats., provides:
"85.01 AUTO REGISTRATION. (1) Required; manner of enforcement. No automobile, motor truck, motor delivery wagon, bus, motor cycle, or other similar motor vehicle or trailer or semitrailer used in connection therewith, shall be operated upon any highway unless the same shall have been registered in the office of the motor vehicle department, and the registration fee paid.... The absence of number plates shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle is not registered. ..."
Sec. 194.48, Stats., provides:
"194.48 Weight tax on motor carriers. (1) No motor carrier shall operate, or cause to be operated, on the highways of this state a motor vehicle otherwise than as described in section 194.47 unless there shall have been paid to the motor vehicle department the tax on such vehicle provided by this section or by section 194.49, and unless there shall be on such vehicle such evidence of such payment as the motor vehicle department may require...."
*312 Frank J. Miller, a resident of Illinois, owned two trucks and leased them to Transport for transporting petroleum from Indiana to Wisconsin in interstate commerce. The defense in the action was based on the reciprocity compact between Illinois and Wisconsin, entered into pursuant to sec. 85.05 (2) (d), Stats.; and the question as to whether the reciprocity compact applies depends on whether Miller or Transport was the operator of the truck.
With respect to requirements of sec. 194.48, Stats. (weight tax on motor carriers), there are applicable the decisions in Cobb v. Harrington, 144 Tex. 360, 190 S. W. (2d) 709, 172 A. L. R. 837; and Thomson v. United States, 321 U.S. 19, 64 Sup. Ct. 392, 88 L. Ed. 513. Transport is the operator, because it had the I. C. C. license, issued the bills of lading, had all dealings with the customer whose freight was transported, and had the right to control the driver of the truck, whether it was Miller himself, or one of his employees.
On the other hand, Miller had no operating authority from the I. C. C. or from the Wisconsin public service commission; he did not register or license the vehicle under sec. 85.01, Stats.; and he did not file a policy of insurance with the motor vehicle department in compliance with sec. 194.41, Stats.; and neither Miller nor Transport paid the weight tax imposed by sec. 194.48, Stats.
The exemption under the reciprocity compact is strictly construed and not transferable. Transport was a Wisconsin corporation and could not avoid the weight tax by hiring, or leasing, motor trucks or trailers owned by a nonresident.
Under sec. 85.01, Stats., the physical operation of the truck in violation thereof is all that is required; Miller was the operator so far as that statute is concerned.
By the Court.Judgment reversed so far as it acquitted Transport from having violated sec. 194.48, Stats., and cause remanded for further proceedings.

=== CASE 2223275 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:58.06841+00 ===

260 Wis. 378 (1951)
ESTATE OF TULLOCH: WEBB, Claimant, Appellant,
vs.
LATIMER, Administrator, Respondent.
Supreme Court of Wisconsin.
December 4, 1951.
January 8, 1952.
*380 For the appellant there were briefs by Hale, Skemp, Nietsch, Hanson & Schnurrer of La Crosse, and oral argument by Thomas H. Skemp.
For the respondent there was a brief by Martin Gulbrandsen of Viroqua, and Donovan, Gleiss, Goodman, Breitenfield & Gleiss of Sparta, and oral argument by William M. Gleiss.
BROWN, J.
The court admitted almost all the testimony which Webb offered regardless of its being hearsay or otherwise incompetent and even with this testimony it seems quite clear that Tulloch never made any express agreement to compensate Webb in consideration of services to be rendered. From 1925 to 1938 Webb was brought up and lived in Tulloch's family and from 1933 to 1938 his wife lived there also. There is no suggestion that Tulloch ever charged them for their maintenance or that during this period Webb claimed he was to be paid for what he did. In such circumstances there is a presumption that services and accommodations are rendered gratuitously by the members of the family to each other. Estate of Engels (1951), 259 Wis. 62, 47 N. W. (2d) 335; Estate of Goltz (1931), 205 Wis. 590, 238 N.W. 374. Direct and positive evidence of an express contract for payment is required to rebut the presumption. Ibid.
After 1938 Webb lived apart and while it is apparent that he did some work for Tulloch he kept no records and could not say definitely what he did or when he did it. While his claim was for practically full-time services and he testified that he received no pay at all from Tulloch, it is established that he acquired considerable property and that he made a living for his wife and small son. If he was not paid by Tulloch, as he says, it is clear that the time he spent in serving Tulloch was not so great as to prevent self-support.
Of course, sec. 330.21 (5), Stats., limits the compensation which Webb might recover on quantum meruit to the last *381 two years before Tulloch's death. In this period Tulloch spent much of the time in the hospital in La Crosse or with his sister in that city and a witness testified that she, the witness, came daily to Tulloch's home while he was in Victory during these last years to care for him and get his meals, tend the fire, dress him in the morning, and put him to bed at night. These are the principal services for which Webb demands compensation for the two years preceding Tulloch's death, and the witness denied that Webb rendered them.
This is not an appeal where the trial court has found that services were rendered and has allowed compensation and we are asked to determine whether the evidence supports the finding. On the contrary, the court found the evidence did not support the claim and our problem is to discover whether there is such clear and satisfactory evidence, either of a contract for payment or of services rendered, and their value, which is of such probative force that the trial court committed error in finding against it. Such evidence is lacking in this record. Counsel contends that the claimant, his wife, and his mother, who testified in his behalf, are retarded mentally and justice requires that little should be required of them in the way of proof. The record shows that the learned trial judge was most considerate of them in admitting their testimony, but the best that can be said for it is that it shows their hope that Webb would be generously treated by his stepfather. We find no proof that there was any agreement for compensation nor can we discover to our own satisfaction evidence of services rendered and values earned which is sufficiently definite to support an award to the claimant if the trial court had seen fit to make one. The disappointment of the claimant and his family is due to a possible lack of generosity on Tulloch's part but not to any failure to honor legal obligations. Moreover, if the mental condition of the claimant is as bad as his counsel says, his value as an employee is *382 necessarily affected. The record shows that in 1945 Tulloch gave a house and land to Webb and Webb's son as joint tenants, reserving a life estate in himself, and when the life estate was extinguished the property was worth $4,500. There is also evidence of income received by Webb while working for others and as a share cropper on Tulloch's land, and no evidence that Tulloch ever charged or expected to charge him for the support which he and his family received while they lived under Tulloch's roof. Tulloch is not here to speak and, upon this record, we would hesitate to condemn the deceased for a breach of moral obligation.
We consider that the findings of the learned county court are in accord with the evidence, and its judgment dismissing the claim and the complaint must be affirmed.
By the Court.Judgment affirmed.

=== CASE 2223207 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:56.768527+00 ===

235 Minn. 1 (1951)
GLEN G. NEPSTAD
v.
J.M. LAMBERT, INDIVIDUALLY AND d.b.a. TRUCK CRANE SERVICE COMPANY, AND OTHERS. NORTHERN STATES POWER COMPANY, RESPONDENT.[1]
No. 35,341.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
August 3, 1951.
*3 Meagher, Geer & Markham, Howard P. Quealy, and Herbert C. Davis, for appellants.
Thompson, Hessian, Fletcher & McKasy, for respondent Glen G. Nepstad.
Charles H. Weyl, for respondent Northern States Power Company.
CHRISTIANSON, JUSTICE.
This case involves an action in tort to recover damages for injuries sustained by plaintiff in an accident occurring at Menomonie, Wisconsin, on August 6, 1946.
It will perhaps make the preliminary facts more meaningful if it is stated at the outset that plaintiff was injured when some portion of a truck crane made contact with a high-voltage (66,000) power line operated by defendant Northern States Power Company. The crane was being used on a construction job, and at the time it contacted the power line plaintiff was holding some steel trusses fastened to the boom of the crane by means of a steel-hoisting cable. As a result of the contact, the current was transmitted through the crane and trusses to plaintiff, who sustained burns so severe that he lost the use of one hand, lost one leg by amputation, and underwent numerous operations.
Suit was brought in Hennepin county district court against (1) J.M. Lambert, the owner of the crane, doing business as the Truck Crane Service Company; (2) August Pasma, the operator of the crane; and (3) Northern States Power Company. Subsequent to the accident, all assets and liabilities of Lambert's business were assumed by Truck Crane Service Company, a Minnesota corporation, and it has also been designated as a defendant. With the exception of the Northern States Power Company, which is a Wisconsin corporation, all parties to the suit are residents of Minnesota.
At the trial, special interrogatories were submitted to the jury in order to settle issues of fact as required by the comparative negligence *4 law of the state of Wisconsin.[2] The jury found: (1) That plaintiff sustained total damages of $77,500; (2) that Pasma, at the time and place of the accident, was not a loaned servant; (3) that Pasma was guilty of 65 percent negligence; (4) that Northern States was guilty of ten percent negligence; and (5) that plaintiff was guilty of 25 percent contributory negligence.
All the defendants except Northern States joined in an alternative motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict or a new trial. This appeal is from the order denying their motion. Defendant Northern States was made a respondent on appeal, and on December 29, 1950, it moved this court to dismiss the appeal as to it. Plaintiff did not oppose this motion, but appellants did. The record on appeal contains the testimony of only one of Northern States' witnesses, and none of the assignments of error have any bearing on the issue of negligence on its part. The motion to dismiss was denied with leave to renew it at the time of the hearing on the merits; and, having been renewed, is now before us as one of the matters to be decided on this appeal.
In this case, we have had the benefit of a clear and detailed statement of the facts and an excellent plat showing the premises upon which the accident occurred. Through the medium of a miniature model, we have been shown a truck crane of the type involved in the accident. The particular truck crane involved weighs 24 tons and is a machine of substantial value.
A truck crane, as its name implies, is a crane mounted upon the chassis of a truck and is frequently used on construction projects *5 for lifting heavy weights. The crane portion of the machine is motor-operated and is controlled by the crane operator, who is seated in a cab mounted upon the rear of the truck chassis approximately five feet above the ground. A turret arrangement enables the operator to swing both the cab and the boom, which was 60 feet long, in a complete circle. A system of cables and pulleys operated from the cab regulates the elevation of the boom and the hoisting of the loads. Five levers and two pedals are used in working the various cables, but on the particular job involved only three levers and one pedal were being used. Because the boom is offset and because the cab has a roof, the operator's view as he sits in the cab is limited to his right and upward, but is unobstructed straight forward and to the left. When the motor of the crane is in operation, its noise prevents the operator from hearing the voices of persons on the ground. The truck portion of the machine is entirely independent of the crane. It operates on a separate motor and is driven by another worker, known in the trade as an oiler, from a cab mounted in standard position on the front of the truck chassis.
Plaintiff's employer, the L.G. Arnold Company, was a general contractor in charge of a project to expand the Lakeside Aluminum Company's plant at Menomonie, Wisconsin. It had from 22 to 25 men employed on the project in addition to a steel crew of four men. Friday, August 2, 1946, a few weeks after construction had been started, the Arnold company, through its agent, phoned Lambert, who rents cranes as a business, to inquire whether he had a crane with operators available to go to Menomonie the following Monday morning to help with the erection of steel. It was agreed that the Arnold company would pay $12 per hour, that the crane would arrive on the work site by noon on Monday, and that the crane would be equipped with a 60-foot boom. In addition to this conversation, the only other evidence bearing upon the contract terms was an invoice indicating that the use of the machine and the gas, oil, maintenance, and services of the operator and oiler were included in the rental charge of $12 per hour.
*6 After receiving the call, Lambert told his dispatcher to send a crane with two operators to the aluminum company's plant. When Pasma reported in to the dispatcher, saying that he and Ben Pastwa, an oiler, would finish the job they were on in St. Paul that evening, he was told to leave Monday morning for Menomonie, Wisconsin, and to report to the Arnold company at the aluminum company's plant. He was also told that a 60-foot boom would be needed. Both Pasma, the operator, and Pastwa, the oiler, were on Lambert's payroll. Lambert also had workmen's compensation coverage on them, made their withholding tax deductions, and paid their social security taxes. Both men were paid on an hourly wage basis.
Pasma and Pastwa reported to George Morris, the Arnold company's steel foreman, when they arrived at the work site about 10:30 Monday morning. Morris told them that it was so close to noon they should go to lunch and that they could set up the boom in the afternoon. However, Morris, with the help of his steel crew, appears to have assembled the boom. After the boom had been assembled, Morris gave arm and hand signals directing the movement of the truck crane to the point where work was to be commenced. At first the crane was used to install prefabricated steel trusses in horizontal positions and prefabricated steel beams in upright positions so that the steel crew could bolt them in place. Morris had blueprints of the construction project to enable him to identify the various prefabricated steel pieces and direct their installation in the proper places. Since Pasma, the crane operator, could not hear oral instructions because of the noise in the crane cab, he was directed entirely by a standard system of arm and hand signals used in the building trade. Signals are used to raise and lower the boom, to swing it right or left, to give or take up slack in the hoisting cable, to hold the load, and to direct all movements of the crane. From the nature of the work, it appears that the success of the work and the safety of the steel crew, working at points where the steel pieces were being joined, were greatly dependent upon the precision with which the crane operator was able to respond promptly and accurately to the arm and hand signals. The steelworkers rely upon the *7 crane operator to watch for signals at all times and to move the crane precisely in accord with the signals given. He is not to move the crane except upon signal, but must be ready to respond when a signal is given. Every movement of the crane, boom, or cable must be made in response to a signal to either the oiler or the crane operator. It appears to be conceded that Pasma was a competent and experienced operator. Even plaintiff admitted that Pasma never mismoved the crane as far as he observed. Although a regular signalman is frequently employed for the sole purpose of communicating orders to the crane operator, on this particular project the signals were given either by Morris, the steel foreman, or by one of the steelworkers. Plaintiff testified that, although it was not his duty to do so, he knew that he had a right to give signals.
The steel crew, the crane operator, and the oiler, working under the direction of Morris, the steel foreman, completed their work on the north section of the aluminum company's plant about 1:30 Tuesday afternoon and were to follow it by the installation of a similar steel framework for the south section of the plant. To perform this job, it was necessary that four steel truss sections, each 26 feet long and weighing about four tons, which were lying to the north of the plant, be moved to the south side. Marvin Brunkow, the general foreman of the project, conferred with Morris, the steel foreman, relative to the placement of the trusses. Morris walked with Brunkow to the southeast corner of the building, and there Brunkow indicated some timbers on which to place the trusses. Morris then returned to the north side of the building and directed the placement of the truck crane to pick up the trusses and the attachment of the trusses to the crane's cable.
About the same time that the crane cable was fastened to the steel trusses, plaintiff came down off the steel framework, having completed the work of installing trusses at the north end of the building. He observed the steel trusses being attached to the crane. Morris, Brunkow, plaintiff, and two other steelworkers were present at this time. Plaintiff admitted hearing that some discussion relative to the movement of the trusses had taken place, but denied *8 having any accurate knowledge about the matter. It is admitted that Pasma, the crane operator, could not have heard this conversation, and it does not appear that he knew what he was to do next except as he was given signals. After the trusses were attached to the crane, Pasma was given a signal to raise the load to an elevation of about three feet and to hold it there.
The trusses were attached to the crane so that the boom of the crane and the trusses were extended off the rear of the truck in prolongation of its length. The boom was elevated from the ground at about a 60-degree angle and at that elevation extended about 50 feet into the air. There was a distance of about 10 or 15 feet from the rear of the truck to the rear end of the trusses. In order to prevent them from swaying unduly, a steelworker named Knutson held onto the end of the trusses nearest to the rear of the truck, and plaintiff held onto the bundle of trusses at the far end. Thus, as the truck moved down the road, plaintiff was facing in the direction of travel, and Pasma, the crane operator, was facing to the rear. At a signal from Morris, the truck began the movement to the south end of the building.
The route of the truck was along a public street which curves around the northeast corner of the building and then runs roughly parallel with its east side. The Northern States power line is also located east of the plant; but, whereas the side of the building and the public road run almost true north, the power line approaches the building at an angle from the northeast and parallels it for only a relatively short distance at the south end. Thus, after the truck rounded the northeast corner and proceeded south, the farther it traveled the closer it came to the power lines. With plaintiff and Pasma situated as they were, plaintiff was facing the power line and Pasma had his back to it until the truck crane rounded the northeast corner. Thereafter, the power line was on plaintiff's left and on Pasma's right. When the truck, which had been traveling at approximately two miles per hour, reached the southeast corner of the building, Morris, who had been walking alongside the driver, signaled for the driver (Pastwa) to stop.
*9 At this moment the situation was this: The truck crane was standing on the west edge of the street facing south with the boom of the crane extending north, while the trusses were hanging lengthwise on the end of the cable in a north-south direction. Plaintiff was on the north end of the trusses, and Knutson was on the south end, nearest the truck. Pasma was in the cab of the crane facing north. The Northern States wires ran roughly parallel with the road and were about six or eight feet east of the east edge of the public street and about 33 feet above the ground. The distance from the edge of the building to the power line was about 50 feet.
Thereafter, the evidence conflicts as to who signaled for the further movements of the crane. In any event, the crane was swung to the west a distance of about ten feet so that the trusses were directly above some timbers placed along the west side of the street. Pasma testified that Morris gave him the signal to swing west, but Morris denied it. Plaintiff testified that he did not know who gave this signal. Since it is clear that plaintiff, Morris, and Knutson were the only persons in a position to give the signal, and, since there is no claim that Knutson gave it, we are left to conclude either that plaintiff or Morris gave the signal or that Pasma moved without signal.
Morris testified that after the truck was stopped in this position he walked from the east side of the truck, crossed in front of it, and told plaintiff and Knutson to get some blocks and place the trusses on them at the side of the road so as not to obstruct traffic. However, Morris did not specify on which side of the road the trusses were to be placed. Plaintiff did not recall receiving any instructions from Morris, but Pasma testified that he saw Morris talking to him. Morris then walked around the southeast corner of the building to look for some other steel pieces.
Pasma and another witness testified that the trusses were then placed upon the blocks on the west side of the road, but again plaintiff did not recall that this was done. However, there is no conflict that the next movement of the boom of the crane was to the east. Pasma and another witness testified that plaintiff signaled for this *10 movement, but he denied it. Morris was not present when this movement took place; and, although Knutson was present, there is no testimony that he gave any signal. As the crane moved from west to east, plaintiff held onto one end of the load to steady it. He walked along with the load toward Northern States' wires as the boom of the crane moved the load from the west to the east side of the road, a distance of approximately 30 feet. At some point in the eastward movement a portion of the crane contacted the power line. As soon as Pasma heard the noise made by the contact, he swung the crane back to the west. What happened as a result of the contact has already been stated.
1. As between Lambert[3] and plaintiff, the principal issue on appeal is whether, at the time of the accident and with reference to the work he was then doing, Pasma, the crane operator, was a loaned servant in the employ of the Arnold company. The jury found that he was not. Although this determination is normally one of fact for the jury, it is well established that where there is no dispute as to controlling facts and no jury would be entitled to find that there was not a loaned-servant relationship the question becomes one of law for the court.[4] It is undisputed that, insofar as Pasma in fact became a loaned servant, the liability for his negligent act was shifted from Lambert and rested upon the Arnold company under the doctrine of respondeat superior.
Though well established, the loaned-servant principle has proved troublesome in its application to individual fact situations. The criteria for determining when a worker becomes a loaned servant are not precise; as a result, the state of the law on this subject is chaotic.[5] Respectable authority for almost any position can be *11 found, for even within a single jurisdiction the decisions are in conflict. The supreme court of Wisconsin, to whose law we must look in this case,[6] once stated:
"We shall not attempt to reconcile the decisions of this and other courts in this field. They are, to some extent at least, irreconcilable."[7]
Since decisions on this subject often turn on narrow fact distinctions, it is regrettable that a rather extensive examination of Wisconsin loaned-servant cases has failed to reveal a case on all fours with the one at bar. The absence of any decision directly in point makes this case largely one of first impression under Wisconsin law.
In the main, courts have relied on two tests in determining when a worker becomes a loaned servant. The first of these is the "whose business" test.[8] It asks: At the time of the negligent act, which employer's business was being done or furthered? The answer to the question names the responsible employer. This test is practically valueless where, as in the instant case, the general employer's business consists of furnishing men to perform work for the special employer, because by doing his job the worker is necessarily furthering and doing the business of both employers. If the test is meant to determine whether or not the worker's status was that of a servant of an independent contractor at the time of the negligent act, then *12 it only begs the question and must depend for its answer on the "control" test, which we shall discuss next.[9]
The so-called "right of control or direction" test assumes to place the responsibility for the servant's negligence upon the employer having the right to control his actions at the time the negligent act occurs. The theoretical basis for this test is probably the desire to impose the liability upon the employer who was in the best position to prevent the injury. Although this may be considered inconsistent with the liability-without-fault nature of respondeat superior,[10] the control test has received widespread approval from the courts.[11]
One danger in using control as a test lies in failing to define sufficiently the scope and the meaning of the term. In a general sense, both employers frequently have powers over the employe which may *13 be considered elements of control.[12] The control possessed by the general employer may be more remote than that of the special employer, but nevertheless it has real force behind it. An example may be found in the instant case. Among other things, Lambert selected Pasma, could discharge him, paid his wages, and administered such matters as social security, workmen's compensation, and income tax withholding. He also unquestionably had the exclusive right to direct how the truck crane should be cared for. All these may properly be considered elements of control. On the other hand, as we shall see, the Arnold company exercised detailed on-the-spot control over the actual construction work done by Pasma.
Cases which require a complete surrender of control by the general employer as a condition precedent to finding the worker a loaned servant fail to recognize that it is the fact that dual control exists which often causes the loaned-servant problem. Such cases have been ably criticized in Wylie-Stewart Mach. Co. v. Thomas, 192 Okl. 505, 507, 137 P. (2d) 556, 558.
"* * * there are decisions from states that read literally would negative * * * [the loaned-servant] principle. For instance, it is said that (1) unless the lending master surrenders all control, and (2) unless the servant renounces all obedience to the master who hired and loaned him, and (3) unless the lending master surrenders the power to discharge the employee and the borrowing master has the power to discharge the servant from both employments, there is no release of the hiring master from responsibility for the servant's negligence under the rule of respondeat superior. * * *
"To us, when the principle is tested by the elements stated above, the result is the destruction of the principle. When a master turns an employee to another's service under the tests outlined, it is not a loan of the servant, it is a complete giving up of the servant, a termination of any relationship between the hiring master and the servant. It would be an out and out change of employment. It would be a discharge from one master and a hiring by another."
*14 Since both employers may each have some control, there is nothing logically inconsistent, when using this test, in finding that a given worker is the servant of one employer for certain acts and the servant of another for other acts. Excellent examples of this are the cases which hold a machine operator performing work for another to be the servant of the machine owner in the care and maintenance of the machine, but the servant of the borrower in the operation of it.[13] The crucial question is which employer had the right to control the particular act giving rise to the injury. In this connection, Restatement, Agency, § 227, comment a (2), states:
"* * * Since the question of liability is always raised because of some specific act done, the important question is not whether or not he remains the servant of the general employer as to matters generally, but whether or not, as to the act in question, he is acting in the business of and under the direction of one or the other." (Italics supplied.)
But, even after limiting the inquiry to the particular act giving rise to the injury, the task of defining the meaning of control remains. Detailed authoritative control must be distinguished from mere designation of work or suggestions made incident to encouraging cooperation between related activities on large projects.
The orders of the borrowing employer must be commands and not requests if the worker is to be found to be a loaned servant.[14] However, it is not necessary, as plaintiff contends, that the penalty for *15 disobedience be discharge or discipline. The right to discharge is one element in measuring the authoritativeness of the order, but it should not be made decisive.[15] Despite the contrary holding in a similar case,[16] where the safety of other workers and the efficiency of the operation depend upon absolute obedience to the orders of the hirer, it seems to flaunt reality to consider such orders mere requests aimed at getting cooperation among the workers.
Authority to designate only the result to be reached is not sufficient under the control test. There must be the authority to exercise detailed authoritative control over the manner in which the work is to be done. The line of cases known as the "carriage cases" will illustrate this distinction amply for our purposes.[17] These cases hold that where a person hires an automobile and driver and merely designates the destination he wishes to reach, the route to be taken, or even the approximate speed he wishes to travel, the driver does not become a loaned servant for purposes of respondeat superior. Unless there is detailed control over the manner in which the driver guides the car over the road, no responsibility devolves upon the hirer.[18]
*16 The application of these principles to the instant case compels the conclusion that Pasma, the crane operator, was under the detailed authoritative control of the Arnold company exclusively with respect to the act which caused the injury. Every movement of the crane while it was being used on the job was directed through hand signals by an Arnold company employe. Signals were given indicating when and how far to swing the boom of the crane, when to stop the movement, when and how far to raise or lower the boom, and when and how far to slacken or tighten the hoisting cable. Without these signals, Pasma lacked the knowledge or authority to make a move, because only Morris, the Arnold company's steel foreman, with the aid of his blueprints, knew the pattern and progress the work was to take. More detailed control can hardly be conceived. The crane operator was virtually an automatic eye which caused the machinery of the crane to respond to signals given by the Arnold company's employes.
There can be no doubt that these signals carried the force of command. The work of the crane involved moving heavy pieces of steel to within inches of workmen standing on narrow platforms 10 or 20 feet above the ground. A hesitant response or disobedience to a signal jeopardized their lives, and Pasma was fully aware of it. In such a situation, the orders given, viewed realistically, must be considered authoritative. In this connection, it is interesting to compare this case with the so-called "hospital cases."[19] In the St. Joseph's Hospital case (cited in footnote 19), this court held that a nurse employed by a hospital was a loaned servant when acting under the supervision of a surgeon in the operating room, because the complete reliance of the patient upon the surgeon made it essential that the surgeon have absolute control of all those in attendance. Although these cases are not strictly analogous with the instant case, the reliance of the steelworkers on the signalman for their safety would seem to require that *17 he possess a comparably high degree of control over the crane movements.
It is not material for the purposes of this case whether or not the negligent movement of the crane was actually made in response to a signal by an Arnold company employe. If the Arnold company had the exclusive right to direct all movements of the crane, then Lambert did not; and, when he was moving the crane, Pasma was a loaned servant of the Arnold company. The absence of actual control at the time of the negligent act does not alter its liability. It is to be remembered that the ultimate basis for imposing liability upon either employer is respondeat superior, which requires no fault on the part of the responsible employer.[20] The right to control is the basis for imposing this responsibility, and the actual control exercised is merely evidence of which employer held that right. Actual control becomes material only when an attempt is made to hold an employer personally liable as procurer of the negligent act.
After a careful review of the record and in light of the numerous cases and authorities examined, we are of the opinion that as a matter of law Pasma was a loaned servant in the employ of his special employer, the Arnold company, with respect to the negligent act causing plaintiff's injury.[21] It follows from the cases heretofore *18 cited that Lambert, the general employer, is not liable for plaintiff's injury, and judgment must be entered in Lambert's favor.
2. In view of our decision that Lambert is entitled to judgment in his favor, there remains for consideration only those assignments of error which pertain to Pasma's personal liability. It is clear under the Wisconsin law that if one coemploye negligently injures his fellow employe it is no defense in a suit against him to assert that both were employed under one master. Lawton v. Waite, 103 Wis. 244, 79 N.W. 321, 45 L.R.A. 616; McGonigle v. Gryphan, 201 Wis. 269, 229 N.W. 81.
The only errors assigned relative to Pasma's personal liability are with respect to the court's instructions to the jury on the issues of plaintiff's contributory negligence and damages. The sufficiency of the evidence to sustain the jury's separate findings as to the comparative negligence of the respective parties and plaintiff's damages has not been questioned.
3. Although a portion of the court's instructions on contributory negligence, standing alone, might give the impression that the court confused the doctrine of contributory negligence with assumption of risk, upon considering the instructions given on this issue as a whole, we find no prejudicial error presented.
4. The court's failure to instruct the jury that in determining damages for loss of future earnings it should allow only the present value of such future earnings is also urged as reversible error. No request for such an instruction appears to have been made until after the court had concluded its charge to the jury. This court has frequently held that a requested instruction proffered orally at the conclusion of the charge comes too late. 6 Dunnell, Dig. & Supp. § 9772, and cases cited. This rule is particularly applicable where, as here, the instruction requested is not deemed essential to the jury's consideration of the controlling issues in the case. Moreover, since it is not contended that the damages found by the jury were excessive and there is nothing in the record before us to indicate that loss of future earnings was, in fact, included as an element of damage in *19 the sum found by the jury, any error in this respect cannot be assumed to have been prejudicial.
Although the assignments of error attack the admission in evidence against Lambert of General Order No. 3537 on Safety in Construction issued by the Wisconsin industrial commission and certain provisions of the Wisconsin Safe Place Statute, there is no occasion for us to consider their applicability to the facts of this case. Since Lambert's liability is predicated solely upon the doctrine of respondeat superior and we have determined that he is entitled to judgment as a matter of law, and since neither the trial court's admission in evidence of said General Order and statute against Pasma nor its instructions to the jury with reference thereto have been assigned as error on appeal, there remains nothing further before us to consider. See, 1 Dunnell, Dig. & Supp. § 358.
It follows that the jury's findings on the issues of comparative negligence and damages must stand and that the order of the trial court denying Pasma's motion in the alternative for judgment or a new trial must be affirmed. Accordingly, it becomes unnecessary for us to decide whether Northern States Power Company is entitled to a dismissal of the appeal as to it. Flemming v. Thorson, 231 Minn. 343, 43 N.W. (2d) 225.
Reversed as to appellants J.M. Lambert and Truck Crane Service Company with directions to enter judgment in their favor.
Affirmed as to appellant August Pasma.
So ordered.
MR. JUSTICE FRANK T. GALLAGHER took no part in the consideration or decision of this case.
NOTES
[1]  Reported in 50 N.W. (2d) 614.
[2]  The Wisconsin comparative negligence statute (Wisconsin Stat. § 331.045) provides as follows:
"Contributory negligence shall not bar recovery in an action by any person or his legal representative to recover damages for negligence resulting in death or in injury to person or property, if such negligence was not as great as the negligence of the person against whom recovery is sought, but any damages allowed shall be diminished in the proportion to the amount of negligence attributable to the person recovering."
For an interesting analysis of the statute and review of cases decided under it, see Campbell, Ten Years of Comparative Negligence, 1941 Wis. L. Rev. 289.
[3]  For convenience of reference, the name "Lambert" will be used hereinafter to designate both J.M. Lambert and his successor, Truck Crane Service Company.
[4]  Cayll v. Waukesha G. & E. Co. 172 Wis. 554, 179 N.W. 771; Mansfield v. Andrew Murphy & Son, 139 Neb. 793, 298 N.W. 749; Devaney v. Lawler Corp. 101 Mont. 579, 56 P. (2d) 746; McFarland v. Dixie M. & E. Co. 348 Mo. 341, 153 S.W. (2d) 67, 136 A.L.R. 516.
[5]  Cardozo, A Ministry of Justice (1921) 35 Harv. L. Rev. 113, 121.
[6]  It is a well-settled general rule governing conflict of laws that the law of the state where the injury occurs governs the determination of liability in actions for negligence. Anderson v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co. 222 Minn. 428, 24 N.W. (2d) 836; Darian v. McGrath, 215 Minn. 389, 10 N.W. (2d) 403; E.I. Du Pont De Nemours & Co. Inc. v. Frechette (8 Cir.) 161 F. (2d) 318; 1 Dunnell, Dig. & Supp. § 1541; 21 Minn. L. Rev. 204.
[7]  Rhinelander Paper Co. v. Industrial Comm. 206 Wis. 215, 217, 239 N.W. 412, 413.
[8]  Cayll v. Waukesha G. & E. Co. 172 Wis. 554, 179 N.W. 771; Spodick v. Nash Motors Co. 203 Wis. 211, 232 N.W. 870; Western W. & I. Bureau v. Industrial Comm. 212 Wis. 641, 250 N.W. 834; Devaney v. Lawler Corp. 101 Mont. 579, 56 P. (2d) 746; Standard Oil Co. v. Anderson, 212 U.S. 215, 29 S. Ct. 252, 53 L. ed. 480.
[9]  In Wicklund v. North Star Timber Co. 205 Minn. 595, 599, 287 N.W. 7, 10, where this court was confronted with a case involving problems of both loaned servant and independent contractor, numerous cases were reviewed, and, with reference to determining whether trucks and drivers were employed in a status of independent contractor, it was stated: "The test of the relationship is right of control." See, Kolman v. Industrial Comm. 219 Wis. 139, 262 N.W. 622; Employers Mut. Liability Ins. Co. v. Brower, 224 Wis. 485, 272 N.W. 359.
[10]  See, Seavey, Speculations as to "Respondeat Superior," Harvard Legal Essays 433.
[11]  Cayll v. Waukesha G. & E. Co. 172 Wis. 554, 179 N.W. 771; Spodick v. Nash Motors Co. 203 Wis. 211, 232 N.W. 870; Western W. & I. Bureau v. Industrial Comm. 212 Wis. 641, 250 N.W. 834; Roe v. Winston, 86 Minn. 77, 90 N.W. 122; Saint Paul-Mercury Ind. Co. v. St. Joseph's Hospital, 212 Minn. 558, 4 N.W. (2d) 637; see, Chapman v. Peoples Ice Co. 125 Minn. 168, 172, 145 N.W. 1073, 1075; Errickson v. F.W. Schwiers, Jr., Co. 108 N.J.L. 481, 158 A. 482; Gaston v. Sharpe, 179 Tenn. 609, 168 S.W. (2d) 784; Mansfield v. Andrew Murphy & Son, 139 Neb. 793, 298 N.W. 749; McFarland v. Dixie M. & E. Co. 348 Mo. 341, 153 S.W. (2d) 67, 136 A.L.R. 516; Bojarski v. M.F. Howlett, Inc. 291 Pa. 485, 140 A. 544; Rourke v. White Moss Colliery Co. [1877] 2 C.P.D. 205; Donovan v. Laing, Wharton, and Down Const. Syndicate, Ltd. [1893] 1 Q.B. 629; Bain v. Central Vermont Ry. Co. [1921] 2 A.C. 412; cf. Mersey Docks and Harbour Board v. Coggins & Griffith, Ltd. [1947] A.C. 1.
[12]  Smith, Scope of the Business: The Borrowed Servant Problem, 38 Mich. L. Rev. 1222.
[13]  Hilgenberg v. Elam, 145 Tex. 437, 198 S.W. (2d) 94; McFarland v. Dixie M. & E. Co. 348 Mo. 341, 153 S.W. (2d) 67, 136 A.L.R. 516. See, Wagner v. Larsen, 174 Wis. 26, 182 N.W. 336, where defendant rented his team, sleigh, and driver to a coal company to be used in making deliveries. It was held that the driver was defendant's servant in driving, managing, and caring for the team; but the opinion suggested that in selecting his route, sprinkling coal, and making collections he was also the servant of the coal company, and that if he had driven over someone's lawn in approaching a customer's dwelling the coal company would have been liable.
[14]  Standard Oil Co. v. Anderson, 212 U.S. 215, 29 S. Ct. 252, 53 L. ed. 480. See, also, Charles v. Barrett, 233 N.Y. 127, 135 N.E. 199.
[15]  See, Spodick v. Nash Motors Co. 203 Wis. 211, 232 N.W. 870; Devaney v. Lawler Corp. 101 Mont. 579, 56 P. (2d) 746.
[16]  Standard Oil Co. v. Anderson, supra, footnote 14.
[17]  In Donovan v. Laing, Wharton, and Down Const. Syndicate, Ltd. [1893] 1 Q.B. 629, 634, the cases of Laugher v. Pointer [1826] 5 B. & C. 547, 108 Reprint 204, and Quarman v. Burnett [1840] 6 M. & W. 499, 151 Reprint 509, were referred to as the "carriage cases." Since that time, numerous cases involving a similar fact situation have arisen where the rule of the carriage cases has been applied and where one of the English cases has been cited. See, Wagner v. Larsen, 174 Wis. 26, 30, 182 N.W. 336, 338; Meyers v. Tri-State Auto. Co. 121 Minn. 68, 71, 140 N.W. 184, 185, 44 L.R.A.(N.S.) 113; Driscoll v. Towle, 181 Mass. 416, 419, 63 N.E. 922, 923. For more recent decisions on the "carriage cases" rule, see Hoefer v. Last, 221 Wis. 102, 266 N.W. 196; Boehck Equipment Co. v. Industrial Comm. 246 Wis. 178, 16 N.W. (2d) 298; Antonelly v. Adam, 175 Minn. 438, 221 N.W. 716.
[18]  Where the hirer does have detailed control over the driver and has the right to tell him how to drive, the driver does become the hirer's servant. Irwin v. Klein, 271 N.Y. 477, 3 N.E. (2d) 601.
[19]  See, Saint Paul-Mercury Ind. Co. v. St. Joseph's Hospital, 212 Minn. 558, 4 N.W. (2d) 637; Wallstedt v. The Swedish Hospital, 220 Minn. 274, 19 N.W. (2d) 426; Aderhold v. Bishop, 94 Okl. 203, 221 P. 752, 60 A.L.R. 137.
[20]  Seavey, Speculations as to "Respondeat Superior," Harvard Legal Essays 433.
[21]  The conclusion here reached is widely supported in other jurisdictions. See, Gallagher T. & S. Co. v. Public Service Co. 111 Colo. 162, 138 P. (2d) 926; McFarland v. Dixie M. & E. Co. 348 Mo. 341, 153 S.W. (2d) 67, 136 A.L.R. 516; Devaney v. Lawler Corp. 101 Mont. 579, 56 P. (2d) 746; Mansfield v. Andrew Murphy & Son, 139 Neb. 793, 298 N.W. 749; Errickson v. F.W. Schwiers, Jr., Co. 108 N.J.L. 481, 158 A. 482; Gaston v. Sharpe, 179 Tenn. 609, 168 S.W. (2d) 784; Hilgenberg v. Elam, 145 Tex. 437, 198 S.W. (2d) 94; Coker v. Gunter, 191 Va. 747, 63 S.E. (2d) 15. Compare Wylie-Stewart Mach. Co. v. Thomas, 192 Okl. 505, 137 P. (2d) 556, with Hodges v. Holding, 204 Okl. 327, 229 P. (2d) 555, and compare Bojarski v. M.F. Howlett, Inc. 291 Pa. 485, 140 A. 544, with Pennsylvania S. & R. Co. v. Duffin, 363 Pa. 564, 70 A. (2d) 270, 17 A.L.R. (2d) 1384. For recent annotation on this subject, see Annotation, 17 A.L.R. (2d) 1388, 1442.

=== CASE 9740382 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:34:13.656991+00 ===

JUSTICE FREEMAN delivered the judgment of the court, with opinion. Chief Justice Fitzgerald and Justice Burke concurred in the judgment and opinion. Justice Kilbride specially concurred, with opinion. Justice Garman dissented, with opinion, joined by Justice Karmeier. Justice Thomas took no part in the decision. OPINION In 2003, following a jury trial, the circuit court of Cook County entered judgment in favor of plaintiff Terry Ready in a wrongful-death action stemming from the death of her husband, Michael, in a workplace accident. The appellate court affirmed in part and reversed in part and remanded for a new trial, directing that fault for the accident be reapportioned. 367 Ill. App. 3d 272. We allowed plaintiffs petition for leave to appeal. 210 Ill. 2d R. 315. For the reasons set forth below, we affirm in part and reverse in part the judgment of the appellate court. BACKGROUND In December 1999, a pipe-refitting project was under way at the Midwest Generation, L.L.C., power plant in Joliet, Illinois, where Michael Ready was employed as a maintenance mechanic. As part of this project, scaffolding material had to be raised from the ground to the level of the eighth floor. The general contractor of the project, BMW Constructors, Inc. (BMW), had subcontracted with United/Goedecke Services, Inc. (United1), to perform the scaffolding work, including the lifting of scaffolding materials. On December 23, 1999, a United employee was supervising the lifting of wooden trusses. Another United employee was rigging the trusses for lifting, using a single sling. Ready was standing beneath the rigging so that he could give hand signals to the operator of the tugger that was being used to lift the trusses. The tugger was owned by Midwest and was being operated by a Midwest employee. Eight trusses were lifted without incident. As the ninth truss was being lifted, it slipped out of the sling, falling eight floors to the ground level where it struck and killed Ready. Ready was survived by his wife, Terry, and two children. The wrongful-death suit brought by Terry, as administrator of Ready’s estate, named two defendants: United and BMW. Both defendants filed third-party complaints against Midwest pursuant to the Joint Tortfeasor Contribution Act (Contribution Act) (740 ILCS 100/0.01 et seq. (West 1998)). Plaintiff thereafter amended her complaint, adding Midwest as a defendant. She reached settlement agreements totaling $1,113 million with BMW and Midwest. United did not object to the settlements and the trial court found that they were reached in good faith. Prior to trial, the parties filed numerous motions in limine, some of which the trial court granted. As a result of these rulings, United was not allowed to present any evidence at trial regarding the conduct of the settling defendants. In addition, the trial court denied United’s motion to list BMW and Midwest on the verdict form so that if the jury found United at fault, it could consider whether to allocate some portion of the fault not only to Ready, but also to his employer and the general contractor. The case proceeded to trial with United as the sole defendant. The jury found United hable for negligence and awarded damages of $14.23 million. Based on section 2 — 1117 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Code) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2 — 1117), the trial court found United jointly and severally hable for the amount of the verdict remaining after offsets for Ready’s comparative negligence (35%) and the settlement amounts paid by BMW and Midwest. United was held hable in the amount of $8.137 million. On appeal, United argued that the trial court erred by failing to include the settling defendants on the verdict form so that the jury could determine their share of fault, if any, for the fatal accident. If the jury had been asked to consider their relative fault, United argued, its share of fault might have been set at less than 25% and, under section 2 — 1117, United would have been only severally liable. The appellate court affirmed in part and reversed in part and remanded the cause for a new trial as to liability only. 367 Ill. App. 3d 272. The appellate court concluded that, under section 2 — 1117, a nonsettling defendant’s fault should be assessed relative to the fault of all defendants, including settling defendants. The court thus held that, in the case at bar, BMW and Midwest should have been included on the verdict form for purposes of fault apportionment. The court also concluded, contrary to the circuit court, that evidence relating to the culpability of these settled defendants was relevant and admissible. The appellate court affirmed the amount of the damages award, concluding that United had forfeited the right to challenge this amount. We permitted the Illinois Trial Lawyers Association, the Illinois Association of Defense Trial Counsel, and the Illinois Chamber of Commerce to file amicus curiae briefs. 210 Ill. 2d R. 345. ANALYSIS The central issue in this appeal is whether settled tortfeasors are “defendants sued by the plaintiff’ within the meaning of section 2 — 1117 of the Code. Plaintiff argues that the statute unambiguously excludes settling defendants from the apportionment of fault. United takes the opposite view, contending that the statute unambiguously requires a jury to allocate fault to settling and dismissed defendants. United argues, in addition, that the appellate court erred in affirming the amount of the damages award. Section 2 — 1117 was amended in 2003.2 Before the appellate court below, the parties disagreed as to which version of section 2 — 1117 applied in the case at bar. The appellate court concluded that the preamendment version of the statute was applicable. The parties are no longer in dispute on this point. Our analysis, therefore, is limited to the version of section 2 — 1117 in effect at the time of plaintiffs accident, i.e., the 1986 version. Section 2 — 1117 provides: “Joint Liability. Except as provided in Section 2 — 1118, in actions on account of bodily injury or death or physical damage to property, based on negligence, or product liability based on strict tort liability, all defendants found liable are jointly and severally liable for plaintiffs past and future medical and medically related expenses. Any defendant whose fault, as determined by the trier of fact, is less than 25% of the total fault attributable to the plaintiff, the defendants sued by the plaintiff, and any third party defendant who could have been sued by the plaintiff, shall be severally liable for all other damages. Any defendant whose fault, as determined by the trier of fact, is 25% or greater of the total fault attributable to the plaintiff, the defendants sued by the plaintiff, and any third party defendants who could have been sued by the plaintiff, shall be jointly and severally liable for all other damages.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2 — 1117. In construing the meaning of a statute, our primary objective is to ascertain and give effect to the intent of the legislature. DeLuna v. Burciaga, 223 Ill. 2d 49, 59 (2006). The best evidence of the legislature’s intent is the language of the statute, which must be given its plain and ordinary meaning. Hadley v. Illinois Department of Corrections, 224 Ill. 2d 365, 371 (2007); Paris v. Feder, 179 Ill. 2d 173, 177 (1997). However, if the language of a statute is ambiguous, courts may look to tools of interpretation to ascertain the meaning of a provision. Wade v. City of North Chicago Police Pension Board, 226 Ill. 2d 485, 511 (2007); DeLuna, 223 Ill. 2d at 59. The construction of a statute is a question of law, which we review de novo. Wade, 226 Ill. 2d at 510-11; DeLuna, 223 Ill. 2d at 59. The first sentence of section 2 — 1117 deals with liability for a plaintiff’s medical expenses. The sentence states, in pertinent part: “[A] 11 defendants found liable are jointly and severally liable for plaintiff’s past and future medical and medically related expenses.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2 — 1117. Liability for medical expenses is not at issue in the case at bar. The second and third sentences of section 2 — 1117 deal with liability for all other damages. According to this portion of the statute, a defendant whose fault is 25% or greater is jointly and severally liable for these damages, while a defendant whose fault is less than 25% is only severally liable. In making this determination, the fault to be considered is that of “the plaintiff, the defendants sued by the plaintiff, and any third party defendants who could have been sued by the plaintiff.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2 — 1117. The relevant phrase, for purposes of our analysis, is “defendants sued by the plaintiff.” The question is whether settling defendants such as BMW and Midwest are “defendants sued by the plaintiff” within the meaning of section 2 — 1117. United answers this question in the affirmative, arguing that the statutory language plainly includes settling defendants within its scope. Noting that “sued” is in the past tense, United asserts: “Defendants dismissed from an action prior to verdict based on settlement were ‘sued by the plaintiff.’ ” United thus contends, citing Lannom v. Kosco, 158 Ill. 2d 535 (1994), that all defendants, including settling defendants, must be included in the apportionment of fault. Plaintiff takes the opposite view, arguing that the plain meaning of section 2 — 1117 “does not permit the apportionment of fault to dismissed defendants.” According to plaintiff, the phrase “defendants sued by the plaintiff” includes only those defendants who remain in the case when it is submitted to the fact finder. Necessarily excluded from this group are settling defendants such as BMW and Midwest who were dismissed from the action. Plaintiff states: “Dismissed or former defendants are not defendants.” Plaintiff cites Lannom in support of her view of section 2 — 1117. Initially, we reject the parties’ simultaneous claims that Lannom supports their opposite viewpoints. Even disregarding the contradictory nature of these claims, we note that the relevant issue in Lannom, unlike the case at bar, was whether section 2 — 1117 prohibited the dismissal of a defendant or third party from an action where such dismissal was otherwise warranted. The instant appeal presents a different issue: whether section 2 — 1117 requires the inclusion of settled and otherwise dismissed defendants in the allocation of fault. Lannom did not interpret the statutory language to determine this question. More important, we disagree with both plaintiff and United that section 2 — 1117 is unambiguous with regard to whether settled tortfeasors are to be included in the apportionment of fault. A statute is ambiguous when it is capable of being understood by reasonably well-informed persons in two or more different senses. Wade, 226 Ill. 2d at 511. The phrase “defendants sued by the plaintiff’ is not defined in the statute. The standard dictionary definition of “sue” includes “to seek justice or right from (a person) by legal process : bring an action against : prosecute judicially,” as well as “to proceed with (a legal action) and follow up to proper termination : gain by legal process.” Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 2284 (2002). The first of these definitions appears to correspond with United’s view that any defendant who was sued by the plaintiff is included within the scope of section 2 — 1117, regardless of whether that defendant may have settled with the plaintiff. The second definition, on the other hand, appears to comport with plaintiffs view that section 2 — 1117 applies only to those defendants who remain in the case when it is submitted to the fact finder. These definitions thus provide no help in determining which of these contradictory views might have been intended by the legislature. Nor is this matter clarified by an examination of the statute as a whole. We find no clear indication of a legislative preference for either of the parties’ asserted meanings over the other. Accordingly, based on a careful examination of the language of section 2 — 1117, we conclude that the statute is ambiguous with regard to whether it includes within its scope settling tortfeasors such as BMW and Midwest. We disagree with the dissent that the phrase “defendants sued by the plaintiff” unambiguously includes settling defendants such as BMW and Midwest. We note that, in establishing this alleged “plain meaning,” the dissent, in addition to citing multiple dictionary definitions, engages in a rather complex discussion of grammatical principles, particularly those relating to participial verb forms. The need for such an extended discussion strongly belies the notion that the statute unambiguously speaks in terms that the ordinary person, exercising ordinary common sense, can understand. Our determination that section 2 — 1117 is ambiguous finds support in the conflicting interpretations of the statute by our appellate court. In Blake v. Hy Ho Restaurant, Inc., 273 Ill. App. 3d 372 (1995), for example, the court held that defendants who had settled were no longer defendants in the suit and were not to be included in the apportionment of fault under section 2 — 1117. Blake’s holding was noted in Lombardo v. Reliance Elevator Co., 315 Ill. App. 3d 111, 125 (2000), which concluded that Blake “established] guidelines for using the attributions of fault for purposes of determining whether the defendants meet the 25% threshold of responsibility requisite for joint liability.” In remanding for a new trial, Lombardo instructed the circuit court to “consider the fault of only those parties specified in section 2 — 1117 for purposes of determining joint liability. Following Blake, the court should not subject the settling defendants to the expense of discovery ***.” (Emphasis added.) Lombardo, 315 Ill. App. 3d at 125. Accord Yoder v. Ferguson, 381 Ill. App. 3d 353, 374 (2008) (“In Lombardo, the First District of this court adopted the holding of the Fifth District in Blake”). In Skaggs v. Senior Services of Central Illinois, Inc., 355 Ill. App. 3d 1120 (2005), on the other hand, the court held that a settling defendant does not lose its status as a defendant sued by the plaintiff, and settling defendants therefore are to be included in the apportionment of fault. See also Yoder, 381 Ill. App. 3d at 378-79 (following Blake in limiting fault allocation to “remaining defendants”); Heupel v. Jenkins, 379 Ill. App. 3d 893, 903 (2008) (concluding that section 2 — 1117 applies to all tortfeasors, including those who settled with the plaintiff). Indeed, individual members of this court disagree on this same point. Compare 232 Ill. 2d at 386 (Kilbride, J., specially concurring) (concluding that the language of section 2 — 1117, viewed in its entirety, clearly excludes settling tortfeasors from the allocation of fault) with 232 Ill. 2d at 390 (Garman, J., dissenting, joined by Karmeier, J.) (concluding that the plain language of the statute clearly includes settling tortfeasors in the allocation of fault). Though the difference in appellate court interpretations of section 2 — 1117 is not dispositive as to whether the statute is ambiguous, it strongly suggests that it is. Once a court has concluded, through an examination of statutory language, that a statute is ambiguous, the existence of differing interpretations in the lower courts may be considered in support of the finding of ambiguity. See Avery v. State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co., 216 Ill. 2d 100, 184 (2005) (holding that “the wealth of competing interpretations of section 1(f) [of the Consumer Fraud Act] is a compelling indication of the statute’s ambiguity”). Where a statute is ambiguous, “courts may look to tools of interpretation to ascertain the meaning of a provision.” DeLuna, 223 Ill. 2d at 59; Wade, 226 Ill. 2d at 511. One such aid to construction is the principle that, where the legislature chooses not to amend a statute after a judicial construction, it is presumed that the legislature has acquiesced in the court’s statement of the legislative intent. Wakulich v. Mraz, 203 Ill. 2d 223, 233 (2003); see also Bruso v. Alexian Brothers Hospital, 178 Ill. 2d 445, 457-59 (1997) (applying this principle to prior judicial construction by appellate court). As previously noted, in 1995 our appellate court held that, under section 2 — 1117, settling defendants were not to be included in the apportionment of fault. Blake, 273 Ill. App. 3d at 376. The 2003 amendment to section 2 — 1117 did not deal with this prior holding in Blake. The legislature’s failure to address Blake’s holding at that time is an indication of the legislature’s acceptance, as of 2003, of this judicial interpretation of section 2 — 1117. Yoder v. Ferguson, 381 Ill. App. 3d 353, 377-78 (2008) (accepting argument, based on Bruso, that legislature’s failure to alter relevant language of section 2 — 1117 in 2003 created presumption that legislature agreed with 1995 interpretation of statute in Blake). Also applicable in this case is the rule that an amendment to a statute creates a presumption that the amendment was intended to change the law. People v. Hicks, 119 Ill. 2d 29, 34 (1987). Plaintiff cites this principle in arguing that the amendments included in Public Act 89 — 7, entitled “Tort Reform Act of 1995,” indicate that settled tortfeasors were not to be included in the apportionment of fault under the original, 1986 statute. Plaintiff points, in particular, to the Public Act 89 — 7 amendments to section 2 — 1116 of the Code, which was titled, as amended: “Limitation on recovery in tort actions; fault.” The amended section 2 — 1116(b) defined “Tortfeasor” as “any person, excluding the injured person, whose fault is a proximate cause of the [injury] for which recovery is sought, regardless of whether that person is the plaintiffs employer, regardless of whether that person is joined as a party to the action, and regardless of whether that person may have settled with the plaintiff.” (Emphasis added.) 735 ILCS 5/2 — 1116(b) (West 1996). Plaintiff asserts that, under this amendment, settling tortfeasors were to be included on the verdict form. According to plaintiff, this amendment constituted a recognition by the legislature that settling tortfeasors were not originally included in the apportionment of fault. Plaintiff cites Hicks, which stated: “It is an elementary rule of statutory construction that ‘[t]he addition of a new provision in a statute by amendment is an indication of the absence of its implied or prior existence.’ [Citation.] Absent substantial considerations to the contrary, ‘an amendatory change in the language of a statute creates a presumption that it was intended to change the law as it theretofore existed.’ ” Hicks, 119 Ill. 2d at 34. In Best v. Taylor Machine Works, 179 Ill. 2d 367 (1997), this court held Public Act 89 — 7 unconstitutional in its entirety. As a result, section 2 — 1116, as well as section 2 — 1117, which also was amended by Public Act 89 — 7, reverted to the original language of the 1986 version, i.e., the language in effect prior to the adoption of Public Act 89 — 7. “The effect of enacting an unconstitutional amendment to a statute is to leave the law in force as it was before the adoption of the amendment.” People v. Gersch, 135 Ill. 2d 384, 390 (1990). According to plaintiff, the 1995 amendment to include settling defendants in the apportionment of fault is a strong indication that the 1986 version — the statute at issue in the case at bar — was not intended to include such defendants. United responds that the 1995 amendments are irrelevant to the interpretation of section 2 — 1117. United notes that the amendments were declared void ab initio and without legal effect. According to United, these amendments therefore have no bearing on the analysis of section 2 — 1117. This argument misses the mark. In contending that the 1995 amendments are relevant to the analysis, plaintiff does not argue that they are legally effective. Instead, plaintiff simply cites the amendments as record evidence that is indicative of the original intent of the 1986 statute. We agree with plaintiff that the 1995 amendments are a compelling indication that settling defendants were not meant to be included in the apportionment of fault under the 1986 statute. Based on the well-established principles set forth above regarding (1) the legislature’s failure to amend a statute following a judicial construction and (2) the amendment of a statute to add a new provision, we conclude that section 2 — 1117, as enacted in 1986, was never intended to include settling tortfeasors in the apportionment of fault. Although not necessary, additional support for this conclusion is found in statements made by Illinois Senator John Cullerton during floor debate on Senate Bill 1296, which is aimed at amending section 2 — 1117. Senate Bill 1296 was passed by the Senate on March 20, 2007, but remains pending in the House. While the statements of Senator Cullerton, a cosponsor of the bill, are nonbinding, they are nevertheless informative and serve to confirm our conclusion, reached above, regarding the meaning of section 2 — 1117. On March 20, 2007, during the discussion of Senate Bill 1296, Senator Cullerton provided some historical background regarding section 2 — 1117. Senator Cullerton stated that, since the enactment of section 2 — 1117 in 1986, the law has been that if a defendant is less than 25% negligent, “that defendant only has to pay the percentage that the jury found [the defendant liable].” 95th Ill. Gen. Assem., Senate Proceedings, March 20, 2007, at 76 (statements of Senator Cullerton). Senator Cullerton indicated that in a situation where the plaintiff settles with defendants, “the plaintiff then continues the lawsuit against the remaining defendant, and after the verdict, there’s a subtraction from the verdict of the amount of money that the defendants who *** settled the case had to pay. And the remaining defendant — pays the remainder.” 95th Ill. Gen. Assem., Senate Proceedings, March 20, 2007, at 76 (statements of Senator Cullerton). Senator Cullerton emphasized that Senate Bill 1296 was intended to clarify “what the intent of the 1986 law was. *** It just makes it clear, if you settle with somebody, their names don’t go on the verdict form.” 95th Ill. Gen. Assem., Senate Proceedings, March 20, 2007, at 77 (statements of Senator Cullerton). Notwithstanding the foregoing, United argues various policy reasons in support of its interpretation of section 2 — 1117. United argues, for example, that the exclusion of settling defendants from the apportionment of fault results in unfairness. Plaintiff, for her part, argues policy reasons as well. She contends, for example, that the inclusion of settling tortfeasors in the allocation of fault would discourage future settlements. Deciding between such competing policy positions is, in our view, a task better left to the legislature. See Heckendorn v. First National Bank of Ottawa, 19 Ill. 2d 190, 194-95 (1960); Board of Education of Dolton School District 149 v. Miller, 349 Ill. App. 3d 806, 811 (2004). In sum, we disagree with the appellate court’s holding that, under section 2 — 1117, a remaining defendant’s culpability must be assessed relative to the culpability of all defendants, including settling defendants. We reverse that portion of the appellate court’s judgment reversing the circuit court as to liability. We next consider United’s claim that the appellate court erred in affirming the amount of the damages award. United argues that because the appellate court reversed the circuit court as to liability, it should also have reversed as to damages. Starting from the premise that damages flow from liability, United contends that, once the appellate court reversed as to liability, “there were no damages for the appellate court to affirm.” We need not resolve this question. Our decision today reverses the appellate court’s judgment as to liability, effectively eliminating the basis for United’s claim that the damages award should have been reversed. The remaining issue before us is whether the appellate court erred in concluding that United forfeited the right to challenge the damages amount. The appellate court held that United forfeited this issue by mentioning the damage award only in the “Concluding Remarks” section of its brief, without presenting it as a separate issue for review. Specifically, the appellate court noted, United failed to set forth in its brief “specific reasons or argument as to why the damage award was excessive or unreasonable” and failed to “specifically argue that the damage award was improper.” 367 Ill. App. 3d at 280. The appellate court pointed to Supreme Court Rule 341(h)(7), which requires that arguments “shall contain the contentions of the appellant and the reasons therefor, with citation of the authorities and the pages of the record relied on.” 210 Ill. 2d R. 341(h)(7). Before this court, United argues that the appellate court erred by applying the doctrine of procedural default. A review of the appellate court’s application of the doctrine would necessarily require that we examine the briefs filed in the appellate court. However, United has failed to utilize Supreme Court Rule 318(c), which provides: “If it is important for the Supreme Court to know the contentions of any party in the Appellate Court, copies of the pertinent Appellate Court briefs certified by the clerk of that court may be filed in the Supreme Court.” 155 Ill. 2d R. 318(c). Because the briefs filed by the parties in the appellate court are not a part of the record provided to this court, we are unable to review whether the appellate court erred in applying procedural default. We affirm the judgment of the appellate court upholding the amount of the damages award. In its petition for rehearing, United argues that this court, in light of its resolution of the section 2 — 1117 question, should address United’s concern that it was deprived of a sole proximate cause defense when the trial court refused its request for an instruction on sole proximate cause. We note that the issue was raised in the appellate court, but that court concluded that, because it was remanding for a new trial, it “need not now address United’s contention.” 367 Ill. App. 3d at 279. Because our opinion today reverses the appellate court’s judgment ordering a new trial, we remand the cause to the appellate court for a decision on United’s claim that the jury should have been instructed on sole proximate cause. CONCLUSION We affirm the appellate court’s upholding of the damages award, but reverse the remainder of the judgment of the appellate court. We hold that section 2 — 1117 does not apply to good-faith settling tortfeasors who have been dismissed from the lawsuit. We remand the cause to the appellate court for a decision on United’s claim that the jury should have been instructed on sole proximate cause. Appellate court judgment affirmed in part and reversed in part; cause remanded with directions. JUSTICE THOMAS took no part in the consideration or decision of this case.  We note that defendant United/Goedecke Services, Inc., refers to itself as “Goedecke.” We acknowledge that, in general, a party should be addressed in the manner the party prefers. However, because the appellate court opinion below refers to this entity as “United,” we elect to do the same for the sake of consistency.   This amendment excluded the plaintiffs employer from the third-party defendants subject to a finding of fault. 735 ILCS 5/2— 1117 (West 2004) (limiting the allocation of fault to “the plaintiff, the defendants sued by the plaintiff, and any third party defendant ] except the plaintiff’s employer’’ (emphasis added)).

=== CASE 9740383 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:34:13.661825+00 ===

JUSTICE KILBRIDE, specially concurring: While I agree with the plurality’s determination that the meaning of the phrase “defendants sued by the plaintiff’ is unclear, I disagree with its conclusion that an examination of the statute as a whole fails to clarify that meaning. Therefore, I respectfully concur in the plurality opinion. As this court recently noted in People v. Perry, 224 Ill. 2d 312, 323 (2007): “The principles guiding our analysis are well established. Our primary objective is to ascertain and give effect to legislative intent, the surest and most reliable indicator of which is the statutory language itself, given its plain and ordinary meaning.” See also Illinois Graphics Co. v. Nickum, 159 Ill. 2d 469, 479 (1994). Nonetheless, “ ‘[w]e do not view words and phrases in isolation but consider them in light of other relevant provisions of the statute.’ ” People v. Beachem, 229 Ill. 2d 237, 243 (2008), quoting People v. Campa, 217 Ill. 2d 243, 252-53 (2005). See also Town & Country Utilities, Inc. v. Illinois Pollution Control Board, 225 Ill. 2d 103, 117 (2007). Here, an examination of the statute as a whole aids in the construction of the critical statutory phrase. The first sentence of section 2 — 1117 provides: “Except as provided in Section 2 — 1118, in actions on account of bodily injury or death or physical damage to property, based on negligence, or product liability based on strict tort liability, all defendants found liable are jointly and severally liable for plaintiffs past and future medical and medically related expenses.” (Emphasis added.) Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2 — 1117. In this sentence, the legislature limits the statute’s scope to specific categories of tort actions. Only those “defendants found liable” “in” the specified actions are implicated. (Emphasis added.) Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2 — 1117. The legislature’s decision to limit section 2 — 1117’s application only to defendants in the specified categories of actions strongly suggests that the statute was intended to include only those defendants who remained “in” the action when liability was determined. Under the express language of the first sentence of section 2 — 1117, former defendants who are not parties in the specified tort action when liability is determined are not subject to joint and several liability for a plaintiffs medical expenses. The reach of the second and third sentences of section 2 — 1117 is similarly limited to the types of actions noted in the first sentence. Therefore, the same limitation on the procedural status of the defendants subject to liability also applies to the final two sentences in the statute. In other words, those two sentences apply only in the same type of actions listed in the first sentence. They do not apply to other categories of legal actions. A comparison of words used in all three sentences in section 2 — 1117 is instructive. The second and third sentences state: “Any defendant whose fault, as determined by the trier of fact, is less than 25% of the total fault attributable to the plaintiff, the defendants sued by the plaintiff, and any third party defendant who could have been sued by the plaintiff, shall be severally liable for all other damages. Any defendant whose fault, as determined by the trier of fact, is 25% or greater of the total fault attributable to the plaintiff, the defendants sued by the plaintiff, and any third party defendants who could have been sued by the plaintiff, shall be jointly and severally liable for all other damages.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2 — 1117. A comparison with the first sentence reveals that the legislature repeats the word “defendants” throughout the provision. Nothing in the statute indicates that the legislature intended the word “defendants” to have a different meaning in the second and third sentences than it has in the first sentence. Accordingly, the language chosen by the legislature in all three sentences appears to include in the allocation of fault for liability purposes only those “defendants” who remain “in” the tort action until verdict. This interpretation also comports with the ordinary meaning of the word “defendant.” In Webster’s Third New International Dictionary, a “defendant” is defined as “a person required to make answer in an action or suit in law or equity or in a criminal action.” (Emphasis added.) Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 591 (1981).3 Under this definition, a “defendant” must answer and defend against claims made in a legal action and must, therefore, be a party in the lawsuit. Thus, under this definition, the need for opposition “in an action or suit in law or equity” establishes the adversarial nature of the relationship required between the plaintiff and any defendant in the action who is included in the apportionment of fault. This same adversarial relationship is expressly required by the first sentence of section 2 — 1117, where all defendants found liable “in” the specified tort actions are jointly and severally liable for the plaintiff’s medical expenses. Additionally, construction of section 2 — 1117 comports with the use of the word “defendant” as a legal term of art. In Black’s Law Dictionary, a “defendant” is defined as “[t]he person defending or denying; the party against whom relief or recovery is sought in an action or suit or the accused in a criminal case.” (Emphases added.) Black’s Law Dictionary 377 (5th ed. 1979). Applying this definition, a settled tortfeasor who has been dismissed from the lawsuit is no longer “defending or denying” and is no longer a “party against whom relief or recovery is sought in an action or suit.” (Emphasis added.) Notably, the legislature chose to limit the allocation of fault to only three types of parties: “the plaintiff, the defendants sued by the plaintiff, and any third party defendants who could have been sued by the plaintiff.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2 — 1117. By expressly creating three categories for the allocation of fault within the specified tort actions, the legislature signaled that fault should be apportioned only among those parties. The legislature did not choose to create a fourth category for “former defendants” or “settled defendants.” Under the plain meaning of the relevant words, the absence of that express category signals the legislature’s intent to exclude persons or entities no longer engaged in an active plaintiff-defendant relationship at the time of fault allocation. See Bridgestone/Firestone, Inc. v. Aldridge, 179 Ill. 2d 141, 151-52 (1997) (“Where a statute lists the things to which it refers, there is an inference that all omissions should be understood as exclusions”). Therefore, I wholeheartedly agree with the plurality’s conclusion that section 2 — 1117 does not permit the allocation of fault to settling defendants that have been dismissed from the lawsuit. This conclusion is consistent with our statements in Unzicker v. Kraft Food Ingredients Corp., 203 Ill. 2d 64 (2002), even though that case is not directly on point. In Unzicker, this court determined that the language of section 2 — 1117 demonstrated the legislature’s intent to determine tort liability by dividing responsibility among “those people in the suit *** who might have been responsible for the plaintiff’s injuries.” (Emphasis added.) Unzicker, 203 Ill. 2d at 78-79, 80. Although Unzicker was superceded by statute, the 2003 amendments did not affect the statutory language at issue in this case, and Unzicker is still applicable to the 1986 version of section 2 — 1117. The statutory analysis in Unzicker is instructive here. In Unzicker, we noted that in enacting the 1986 version of section 2 — 1117, “the legislature referred to a division of fault among the plaintiff, the defendants sued by the plaintiff, and any third-party defendants who could have been sued by the plaintiff.” Unzicker, 203 Ill. 2d at 77. As this court recognized in Unzicker, in apportioning responsibility under section 2 — 1117, “the legislature looked to those people in the suit.” (Emphasis added.) Unzicker, 203 Ill. 2d at 78. Unzicker explained that “the party must already have been brought into the case by a defendant for that party to be included in the division of fault.” Unzicker, 203 Ill. 2d at 78. Our decision in Unzicker, therefore, is consistent with the plurality’s current, de novo, interpretation of section 2 — 1117, holding that the legislature intended to divide responsibility only among those parties in the suit, not among those that have been dismissed. For the reasons stated, I specially concur in the plurality’s decision.  When citing dictionary definitions, I use the edition in effect at the time the statute was enacted to reflect most accurately the intent of the legislature.

=== CASE 9740384 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:34:13.666049+00 ===

JUSTICE GARMAN, dissenting: The plurality concludes that the phrase “defendants sued by the plaintiff’ in section 2 — 1117 of the Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/2 — 1117 (West 1998)) is ambiguous. It then construes the phrase as referring to only those defendants who were sued by the plaintiff but did not enter into a good-faith settlement agreement prior to the entry of judgment. 232 Ill. 2d at 382.1 believe that the phrase “defendants sued by the plaintiff” unambiguously refers to those individuals or entities against whom the plaintiff filed suit. I, therefore, dissent. PLAIN MEANING The plurality begins its analysis by noting that the phrase “is not defined in the statute.” 232 Ill. 2d at 377. The lack of a statutory definition could be seen as an indication of the legislature’s belief that the words it chose were so clear that they did not require further definition or that a standard legal dictionary would reveal that words are unambiguous. Black’s Law Dictionary defines the word “sue” as “[t]o institute a lawsuit against (another party).” Black’s Law Dictionary 1473 (8th ed. 2004). Given this meaning, all three of the defendants in the present case were “sued by the plaintiff.” As the plurality notes, a statutory term is ambiguous if it is capable of being understood by reasonably well-informed persons in two or more different senses. 232 Ill. 2d at 377, citing Wade v. City of North Chicago Police Pension Board, 226 Ill. 2d 485, 511 (2007). Although there is no reason to suppose that the legislature intended the word “sued” to carry any meaning other than the plain and simple definition found in the standard legal dictionary, the plurality finds ambiguity in two alternate usages given in a general usage dictionary. 232 Ill. 2d at 377. While it is not inappropriate to utilize a general usage dictionary to determine the meaning of a statutory term, even if that term may also be found in a legal dictionary (see, e.g., People v. Beachem, 229 Ill. 2d 237, 245-46 (2008) (finding use of the undefined statutory term “custody” to be ambiguous because the broad definition found in the legal dictionary was not clarified by the equally broad definition found in a general usage dictionary)), the plurality overlooks the requirement that a term will be found to be ambiguous only if the two asserted meanings are themselves reasonable. In re J.W., 204 Ill. 2d 50, 85 (2003). As United points out, the legislature’s choice of the word “sued,” as opposed to some other form of the verb, renders only one of the two usages reasonable. The plurality dismisses the verb’s tense without discussion (232 Ill. 2d at 377). It is well established that the tense of a verb used in a statute is an element of plain meaning. In re Gwynne P, 215 Ill. 2d 340, 357-58 (2005) (concluding that the verb phrase in the statute is in the present perfect tense). See also Ingalls Shipbuilding, Inc. v. Director, Office of Workers’ Compensation Programs, Department of Labor, 519 U.S. 248, 255, 136 L. Ed. 2d 736, 746, 117 S. Ct. 796, 801 (1997) (“the use of the present tense” of the verb “enter” in the statutory phrase “ ‘If the person entitled to compensation ... enters into a settlement’ ” agreement in 33 U.S.C. §933(g)(l) indicates that the person “must be so entitled at the time of settlement” (emphasis omitted)); Dole Food Co. v. Patrickson, 538 U.S. 468, 478, 155 L. Ed. 2d 643, 654, 123 S. Ct. 1655, 1662 (2003) (“plain text” of statute, “because it is expressed in the present tense,” reveals its meaning). The dictionary entry for the word “sue” is immediately followed by the words “sued; sued; suing; sues.” Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 2284 (2002). According to the dictionary’s explanatory notes, the principal parts of each verb are listed in the following order: “the past, the past participle, the present participle, and the present 3d singular.” The example is given of the entry for the verb “tie,” which contains the principal parts “tied ... tied ... tying ... ties.” Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 15a (2002). Thus, in Ingalls Shipbuilding, the Supreme Court found plain meaning based on the drafters’ use of the word “enters,” the present third person singular form of the verb “enter.” Ingalls Shipbuilding, 519 U.S. at 255, 136 L. Ed. 2d at 746, 117 S. Ct. at 801. “Sue,” like “tie,” is a regular verb, that is, one whose past tense and past participle forms are created by the addition of “d” or “ed.” Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 15a (2002). “Sued” is both the past tense and the past participle of the verb “sue,” just as “tied” is both the past tense and the past participle of “tie.” A participle is a “nominal verb form used with an auxiliary verb to indicate certain tenses and also functioning independently as an adjective.” Webster’s II New College Dictionary 801 (1999). In the phrase “defendants sued by the plaintiff,” the word “sued” is used as a past participle. Because no auxiliary verb is used, the word “sued” describes the defendants and, therefore, functions as an adjective. Participles, like the verbs from which they are derived, have not only tense, but voice. “The voice of a verb shows whether the subject of the verb has performed the action (active voice), or has received the action (passive voice).” M. Shertzer, The Elements of Grammar 26 (1986). The active voice participles of the verb “sue” are “suing” in the present tense and “having sued” in the past tense. Thus in the active voice, present tense: “The plaintiffs suing the corporation are former employees.” And in the active voice, past tense: “The plaintiffs, having sued their employer, abandoned their workers’ compensation claims.” The passive voice participles are “being sued” in the present tense, “sued” in the past tense, and “having been sued” in the present perfect tense. In the passive voice, present tense: “The defendants being sued are the hospital, the physician, and the nurse.” In the passive voice, present perfect tense: “The defendants, having been sued, tendered the matter to their insurance carrier.” The phrase used in section 2 — 1117—“defendants sued by the plaintiff’ — is in the passive voice, past tense. Because it is in the past tense, it clearly refers to all defendants against whom the plaintiff filed suit. If the legislature had intended this provision to apply to only those defendants remaining in the lawsuit at the time of trial, it would have used the present tense of the participle. Reliance on the rules of grammar to determine whether statutory language is ambiguous is no more unusual than reliance on the dictionary definition of a statutory term. See, e.g., Bowman v. American River Transportation Co., 217 Ill. 2d 75, 83 (2005) (stating that “anyone well versed in statutory construction, or even English grammar” would understand the plain meaning of the statutory provision at issue); In re Marriage of Kates, 198 Ill. 2d 156, 164 (2001) (distinguishing between an independent and a subordinate clause). This court should not utilize the generally accepted rules of grammar as a means of finding plain meaning in some cases, but ignore these rules in others. Indeed, the phrase “defendants sued by the plaintiff’ employs a common and popularly understood construction consisting of a plural noun, a past participle, the preposition “by,” and a singular noun, as in “films directed by George Lucas,” a phrase that clearly includes not only the film he is currently working on, but all of his previous movies. The phrase “players coached by Lovie Smith” includes not only the current roster of Chicago Bears players, but those he coached before coming to Chicago. Yet, the plurality willfully ignores the basic rules of grammar and popularly understood meaning to conclude that “defendants sued by the plaintiff’ means only those defendants who remain in the case at the time the verdict is rendered. However, even if all three defendants in the present case had settled and it had never gone to trial, all three would still be “defendants sued by the plaintiff.” In sum, the plain meaning of the statutory language, which is — after all — the best indicator of legislative intent (Michigan Avenue National Bank v. County of Cook, 191 Ill. 2d 493, 504 (2000)), is consistent with the simple definition found in Black’s Law Dictionary and the first of the two usages described in Webster’s. United, Midwest, and BMW are all “defendants sued by the plaintiff” because the plaintiff instituted a lawsuit against each of them (Black’s Law Dictionary 1473 (8th ed. 2004)), “seek[ing] justice *** by legal process,” by “bring[ing] an action against” them (Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 2284 (2002)). The second usage found in Webster’s, “to proceed with (a legal action) and follow up to proper termination” (Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 2284 (2002)), is not a reasonable reading of the phrase in the context of section 2 — 1117. In this sense, not even United was a “defendant sued by the plaintiff’ until after the trial court entered judgment on the jury’s verdict. It would be absurd to read the term “sued” to refer only to those defendants against whom judgment has been entered when the statute as a whole is designed to operate during trial. See Michigan Avenue National Bank, 191 Ill. 2d at 503-04 (all provisions of a statute are to be viewed as a whole; words and phrases are not to be viewed in isolation, but must be interpreted in light of other relevant provisions of the statute). Because the phrase “defendants sued by the plaintiff’ in the context of section 2 — 1117 is reasonably capable of only one meaning, it is unambiguous and our responsibility is to give effect to the intent of the legislature. CONSTRUCTION OF THE STATUTE Having found section 2 — 1117 ambiguous, the plurality employs two canons of statutory construction to determine its meaning. First, the plurality applies the canon that where the legislature amends the statute after it has been judicially construed, it may be presumed that the legislature acquiesces in the court’s construction. 232 Ill. 2d at 380. Second, the plurality applies the canon that an amendment to a statute may be presumed to be intended to change the law. 232 Ill. 2d at 380. Although I believe that no construction is necessary because the meaning of the statute is plain, I must comment on the manner in which the plurality employs these tools of statutory construction because I believe that this decision may cause this court and our circuit and appellate courts to improperly apply these tools in future cases. The plurality applies these two canons in reverse chronological order. I believe that it is simpler to apply them in historical sequence. Thus, I begin at the beginning. The operative language “defendants sued by the plaintiff’ was enacted in 1986. Pub. Act 84 — 1431, art. 5, §1, eff. November 26, 1986. In 1994, this court discussed section 2 — 1117 of the Code in its decision in Lannom v. Kosco, 158 Ill. 2d 535 (1994). I agree with the plurality that Lannon did not interpret the statutory language at issue (232 Ill. 2d at 377) and, therefore, does not provide any guidance in this case. In 1995, the appellate court decided Blake v. Hy Ho Restaurant, Inc., 273 Ill. App. 3d 372 (1995) (settling defendants are not to be included in the apportionment of fault under section 2 — 1117). The next significant event in the history of section 2 — 1117 was its amendment as part of Public Act 89 — 7, commonly referred to as the Tort Reform Act of 1995. Under this amendment, fault was to be apportioned among the defendant being held liable at trial and “all other tortfeasors, as defined in Section 2 — 1116, whose fault was a proximate cause” of the injury or death. Section 2 — 1116 defined “tortfeasor” as “any person, excluding the injured person, whose fault is a proximate cause of the death, bodily injury to person, or physical damage to property for which recovery is sought, regardless of whether that person is the plaintiffs employer, regardless of whether that person is joined as party to the action, and regardless of whether that person may have settled with the plaintiff.” Pub. Act 89 — 7, eff. March 9, 1995 (subsequently held unconstitutional in its entirety in Best v. Taylor Machine Works, 179 Ill. 2d 367 (1997)). In discussing this failed amendment to section 2 — 1117, the plurality employs the canon of construction that an amendment to a statute is evidence of a legislative intent to change the law. 232 Ill. 2d at 380, citing People v. Hicks, 119 Ill. 2d 29, 34 (1987). Thus, the plurality concludes, the 89th General Assembly’s clear and unequivocal intent to include settling defendants in the apportionment of fault signals that, prior to this amendment, settling defendants were not included in the apportionment of fault. The plurality, however, relies on an incomplete statement of the canon of construction dealing with subsequent amendments. As recently as 2004, this court has stated that an “ ‘amendment of an unambiguous statute indicates a purpose to change the law, while no such purpose is indicated by the mere fact of an amendment of an ambiguous provision.’ ” Williams v. Staples, 208 Ill. 2d 480, 496 (2004), quoting O’Connor v. A&P Enterprises, 81 Ill. 2d 260, 271 (1980). This canon reflects the commonsense notion that if a statute is ambiguous, a subsequent amendment will clarify the statute rather than change the law by replacing the intent of the enacting legislature with the intent of the amending legislature. This places the plurality in a “Catch-22.” If, as the plurality asserts, the phrase “defendants sued by the plaintiff’ is ambiguous, the 1995 amendment cannot be used to reveal a presumed intent to change the law. Their reliance on this canon is, therefore, entirely misplaced. In my opinion, the phrase is unambiguous and, therefore, it is inappropriate to utilize this or any other canon of construction. This court again considered the meaning and application of section 2 — 1117 in Unzicker v. Kraft Food Ingredients Corp., 203 Ill. 2d 64 (2002), a case not mentioned in the plurality opinion. The plaintiff worked for a contractor, installing pipes at a plant owned by Kraft. After he was seriously injured while on the job, he applied for and was awarded workers’ compensation benefits. He sued Kraft, which filed a third-party complaint against the employer. Unzicker, 203 Ill. 2d at 69-70. At the time the injury occurred, section 2 — 1117 provided that for purposes of determining whether defendant would be held jointly and severally liable, his fault was to be compared to the fault of “the plaintiff, the defendants sued by the plaintiff, and any third party defendants who could have been sued by the plaintiff.” 735 ILCS 5/2 — 1117 (West 1994). The question for this court was whether the employer, who was immune from liability under the Workers’ Compensation Act (820 ILCS 305/1 et seq. (West 2000)), was nevertheless a third-party defendant who “could have been sued by the plaintiff.” See Unzicker, 203 Ill. 2d at 72. This court did not specifically state in Unzicker whether it found the phrase to be ambiguous. It did, however, agree with the appellate court’s interpretation, including the conclusion that the “clear legislative intent in section 2 — 1117 was that minimally responsible defendants should not be responsible for entire judgments.” Unzicker, 203 Ill. 2d at 77, citing Unzicker v. Kraft Food Ingredients Corp., 325 Ill. App. 3d 587, 593 (2001). In addition, this court noted that reading the phrase “third party defendants who could have been sued by the plaintiff” to include employers who were immune from further liability under the Workers’ Compensation Act was consistent with the existing body of law holding that immunity under the Workers’ Compensation Act is “in the nature of an affirmative defense that must be raised in the trial court if the plaintiff brings a suit.” Unzicker, 203 Ill. 2d at 77. This court further noted that if “the legislature intended to use language that would exclude employers, we believe that it would have simply put in language specifically excluding employers.” Unzicker, 203 Ill. 2d at 78. The plurality does not mention Unzicker, yet it is relevant to the 2003 amendment to section 2 — 1117 that added the phrase “except the plaintiffs employer.” See Pub. Act 93 — 12, §5, eff. June 4, 2003. In assessing the significance of this amendment, the plurality ignores the legislature’s clear intent to supersede this court’s decision in Unzicker in favor of employing the canon of construction that when the legislature chooses not to amend a statute after a judicial construction, it is presumed to acquiesce in the court’s statement of the legislative intent. 232 Ill. 2d at 380 (citing Wakulich v. Mraz, 203 Ill. 2d 223, 233 (2003), and Bruso v. Alexian Brothers Hospital, 178 Ill. 2d 445, 457-59 (1997)). The plurality overstates the power of the canon. Because the canon is a tool of construction and not a rule of law, the court may rely upon the canon to presume legislative intent to acquiesce if circumstances warrant, but it goes too far to say that such intent “is presumed” (see Perry, 224 Ill. 2d at 331). The basis for applying the presumption is very weak where, as here, the legislature was clearly acting for a specific purpose, that is, to supersede this court’s holding in Unzicker, which involved a different portion of the statute than is at issue in the present case. The plurality nevertheless finds that the legislature implicitly acquiesced in the appellate court’s holding in Blake because it failed to address Blake’s holding at that time. 232 Ill. 2d at 380.1 have several concerns about the manner in which the plurality applies this canon of construction. First, while it is true that we have utilized this canon in the past, we have done so in the context of deeming the legislature to be aware of and, thus, acquiescing in previous constructions of this court. In Wakulich, for example, we noted that we had considered and rejected the plaintiff’s suggested reading of the Dramshop Act eight years previously in Charles v. Seigfried, 165 Ill. 2d 482 (1995). We observed that prior to our decision in Charles, “the General Assembly had considered imposing some form of social host liability upon adults who furnish alcohol to underage persons at least six times, but that such attempts were rejected.” Wakulich, 203 Ill. 2d at 233. We then noted that since our decision in Charles, the General Assembly had considered, but not adopted, several bills that would have superseded our holding in that case. Applying the acquiescence canon, we concluded that although the legislature had continued to amend the statute “in other respects,” it had made no change that would have superseded this court’s previous and long-standing interpretation that the Dramshop Act was “intended to preempt the entire field of alcohol-related liability.” Wakulich, 203 Ill. 2d at 233. In the present case, however, the plurality is applying the canon to presume that when the legislature acted for the specific purpose of rejecting this court’s holding in Unzicker, it is to be presumed that it was aware of and acquiesced in the appellate court’s holding eight years previously in Blake, a case that was not even cited in our Unzicker decision because it construed an entirely different phrase in the same statute. The plurality provides no legislative history of the enactment of the 2003 amendment to support the suggestion that the legislature was actually aware of Blake. It is certain, however, that it was actually aware of Unzicker. The canon, which is not a rule of law, but merely a tool that may be employed when it is likely to reveal legislative intent, is less than helpful in this situation. In my opinion, the canon is much stronger when applied to previous decisions of this court than when applied to an appellate court decision. The plurality cites Bruso as authority for applying this canon to prior judicial construction by the appellate court. 232 Ill. 2d at 380. However, in Bruso, we did not apply the acquiescence canon. Instead, we resolved the question of interpretation of section 13 — 212(b) of the Code of Civil Procedure on the basis of plain meaning. Bruso, 178 Ill. 2d at 453 (finding the section at issue “unambiguous” and stating that its “plain language” demonstrates the intent of the legislature). We then went on to address the defendant’s various arguments, including the argument that the 1987 amendment to the provision evinced legislative acquiescence to the appellate court’s decision in Passmore v. Walther Memorial Hospital, 152 Ill. App. 3d 554 (1987). Before doing so, however, we noted that “where the language of a statute plainly reveals its intent, there is no need for this court to look further” and that in applying the plain language of a statute, it is not this court’s function to search for any subtle or not readily apparent intention of the legislature. Bruso, 178 Ill. 2d at 455. In the end, we rejected the defendant’s argument that the canon of construction favored its position, stating that when it enacted the 1987 amendment, the “legislature chose not to alter” the provision at issue and that there was “simply no indication that the 1987 amendment was intended to have any effect” on the meaning of the provision at issue. (Emphasis in original.) Bruso, 178 Ill. 2d at 458. Thus, our discussion of the canon in Bruso was dictum, because it was not necessary to the resolution of the case once we determined that the meaning of the provision was plain. We did not “apply[ ] this principle to prior judicial construction by [the] appellate court.” 232 Ill. 2d at 380, citing Bruso, 178 Ill. App. 3d at 457-59. Bruso, therefore, provides no authority for employing the canon in the present circumstances, where the legislature in 2003 was acting in response to a decision of this court and cannot reasonably be presumed to have considered an eight-year-old appellate court decision dealing with a different statutory term. Second, the plurality overlooks the importance of the decision of the appellate court in Lombardo v. Reliance Elevator Co., 315 Ill. App. 3d 111 (2000), which was decided five years after Blake and three years prior to the 2003 amendment. The plaintiff maintenance worker at a bank was injured when the lift he was riding from the basement level to the sidewalk level of the building suddenly fell. He sued the beneficiary of the trust that held title to the building (WS Partners), the company hired by the Village of Oak Park to conduct regular inspections of lifts in the village (EIS), the individual inspector (Jacobitz), and the company hired by the building owner to maintain the lift (Reliance). Reliance filed a third-party claim for contribution against the plaintiffs employer, who was the tenant of the building at the time of the accident. Jacobitz, EIS, and the employer reached settlements with the plaintiff. Lombardo, 315 Ill. App. 3d at 114. The case proceeded to trial against the two non-settling plaintiffs, WS and Reliance. The jury assessed total damages of $940,000 and attributed fault as follows: 50% to WS, 25% to the employer, 5% to EIS, 20% to the plaintiff, and none to Reliance. Following reductions for the amounts of the settlements, the trial court entered judgment against WS for $604,178.87. Lombardo, 315 Ill. App. 3d at 118. Both WS and the plaintiff appealed. The appellate court reversed the judgment and remanded for a new trial based on WS’s argument that the jury was exposed to a highly prejudicial document not admitted into evidence. Lombardo, 315 Ill. App. 3d at 122. Because the issue would arise again on remand, the appellate court addressed the plaintiffs argument, citing Blake, that the settling defendants should not have been listed on the verdict form under section 2 — 1117. Lombardo, 315 Ill. App. 3d at 124. The appellate court reached a conclusion somewhat different than Blake. The Lombardo court concluded that the settling defendants were properly listed on the verdict form because the “inclusion of nonparties and settling defendants on the verdict form helps protect the plaintiffs right to an appropriate attribution of his own fault, as well as protecting the defendants’ interests in their right to contribution.” Lombardo, 315 Ill. App. 3d at 125. Further, “[e]ven though the court should include the [employer] and other settling defendants on the verdict form, it should consider the fault of only those parties specified in section 2 — 1117 for purposes of determining joint liability.” Lombardo, 315 Ill. App. 3d at 125. So, if the 2003 amendment evinces the legislature’s intent to acquiesce in the prior judicial construction of the statute, on what basis does the plurality presume acquiescence with the 1995 decision in Blake rather than the 2000 decision in Lombardo? Third, the plurality cites the appellate court’s decision in Yoder v. Ferguson, 381 Ill. App. 3d 353 (2008), as support for employing this canon. According to the plurality, the Yoder court “accept[ed] [the] argument, based on Bruso, that [the] legislature’s failure to alter [the] relevant language of section 2 — 1117 in 2003 created the presumption that [the] legislature agreed with [the] 1995 interpretation of statute in Blake.” 232 Ill. 2d at 380, citing Yoder, 381 Ill. App. 3d at 377-78. Reliance on Yoder is mere bootstrapping. Yoder invoked the acquiescence canon, citing Bruso, as authority for following Blake. Yet this court did not apply the canon in Bruso and, as noted above, Bruso provides no authority for applying the canon in these circumstances, where the legislature was clearly acting in response to this court’s recent decision in Unzicker rather than acquiescing to the appellate court’s eight-year-old decision in Blake. Yoder, therefore, offers no authority for applying the acquiescence canon in this situation. Fourth, the application of this canon of construction reveals the importance of making a careful determination of the threshold question of ambiguity. If the statutory language is truly ambiguous, then the acquiescence canon has a certain logic, especially if the judicial interpretation that is deemed to have been acquiesced to is a decision of the highest court in the jurisdiction. If, however, the statutory language is not ambiguous, the application of this and other canons of construction may obscure, rather than reveal, the intent of the enacting legislature. See K. Llewellyn, Remarks on the Theory of Appellate Decision and the Rules or Canons About How Statutes Are to Be Construed, 3 Vand. L. Rev. 395, 401 (1950) (opining that for every canon that supports a particular reading of a statute, there is a counter-canon that would support the opposite reading). In my opinion, we are most vulnerable to a legitimate accusation of “legislating from the bench” when we find ambiguity where there is none. Yet even if I were to agree with the plurality that the phrase is ambiguous, I would have to take exception to reliance on the statements of Senator Cullerton as “additional support” for its conclusion. 232 Ill. 2d at 382. The senator’s “informative” comments do not correspond to any recognized tool of statutory interpretation. While we do employ legislative history as a tool of statutory construction when necessary, we must look to the committee reports, floor debates, and other legislative materials surrounding the original enactment for guidance as to the intent of the enacting legislature. A member of a subsequent legislature who favors amending the existing statute is not an appropriate source of information as to the intent of the enacting legislature. I strongly object to the suggestion to the circuit and appellate courts that they should look to the content of floor debates in the current legislative session to determine the meaning of statutory language that has been on the books for decades. In addition, the senator’s comments are not a matter of which this court may take judicial notice. Illinois Department of Healthcare & Family Services v. Warner, 227 Ill. 2d 223, 240 (2008), quoting People v. Davis, 65 Ill. 2d 157, 161 (1976), quoting E. Cleary, McCormick on Evidence §330, at 763 (2d ed. 1972) (“[Mjatters susceptible of judicial notice include facts ‘capable of immediate and accurate demonstration by resort to easily accessible sources of indisputable accuracy’ ”). Finally, the plurality mentions Senate Bill 1296, which was sponsored by Senator Cullerton and would have codified the result reached by the Blake court, but fails to mention House Bill 1894, which was filed two weeks later and would have entirely abrogated the doctrine of joint and several liability. Both of these bills remain pending in the House Rules Committee. I have no opinion on the merits of these two proposed pieces of legislation or on the likelihood that either will become law. I am convinced, however, that current legislative proceedings have no relevance to our interpretation of existing statutory law. CONCLUSION Allocating fault among the plaintiff and all defendants sued by the plaintiff is not only required by the plain language of section 2 — 1117, it is entirely consistent with the legislative goal of protecting minimally responsible tortfeasors from excessive liability. Unzicker, 203 Ill. 2d at 78. The result reached by the plurality is inimical to these goals for at least three reasons. First, if fault is allocated among a plaintiff and all of the defendants sued, the plaintiff may be more likely to be made whole because his own degree of fault may be reduced. For example, in the present case, the jury found United to be 65% responsible for the fatal accident and Ready to be 35% comparatively negligent. If fault were to be apportioned among Ready and all three of the defendants sued, it is entirely possible that the jury’s allocation of some degree of fault to BMW and Midwest would reduce the degree of fault attributed to Ready. For example, if United were found to be 30% at fault, the other two defendants to be 45% at fault, and Ready 25% comparatively negligent, plaintiff would receive $9.56 million in damages instead of $8,137 million. Only if consideration of the fault of BMW and Midwest were to result in United’s liability being set at less than 25% would this plaintiff not be made whole, because section 2 — 1117 would limit United’s liability to its actual share. 735 ILCS 5/2 — 1117 (West 1998). Either or both of these results — a lesser share of liability for United or a lesser share of comparative liability for Ready — would be entirely consistent with the intent of the legislature. Second, the plurality’s reading invites future plaintiffs to reject reasonable settlement offers from minimally responsible defendants with “deep pockets” in an effort to keep such defendants in the case until judgment. Under the plurality’s reading of section 2 — 1117, such a minimally responsible defendant will not be allowed to present evidence of other defendants’ shares of fault or to have the jury apportion fault among all of the parties “who might have been responsible for the plaintiff’s injuries.” Unzicker, 203 Ill. 2d at 79. A defendant who is a mere 1% at fault for an injury will be liable for the entire amount of the judgment, less the amount of the settlements with more culpable defendants. Although such a result would fully compensate the injured plaintiff, it would do so by imposing excessive liability on a minimally responsible defendant. Such a result is not consistent with the public policy of this state as expressed by the legislature. Third, under the plurality’s holding, a defendant’s share of liability will be determined only if that defendant has not reached a good-faith settlement with the plaintiff at the time judgment is entered. 232 Ill. 2d at 385. Such a rule is unworkable in practice because it is not uncommon for one of several defendants to reach a settlement with the plaintiff during trial, or even while the jury is deliberating. Under the plurality’s rule, if there are three defendants in the case when the trial commences, but one settles during trial, after evidence of that defendant’s fault has been introduced, must the trial start over? What if another defendant settles during jury deliberations, after the jury has been instructed on the allocation of fault? Must a mistrial be declared? In sum, the plain language employed in section 2 — 1117 reflects the balance struck by the legislature between the potentially competing goals of full compensation to injured plaintiffs and fair imposition of liability upon defendants. In negligence and product liability actions involving personal injury or death or physical damage to property, a defendant will be jointly and severally liable only if his fault is determined to be 25% or more of the total fault. When attributing total fault, the trier of fact is to consider the fault of “the plaintiff, the defendants sued by the plaintiff, and any third party defendants who could have been sued by the plaintiff.” 735 ILCS 5/2 — 1117 (West 1994). I would hold that the phrase “defendants sued by the plaintiff” in section 2 — 1117 unambiguously refers to all three defendants sued by plaintiff and I would, therefore, affirm the judgment of the appellate court. JUSTICE KARMEIER joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 9740385 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:34:14.263055+00 ===

Dethmers, J.
This is habeas corpus and ancillary certiorari to inquire into the cause of plaintiff’s detention in the Lapeer State home and training school. He was committed there, while a minor, as a feeble-minded person, by order of the probate court, pursuant to the provisions of PA 1923, No 151, §§ 10, 11, as amended by PA 1947, No 106 (CL 1948, §§ 330.20, *486330.21 [Stat Ann 1947 Cnm Snpp §§ 14.810,14.811]). Plaintiff claims the proceedings in that court defective. They must be in strict conformity with statutory requirements. In re Myrtle Davis, 277 Mich 88; Freedman v. Freedman, 303 Mich 647; In re Payette, 315 Mich 700. The necessity for strict-compliance with the statute was in nowise diminished by the fact that the proceedings were brought while plaintiff stood committed to the State hospital at Ionia as an insane person under the provisions of CL 1948, § 767.27 (Stat Ann 1949 Cum Supp § 28.967) in a certain criminal cause then pending and thereafter nolle prossed, nor by the fact that said proceedings were brought solely for the purpose of transferring plaintiff from the one institution to the other.
Plaintiff complains first of the insufficiency of the petition for his admission to Lapeer. Section 11 of the statute provides in part that such petition shall ■“contain a statement giving the facts and not the conclusions upon which the allegation of such mental disease is based.” The petition in the case at bar represented that the facts upon which the allegation of feeble-mindedness was based were as follows: “Simple, childish, immature, cannot read or write, I.Q. of 41, behavior typical of an imbecile.” The averment of inability to read or write and of an I.Q. of 41 does not afford a sufficient factual basis for the conclusion of feeble-mindedness, as such facts may not necessarily be inconsistent with the existence of an untrained but, nevertheless, sound mind. The remainder of the statement consists of conclusions and opinions without the facts upon which they are based.. Such petition, fatally defective, could not servé to confer jurisdiction on the probate court and ■ its subsequent order was, therefore, a nullity. In re O’Neil, 239 Mich 450; In re Joseph Nowack, 274 Mich 544.
*487Complaint is also made of the certificates of the 2 physicians for failure to state the. grounds upon which their opinions of feehle-üiindedness were' based. We think this objection also well taken. Under section 10 of the statute, as then in effect, such certificates were required to “contain the facts and circumstances upon which the opinion of .the physician is based.” This requirement is jurisdictional. Freedman v. Freedman, supra. In the instant case one of the certificates represented those facts and circumstances to have been as follows:
“Evidently has only the intelligence of a very low-grade imbecile, with no power of judgment or reasoning. He cannot name the days of the week, nor months of the year. Cannot add 2 and 3, though he' has learned to count. He could not be held responsible for his acts, since he has no conception of right, and wrong.”
The other represented them as follows:
“This young man is 20,years of age and has a mental I.Q. of 40. He cannot read or write. He was-, arrested for gross indecency and committed to prison and then transferred to the Ionia State hospital. This man is definitely feeble-minded and should be transferred to the Lapeer State home and training-school.”
So much of the above as constitutes statements of facts and circumstances suffers from .the same infirmity hereinbefore noted concerning the like statements contained in the petition. The remainder, as in the case of the petition, amounts to nothing more than statements of the opinions and’ conclusions of the physicians. It should be said here that the requirements of the statute that the specified statements-of the petition and certificates shall set forth -facts,, not mere conclusions, are mandatory not only when made by ordinary laymen but as well when made by *488physicians, despite the fact that the latter may well qualify as expert witnesses for the giving of opinion, evidence for certain purposes. Such opinions do not satisfy the statutory requirements in this connec-' tion. It is the prohate judge, not the physicians, who must make the determination of feeble-mindedness; it must be predicated upon a showing of facts, not merely upon the opinions of others, whether laymen or physicians.
Plaintiff also urges that the probate judge erred in failing to appoint a guardian ad litem for him in the, proceedings. "When, as here, personal service of the notice of hearing is had upon the person alleged to be feeble-minded, the statute permits but does not require such appointment.  Plaintiff contends that even though such appointment be not mandatory but permissive only, the failure to make it amounted, under the facts of this case, to an abuse of discretion. The consideration of this claim involves the review of the probate judge’s determination of those very facts and requires our decision of a question of judicial discretion, which is not the office of habeas corpus. See In re McKinney, 326 Mich 190.
The law then in effect did not require a stenographic record to be taken of the testimony and proceedings before the probate court. We are not in accord with plaintiff’s position that failure to take it rendered the order of the probate court a nullity. The probate judge has filed a return, certifying to the substance of the testimony adduced and the proceedings had before him, which proved sufficient in those respects for a determination of the issues in this case. In passing, it may be said that on each of those issues the excellent brief of the solicitor general was of inestimable value and assistance to the Court.
*489An order may enter discharging plaintiff without prejudice to such further proceedings ás may he deemed necessary..
Carr, Btjshnell, and Sharpe, JJ., concurred with 'Dethmers, J. Reid, C. J., concurred in the result.

=== CASE 2223392 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:00.608938+00 ===

50 N.W.2d 605 (1951)
WATSON
v.
CHARLTON.
No. 47990.
Supreme Court of Iowa.
December 13, 1951.
*606 Ray R. Reed, of Waterloo, for petitioner.
Robert L. Larson, Atty. Gen., Robert Buckmaster and Harris, Van Metre & Buckmaster, all of Waterloo, for respondent.
THOMPSON, Justice.
For determination here is a certiorari proceeding in which the petitioner seeks to test the legality of the acts of the respondent, as judge of the district court of Iowa in and for Black Hawk county, in adjudging her guilty of contempt of court and sentencing her to confinement in the Women's Reformatory at Rockwell City for a period of six months. The propositions relied upon for reversal are that the respondent acted illegally, imposed excessive sentence, and exceeded the jurisdiction of the court. In determining whether any or all of these should be sustained, a statement of the facts is essential.
The respondent was the presiding judge at the trial of the case of State of Iowa v. Beckwith. The defendant therein was accused of the crime of murder; the case was of importance, and had attracted much attention because of the brutal nature of the acts charged as constituting the offense, and because it had been tried once previously, with the judgment of guilty and imposition of the death penalty having been reversed by this court. 46 N.W.2d 20. All of this resulted in wide publicity and brought about a situation in which it was difficult to obtain qualified jurors. The trial commenced on May 14, 1951, and the panel of jurors regularly called was soon exhausted, making it necessary to call talesmen. The petitioner was one of the latter group. She was notified sometime after 10:20 a. m. on May 16th that her name had been drawn, and was required to report at 2 p. m. on the same date. She appeared accordingly, accompanied by her five year old son.
The petitioner at the time was 38 years old, and was a housewife living in Waterloo *607 with her husband and two small sons, one eight and the other five. Her husband was employed regularly, and there were no other members of the household. She had no one with whom to leave the children during her absence. The older boy was apparently in school during the day, but the younger attended kindergarten in the morning only. Petitioner testified that she had no one available or upon whom she could call to care for the children if she were away. After her appearance in the court room on May 16th, she was examined on voir dire sometime during the afternoon. At this time she told the prosecuting attorney that she hadn't had a "baby sitter" for nine months; that when she had had one, it was in the evening; that they "just weren't available in the day-time." Counsel then remarked: "Maybe the court will help you find one." She replied: "All right." It is only fair to the respondent to say that upon oral argument in this court, it was claimed that this statement was made facetiously, and was so understood by petitioner. We are unable to determine this from the printed record. It should also be said that petitioner did not request an excuse from jury service.
Upon examination by defense counsel, petitioner again, in answer to the usual question as to whether there was anything not specifically inquired into which might show that she "could not and should not sit as a juror in this case," referred to her family situation. She said: "The only thing is the family. Who will feed the family and take care of the family? My family?" She was not challenged for cause, and shortly after eleven a. m. on the next day, May 17th, was selected as one of the twelve jurors to try the case.
Thereupon, the clerk of the court directed the jurors to stand and be sworn. The petitioner then said: "I cannot take the oath." Upon being advised that she might affirm, she said: "I won't do either. I don't want to do either." Further: "What do I do with my children? They are coming home at 11:30. They are going to roam around there. I don't have anybody to take care of them. And you talk about juvenile delinquency I take care of my children."
Prior to the direction to the chosen jurors to take the oath, there had been no announcement that they would be segregated during the trial. At that time, however, they were so advised by the court. Upon Mrs. Watson's refusal to be sworn, the respondent took her into his chambers, advised her of her duty to serve, told her that if she persisted in her attitude it would be necessary for him to put her in jail for contempt, and, about 12 M., told her that she might go home, returning at 2:30 p. m. He advised her to take the matter up with her husband and to see an attorney during the recess, and to make necessary arrangements for the care of her children. She went home, prepared lunch for her family, was advised by her husband to serve, called an attorney who was unable to see her, but did tell her, via the telephone, that she would probably be compelled to serve, found no one to stay with the children, and returned to the court room at 2:30 p. m. as directed.
At this time, the jury being again ordered to stand and take the oath, petitioner at once said: "First of all I have to have someone to take care of my children before I can take the oath. I have no one to take care of them." Respondent then said: "Is the court to understand, Mrs. Watson, that you refuse to take the oath?"; to which petitioner replied: "I'll have to. I don't know what to do with them. I'm sorry sir." Here respondent ordered petitioner to take the witness chair, where the voir dire oath was administered to her. After eliciting her name, and the fact that she had appeared for examination as a prospective juror, respondent asked: "Without ever having made any application for excuse from jury service?" Petitioner answered: "I didn't know that you could do that. I had never had any dealings with any legal matters." She then admitted her refusal to be sworn, and that the court had advised her, at noon, to consult an attorney. Respondent then sentenced her, in these terms: "Defendant before the Court for contempt in that she refused to take an oath as juror in the case of State of Iowa versus Edward James Beckwith, in which she had been duly selected as a juror. Defendant examined in open Court. Defendant found guilty of *608 contempt and sentenced to be confined in the Women's Reformatory at Rockwell City, Iowa, for the period of six months. Mittimus to issue forthwith."
At this point, William E. Watson, petitioner's husband, appeared, was sworn, and said that he had "tried to talk her into serving;" but he also said that he couldn't take care of the two children, but that he "would go out of his way to hire somebody." Respondent replied that she had "never brought up this matter in regard to the children until after she had been selected and until after she had been directed to assume her place in the jury box and to assume her duties as such." Here petitioner spoke up, saying that she had told of the children upon her examination, that she had said she had no one to care for them; that she had had insufficient time to find anyone, that her husband had to make the family living, but perhaps he could go home and stay with the children, and she would serve if the sentence were "taken back." To this, respondent's only reply was: "Your exception has been noted, and bond on appeal fixed in the sum of $1,000.00."
Within perhaps fifteen to thirty minutes after this, an attorney representing Mrs. Watson appeared in the court room and asked that she be heard in an effort to purge herself of any contempt. The court agreed to hear her, stipulating that it was agreeable to counsel for both the state and defendant that he do so. Counsel were allowed to dictate into the record certain interrogatories which the court was to ask petitioner concerning her attitude of fairness to the opposing parties in case she should purge herself of contempt and be permitted to serve. Upon interrogation by her own counsel petitioner then said that it was not her intention to refuse to serve under any circumstances; that she was thinking of her children and would have been willing to serve if someone could be found to care for them; that her husband's employer had now agreed that Mr. Watson might stay home with the children, without loss of pay. She then said that she was ready to serve upon the jury, to take the oath, and that she could and would serve fairly. That the trouble she had had would in no manner influence or prejudice her for or against either party.
At this point the court, before ruling upon her effort to purge herself, called the attorneys for the state and defense into his chambers, and asked them if they were willing that Mrs. Watson should serve, if purged of contempt. Counsel for the state agreed to accept her, but defense counsel would not. In this connection, in an "Amendment to the Record" in affidavit form, filed herein by respondent, we are told that, when Attorney Ray R. Reed, for petitioner, told respondent that arrangements had been made to care for the children and that she was willing to serve, and desired an opportunity to purge herself of contempt, that he, respondent, advised Mr. Reed "the situation created by Mrs. Watson's refusal to take the oath was beyond the exclusive control and power of the court to correct, as she could not, in fairness to the other eleven jurors, be permitted to purge herself unless she could and did sit on the jury." Respondent says that he then suggested to petitioner's counsel that he confer with the attorneys in the principal case, to determine the possibility of Mrs. Watson sitting on the jury, which would "of necessity depend upon whether or not either or both of such parties made objection to her doing so."
Following the refusal of the defense to accept petitioner as a member of the trial jury, the court made an order finding that she had not purged herself of contempt, and affirming the prior order of commitment, except for that part of it fixing bond, which respondent found that he had no power to make. Petitioner was taken to the Black Hawk county jail to be held until the convenience of the sheriff permitted him to transfer her to the Women's Reformatory; but after she had been there imprisoned about 26 hours a stay order from this court directed her release pending hearing upon her application for review by certiorari.
I. The petitioner's first, and perhaps most emphasized complaint concerns the failure of the respondent to give her an opportunity to explain her conduct in writing before judgment and sentence. Section 665.7, Code of 1950, I.C.A., has been in effect *609 under different numbers in different codes for many years. It is here set out: "Before punishment for contempt, unless the offender is already in the presence of the court, he must be served personally with a rule to show cause against the punishment, and a reasonable time given him therefor; or he may be brought before the court forthwith, or on a given day, by warrant, if necessary. In either case he may, at his option, make a written explanation of his conduct under oath, which must be filed and preserved." (Italics supplied.)
It is evident that in the case at bar the petitioner had no opportunity to exercise the right given her by the italicized portion of the foregoing statute. She was summarily found guilty of contempt and sentenced. Nor does respondent contend otherwise. His argument is that petitioner waived her right to explain in writing, or that her refusal was so flat and definite that she had nothing which could have been satisfactorily explained, and so any permission given her by the court to attempt to explain or justify would have been a useless gesture. An examination of the authorities bearing upon the question is called for here. The statute above quoted has been considered by this court in six different cases. The first of these was State v. Duffy, 15 Iowa 425. Here the defendant asked, and was refused, permission to file a written statement before judgment. He was adjudged guilty of contempt. The next day he filed his written explanation of his conduct. Upon appeal, we said: "There is no authority for refusing to receive the explanation, where it is proposed to make it, and the party should have a reasonable time to prepare the same. In this case it seems a short time was asked; that the request was refused, and the commitment at once made. This was certainly erroneous." However, the written statement filed after judgment of contempt set up only one ground of excuse or defense, and it was held that as a matter of law it was insufficient, so that, even if filed before the adjudication it would have availed nothing. The finding of contempt was affirmed.
Russell v. French, 67 Iowa 102, 105, 106, 24 N.W. 741, 743, is next in chronological order. It is probably the leading case in Iowa upon the point involved. The petitioner there was an attorney who was adjudged guilty of contempt because of the alleged use of insulting language to the court. The judgment was set aside by the supreme court. After pointing out that the common law rule did not give an alleged offender the right to explain his conduct except with the permission of the court, and that it was the evident purpose of the statute to change the rule for the benefit of the accused contemnor, the opinion says: "The court adjudged the defendant and inflicted punishment, so to speak, in the same breath. There was no time when he could have exercised the right given him by statute. The right is not a barren one, but is of a substantial character, and a person cannot be deprived of it by an expeditious mode of inflicting punishment. We cannot but think that when a court deems that a contempt of its authority has been committed, the attention of the accused should be called thereto, and a reasonable time fixed within which he may make the written explanation contemplated by the statute."
In Hardin v. Silvari, 114 Iowa 157, 159, 86 N.W. 223, 224, the petitioner had been found guilty of insolent and contemptuous conduct toward the court, and adjudged guilty of contempt without being given an opportunity to file his explanation in writing. The short opinion of this court held that "in unmistakable language he (petitioner) advised the court that he was ready for punishment if the judge was disposed to inflict it. This clearly amounted to a waiver of the right to be heard in explanation or excuse of his conduct, * * *."
The Hardin case, supra, was followed by State ex rel. Arthaud v. District Court, 124 Iowa 187, 99 N.W. 712, 713. Here again the relator was an attorney who had been adjudged guilty of a contempt committed in the presence of the court. The judgment was annulled upon review in this court. Justice Weaver, for the court, said: "It is quite clearly the intent of the statute to allow the party the right to file such explanation before the assessment of punishment, * * *. To assess punishment first, and allow explanation afterward, would be *610 an entire reversal of the ordinary course of judicial proceedings."
Coyle v. Sawyer, 198 Iowa 1022, 1027, 200 N.W. 721, 723, holds that the right to make a written statement before judgment may be waived. Here again the contemnor was a lawyer, and this court said: "The conduct of the petitioner and the language used unmistakably indicate that he would not comply, and that he was ready to be punished for contempt, if his act was so considered by the trial judge. This in itself constituted a waiver of his right to be heard in further explanation or excuse of his conduct."
Finally we come to Harding v. McCullough, 236 Iowa 556, 562, 19 N.W.2d 613, 617. Since the opportunity to make written explanation had been given and exercised, the point was not directly involved; but we said: "We have held that one charged with even a direct contempt where the court acts upon personal knowledge must be accorded the opportunity to make such explanation. State ex rel. Arthaud v. District Court, 124 Iowa 187, 189, 99 N.W. 712; Russell v. French, [supra] 67 Iowa 102, 105, 24 N.W. 741. Plaintiff was given reasonable opportunity to make written explanation of his conduct and filed such a writing."
The general principle which evolves from a study of the statute and the cases interpreting and applying it is clear. The right to make a written explanation or excuse is expressly granted, and no conviction should be had until reasonable opportunity has been given to the alleged contemnor to exercise it. The common law was to the contrary; and it is the manifest intent of the statute, which has existed in Iowa in substantially its present form almost since the formation of the state, to change the rule in order to avoid the harsh results formerly attendant upon summary proceedings in these matters. Code section 665.7, I.C.A., under its various numbers, has been consistently interpreted by this court in the past to give the accused a real and substantial right. It is true that in two cases Hardin v. Silvari and Coyle v. Sawyer both supra, in each of which the petitioner was a lawyer, we said that the contemnors had so clearly expressed their ultimate refusal to obey the court or to show proper respect for it, and had so definitely invited punishment, that they must be held to have waived their rights to make written showings.
But we think that in the case at bar the situation is ruled by what we have said in Russell v. French, State ex rel. Arthaud v. District Court, and Harding v. McCullough, all supra. The petitioner here was a housewife and mother, with no experience in legal matters. If she was in error in placing her need to care for her two small children above her duty as a citizen to serve upon the jury when she had been legally selected, it was an error which many mothers would make. If we concede that she should have obeyed the order of the court, it must also be conceded that circumstances made it most difficult for her to do so. It is not for us to say whether she could, if given the opportunity, have made a satisfactory excuse, explanation, or justification of her refusal to take the oath. She might have shown, as the fact was, that she had little opportunity to ask for an excuse from jury duty, since she was drawn as a talesman at 10:20 a. m. and directed to report at 2 p. m.; and that she had no knowledge of her right to ask such excuse, or time to learn thereof. She might have corrected the erroneous impression of the respondent that she had not mentioned her difficult family situation until directed to take the oath, by pointing out the record of her voir dire examination by each counsel in which she told them of her problem. Or she might have set forth other reasons, excuses, or explanations which would have removed the stigma of contempt. It was her right to attempt to do so; and we cannot say that her conduct was such that she can be held to have waived it. This right was denied her by the respondent, who summarily tried, convicted and sentenced her within the space of a few minutes; as we said in Russell v. French, supra, "in the same breath." We held, in the latter case, that when a court deems that a contempt has been committed, the attention of the accused should be called thereto and a reasonable time fixed within which he may make the written statement *611 permitted by the statute. This rule should be most scrupulously applied when, as here, the suspected contemnor is without counsel, is inexperienced in legal affairs, and quite evidently has no knowledge of his rights. The respondent acted illegally in failing to give her the opportunity to file a written statement.
In so holding, we are not without understanding of the dilemma in which the petitioner's refusal to take the oath had placed the respondent. He was charged with the duty of presiding at a difficult and important trial, in which the defendant was accused of murder, and whose life was therefore at stake. Many decisions must be made daily, and made correctly. Under the situation existing in the case then being tried, finding a sufficient number of qualified jurors was a serious, although not unsolvable, problem. When a jury had apparently been selected, respondent was faced with an unexpected difficulty in the refusal of the petitioner to take the oath. Trial judges are often hurried, harried and harassed. But this does not affect the rights of the parties before them. It is an occupational hazard.
II. Were the illegality pointed out in Division I the only one appearing in the record, the question might arise as to whether we should not remand the case to the trial court for further proceedings; that is, whether we should not content ourselves with setting aside the judgment and returning the cause with directions to permit petitioner to file her written statement, after which the district court would determine the problem of the alleged contempt. Under some circumstances, in certiorari, we are required to "prescribe the manner in which either party may proceed further". R.C.P. 316, 58 I.C.A.Rules of Civil Procedure. It is the rule that certiorari proceedings may be remanded where the inferior tribunal has not proceeded according to law and the mistake may be corrected upon a further hearing. 14 C.J.S., Certiorari, § 181, pp. 325-326.
But we think there is another illegality which requires that our determination herein should be final. It is apparent on the face of the record, and it would make remand or any further proceedings in the trial court a useless gesture. There is no doubt that the record would be at least as strong for petitioner upon a further hearing. It is our duty to avoid prolonged and profitless litigation whenever possible. Nehring v. Smith, Iowa, 49 N.W.2d 831.
While the matter is not stressed in argument by petitioner, under her assignment of error that respondent acted illegally, and for the reasons set out in the immediately preceding paragraph, we think it proper to comment upon this feature of the case. After petitioner had been adjudged guilty of contempt and sentenced, her attorney appeared and asked that she be permitted to attempt to purge herself. Respondent granted her this right. She thereupon, under oath, explained her situation somewhat more fully, said that her husband's employer had agreed that he might stay at home to care for the small boys, and that she was then willing to take the oath and serve upon the jury. But respondent took the attitude, as shown by his amendment to return filed herein, that he could not purge Mrs. Watson of contempt unless she could serve upon the jury; that it would not be fair to the other jurors. He accordingly referred the matter to the contesting attorneys for the state and defendant, to determine whether they were each willing to accept her as a member of the trial jury. The defendant being unwilling so to do, the respondent refused to hold that petitioner had purged herself.
It is apparent that in effect the respondent abdicated his own right and duty to determine the question of purging, and delegated it to the attorneys in the principal case then on trial. We suggest that it was the willingness of the petitioner to serve, rather than the willingness of counsel to accept her, which should have been made the chief factor in the respondent's decision. He acted illegally in permitting his determination to rest upon the attitude of the attorneys.
It is said that a contemnor will generally be allowed to purge the contempt by performing the act required or by undoing *612 or reversing the acts constituting the contempt. 17 C.J.S., Contempt, § 106, p. 147. Likewise, if the alleged contemnor has done all in his power to obey the court's order he will usually be entitled to discharge, even if he is, through no present fault of his own, unable to comply. 17 C. J.S., Contempt, § 108, b, p. 148.
We have held that we will review the evidence upon certiorari questioning the legality of a judgment of contempt. The cause is not triable de novo, but on the other hand, while much weight is given to the findings of fact by the trial court, we are not bound by them. The exact extent to which we may go in deciding questions of fact from the record is vaguely defined; it lies in a shadowland, a "twilight zone," whose boundaries do not admit of definite charting. Andreano v. Utterback, 202 Iowa 570, 210 N.W. 780; Schraeder v. Sears, 192 Iowa 604, 185 N.W. 110; McNiel v. Horan, 153 Iowa 630, 133 N.W. 1070; Roach v. Oliver, 215 Iowa 800, 244 N.W. 899. Each of these cases holds that we may review the facts upon which the judgment of contempt was founded; that they do not have the effect of the verdict of a jury. We have also said that "to warrant a conviction the guilt of the accused must be established by clear and satisfactory evidence." Burtch v. Zeuch, 200 Iowa 49, 52, 202 N.W. 542, 543, 39 A.L.R. 1349. Also: "Proceedings of this character are held in this state to be in their nature criminal, or quasi criminal, and a clear case of contempt must be shown by the evidence where it is required." Hobson v. District Court, 188 Iowa 1062, 1066, 177 N.W. 40, 42; Crosby v. Clock, 208 Iowa 472, 478, 225 N.W. 954.
It is true that we are dealing, in this division, with the attempt of the petitioner to purge herself of contempt after she had been adjudged guilty. But we see no reason why the same rule should not apply to our right to review the evidence, to determine whether the court acted illegally in refusing to hold that she had purged the contempt. In this case, we have pointed out that as a matter of fact she had not been legally adjudicated to be in contempt at the time of her effort to purge; and further, that the respondent in effect permitted the defendant's counsel to determine the effect of her attempt. It appears clearly, also, that so far as the respondent himself was concerned, he would have held that she had satisfactorily purged herself if she had been then accepted as a juror; else there was no point in submitting the matter to the attorneys. We agree with this interpretation of the facts: that is, that they show a sufficient purging. The respondent should have so held.
III. Petitioner also assigns error upon what is claimed to be an excessive sentence. Since we have held, in Division I, that she was not found guilty of contempt by legal processes, and in Division II, that if she had been so found, she sufficiently purged herself, there is no necessity for determining the question of the degree of punishment. In passing, however, we think it proper to say that we agree with petitioner's contention. The sentence givensix months in the Women's Reformatorywas the maximum imprisonment permitted by the statute. I.C.A. § 665.4. The punishment was far out of proportion to the offense which respondent thought Mrs. Watson had committed.
IV. It is urged upon behalf of respondent that, whatever the decision may be upon the merits of this particular case, we should not lose sight of the basic and most important responsibility of the citizen in discharging his duty of jury service. The attorney general of Iowa, appearing in oral argument for respondent, stressed this feature of the case. It goes without saying that in our determination of this cause we have no thought of encouraging or glorifying attempts to avoid jury service. No higher responsibility rests upon the citizen than that of taking his place on the jury panel, when called, without evasion or complaint. The law recognizes that some situations may arise in which an undue burden would be placed upon the prospective juror if compelled to serve, and so provides for excuses for proper cause. But justified complaint has been heard for some time past that many persons seek excuse from their clear duty for reasons connected only *613 with their convenience, or distaste for service. It occasionally, perhaps usually, happens that the citizen is put to considerable inconvenience or loss of income if he serves. But these are not reasons for seeking to evade his responsibility as a citizen of the republic.
Only the most compelling circumstances will direct the good citizen to ask an excuse when summoned to the jury panel; and the court should grant such a request, when made, only upon the best of grounds. Any other attitude on the part either of the juror or the court destroys the effectiveness of the jury system. The jury panel should represent a true cross-section of the community instead of being composed solely of those who are serving merely because they have nothing better to do. Basically, jury service is a test of character and citizenship. If at all possible, the good citizen will not only serve willingly when called, but will use his best efforts, intelligence and integrity in deciding the cases which are placed before him. Any lesser degree of understanding and performance makes a mockery of the long-established Anglo-Saxon jury system, and must eventually lead to a search for a better method of deciding legal controversies. It can function properly only with the fullest cooperation of all citizens; it must not be emasculated by selfish indifference.
For the reasons set out in Divisions I and II, the writ of certiorari is sustained, the judgment finding petitioner guilty of contempt is annulled, and she is discharged.
Writ sustained and petitioner discharged.
OLIVER, C. J., and BLISS, WENNERSTRUM, MULRONEY, MANTZ, GARFIELD, and HAYS, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9740399 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:34:37.987266+00 ===

JUSTICE LYTTON delivered the opinion of the court: Plaintiff, Richard Martis, filed a class action complaint against defendant, Grinnell Mutual Reinsurance Company, alleging conspiracy, unjust enrichment, violation of the Illinois Consumer Fraud and Deceptive Business Practices Act (Consumer Fraud Act) (815 ILCS 505/1 et seq. (West 2006)) and breach of contract. The trial court dismissed all but plaintiffs breach of contract claim. The trial court then granted plaintiffs motion to certify a class. On appeal, defendant argues that (1) plaintiff does not have a valid breach of contract claim, and (2) the trial court abused its discretion by certifying a class. We hold that plaintiff cannot state a claim for breach of contract against defendant and, thus, reverse and remand. Plaintiff is a chiropractor. In February 2006, he began treating an employee of Water Management Corp. of Illinois who was injured while working. Water Management had a workers’ compensation insurance policy from defendant Grinnell Mutual Reinsurance Company. That policy listed Water Management Corp. of Illinois, employer, as the insured. The policy states: “We [Grinnell] will pay promptly when due the benefits required by you [employer] by the workers compensation law.” Another provision of the policy states: “We [Grinnell] are directly and primarily liable to any person entitled to benefits payable by this insurance. Those persons may enforce our duties; so may an agency authorized by law. Enforcement may be against us or against you [employer] and us.” After plaintiff provided medical treatment to the Water Management employee, plaintiff submitted bills to defendant for payment. Plaintiffs bills were reviewed by a third-party medical invoice review firm, which applied preferred provider organization (PPO) discounts to plaintiffs bills even though plaintiff did not have a PPO agreement with defendant. Defendant paid plaintiff the discounted amounts. Plaintiff filed a seven-count complaint against defendant, seeking to represent a class of Illinois health care providers who submitted bills to defendant under workers’ compensation insurance and had bills reduced because of a PPO discount even though the providers did not have a PPO contract with defendant. Count I alleged civil conspiracy. Count II alleged unjust enrichment. Count III alleged violation of the Illinois Consumer Fraud Act. Count IV alleged breach of contract. Count V sought injunctive relief, and count VI sought declaratory relief. Count VII sought an accounting and a constructive trust. Defendant filed a motion to dismiss plaintiffs complaint. The trial court granted the motion in part and denied it in part, finding that counts I and II failed to state a cause of action. The court then ruled on plaintiffs motion to certify a class action. The trial court concluded that plaintiff, as a class representative, could not prevail on count III, his consumer fraud count, but could potentially prevail on count IV his breach of contract claim, as a third-party beneficiary of the workers’ compensation policy.1 As to count IV the court certified the following class: “All licensed Illinois healthcare providers who: (a) submitted claims for medical expenses pursuant to a Grinnell workers’ compensation policy; (b) received or were tendered payment between October 20, 1996 and October 20, 2006 in which Grinnell took a PPO discount; and (c) did not have a PPO contract with Grinnell.” Defendant filed a petition for leave to appeal pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 306(a)(8) (210 Ill. 2d R. 306(a)(8)), which we granted. ANALYSIS In order to certify a class action, the trial court must find that certain factors, set forth in section 2 — 801 of the Code of Civil Procedure, have been met. See 735 ILCS 5/2 — 801 (West 2006); Avery v. State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co., 216 Ill. 2d 100, 125, 835 N.E.2d 801, 819 (2005). However, before deciding if the necessary requisites for a class action have been met, the trial court must find that the plaintiff has asserted a valid cause of action. See Saldana v. American Mutual Corp., 97 Ill. App. 3d 334, 338, 422 N.E.2d 860, 863 (1981). “Unless the plaintiff has a cause of action against the defendant, any attempted class action fails.” Saldana, 97 Ill. App. 3d at 338, 422 N.E.2d at 863. I Defendant argues that the trial court erred in certifying plaintiffs class action based on his breach of contract claim because plaintiff is not an intended third-party beneficiary of the workers’ compensation policy.  The construction, interpretation, or legal effect of a contract is a matter to be determined by the court as a question of law. Avery, 216 Ill. 2d at 129, 835 N.E.2d at 821. Our review is de novo. Avery, 216 Ill. 2d at 129, 835 N.E.2d at 821. An individual not a party to a contract may only enforce the contract’s rights when the contract’s original parties intentionally entered into the contract for the direct benefit of the individual. Swavely v. Freeway Ford Truck Sales, Inc., 298 Ill. App. 3d 969, 973, 700 N.E.2d 181, 185 (1998). There is a strong presumption that the parties to a contract intend that the contract’s provisions apply only to them, and not to third parties. Barney v. Unity Paving, Inc., 266 Ill. App. 3d 13, 19, 639 N.E.2d 592, 596 (1994). That the contracting parties know, expect, or even intend that others will benefit from their agreement is not enough to overcome the presumption that the contract was intended for the direct benefit of the parties. Barney, 266 Ill. App. 3d at 19, 639 N.E.2d at 596. Whether someone is a third-party beneficiary depends on the intent of the contracting parties, as evidenced by the contract language. See F.H. Paschen/S.N. Nielsen, Inc. v. Burnham Station, L.L.C., 372 Ill. App. 3d 89, 96, 865 N.E.2d 228, 235 (2007). It must appear from the language of the contract that the contract was made for the direct, not merely incidental, benefit of the third person. Gallagher Corp. v. Russ, 309 Ill. App. 3d 192, 200, 721 N.E.2d 605, 612 (1999). Such an intention must be shown by an express provision in the contract identifying the third-party beneficiary by name or by description of a class to which the third party belongs. See Holmes v. Federal Insurance Co., 353 Ill. App. 3d 1062, 1066, 820 N.E.2d 526, 530 (2004). If a contract makes no mention of the plaintiff or the class to which he belongs, he is not a third-party beneficiary of the contract. See 155 Harbor Drive Condominium Ass’n v. Harbor Point Inc., 209 Ill. App. 3d 631, 647, 568 N.E.2d 365, 375 (1991); Swaw v. Ortell, 137 Ill. App. 3d 60, 70, 484 N.E.2d 780, 787 (1984). The plaintiff bears the burden of showing that the parties to the contract intended to confer a direct benefit on him. See F.H. Paschen, 372 Ill. App. 3d at 96, 865 N.E.2d at 235. The issue we must decide in this case, whether a medical provider is a third-party beneficiary of a workers’ compensation policy, is one of first impression in this state.2 Thus, we look to decisions of other states for guidance. In Jou v. National Interstate Insurance Co. of Hawaii, 114 Haw. 122, 157 P.3d 561 (App. 2007), the Hawaii Court of Appeals examined whether a physician who provided medical services to an injured employee was an intended third-party beneficiary of the employer’s workers’ compensation insurance contract. The court held that “a physician is [merely] an incidental beneficiary rather than an intended third-party beneficiary of the employer’s workers’ compensation insurance.” Jou, 114 Haw. at 134, 157 P.3d at 573. The court explained: “In providing workers’ compensation insurance coverage, the insurer promises the employer that the insurer will pay benefits owed by the employer to injured employees. This promise incidentally benefits the physician to the extent that the physician provides treatment for which the employer is required to pay.” Jou, 114 Haw. at 134, 157 P.3d at 573. Thus, the physician was precluded from bringing a bad-faith claim against the workers’ compensation carrier. Jou, 114 Haw. at 134, 157 P.3d at 573. Similarly, in McFadden v. Liberty Mutual Insurance Co., 803 F. Supp. 1178 (N.D. Miss. 1992), a federal district court held that a treating physician could not bring a bad-faith claim against a workers’ compensation insurance carrier because the physician was not an intended beneficiary of the workers’ compensation policy. The court stated that the workers’ compensation act contemplates a three-party agreement among the employer, the employee and the compensation insurance carrier. McFadden, 803 F. Supp. at 1183. The employer and workers’ compensation insurance carrier were the parties to the contract, and the employee was the intended beneficiary of the contract. McFadden, 803 F. Supp. at 1183. The treating physician was not an intended beneficiary but was merely an incidental third-party beneficiary under the insurance contract. McFadden, 803 F. Supp. at 1183. Thus, the physician did not have standing to sue under it. McFadden, 803 F. Supp. at 1185-86. See also CNA Insurance Co. v. Scheffey, 828 S.W.2d 785, 791 (Tex. App. 1992) (“The Workers’ Compensation Act contemplates a three party agreement entered into by the employer, the employee and the compensation carrier”); Furno v. Citizens Insurance Co. of America, 590 N.E.2d 1137, 1141 (Ind. App. 1992) (“it would be unreasonable to find that the physician treating the claimant was a third-party beneficiary of the [workers’ compensation] policy”). In motor vehicle cases, the majority of courts do not allow medical providers’ third-party claims. Nearly every state court to address the issue has held that medical providers are incidental beneficiaries of automobile insurance policies and, thus, have no standing to enforce the policies. See Neurodiagnostics, Inc. v. Kentucky Farm Bureau Mutual Insurance Co., 250 S.W.3d 321 (Ky. 2008); Jou v. Dai-Tokyo Royal State Insurance Co., 116 Haw. 159, 172 P.3d 471 (2007); Elsner v. Farmers Insurance Group, Inc., 364 Ark. 393, 220 S.W.3d 633 (2005); Parkway Insurance Co. v. New Jersey Neck & Back, 330 N.J. Super. 172, 748 A.2d 1221 (1998); Parrish Chiropractic Centers, P.C. v. Progressive Casualty Insurance Co., 874 P.2d 1049 (Colo. 1994); Kelly Health Care, Inc. v. Prudential Insurance Co. of America, Inc., 226 Va. 376, 309 S.E.2d 305 (1983); Ludmer v. Erie Insurance Exchange, 295 Pa. Super. 404, 441 A.2d 1295 (1982). But see Orion Insurance Co. v. Magnetic Imaging Systems I, 696 So. 2d 475 (Fla. App. 1997). Federal courts have concluded that a medical provider can be an intended beneficiary of an insurance policy only if the policy provides for payment directly to the medical provider. See United States v. Automobile Club Insurance Co., 522 F.2d 1 (5th Cir. 1975); Vencor Hospitals v. Blue Cross Blue Shield of Rhode Island, 169 F.3d 677 (11th Cir. 1999). In Automobile Club, the Fifth Circuit found that the federal government, which provided medical care to an insured, was an intended third-party beneficiary of an automobile insurance policy because the policy required the insurer to “pay *** any person or organization rendering the [medical] services.” Automobile Club, 522 F.2d at 2-3. In a health insurance case, the Eleventh Circuit ruled that Vencor Hospital was a third-party beneficiary of a health insurance policy because the policy provided that benefits could be paid directly to the hospital. See Vencor, 169 F.3d at 680. The court explained: “By providing for payment directly to the hospital, the contracting parties showed a clear intent to provide a direct benefit to Vencor, *** and thus Vencor has standing to bring this suit.” Vencor, 169 F.3d at 680.  The above-cited cases teach us that medical providers are generally not third-party beneficiaries of insurance policies, particularly workers’ compensation policies. The only exceptions to this rule are when (1) the policy expressly identifies medical providers as third-party beneficiaries (Holmes, 353 Ill. App. 3d at 1066, 820 N.E.2d at 530; 155 Harbor Drive Condominium Ass’n, 209 Ill. App. 3d at 647, 568 N.E.2d at 375), or (2) the policy provides for payment directly to medical providers {Automobile Club, 522 F.2d at 2-3; Vencor, 169 F.3d at 680). Thus, we must look to the language of the policy to determine if plaintiff is an intended beneficiary. Unlike the policies in Automobile Club and Vencor, the policy in this case does not require defendant to directly pay medical providers, such as plaintiff, who treat an employee for work-related injuries. The policy does not mention medical providers. Nevertheless, plaintiff contends that the following provision gives him standing to sue under the policy: “We [Grinnell] are directly and primarily liable to any person entitled to benefits payable by this insurance. Those persons may enforce our duties ***.” An Illinois court considered whether similar language created third-party beneficiary rights in Federal Insurance Co. v. Turner Construction Co., 277 Ill. App. 3d 262, 660 N.E.2d 127 (1995). In that case, Midwest Stock Exchange sued subcontractors on a building project, alleging that their failure to complete work in a timely fashion caused damage to Midwest’s property. Midwest argued that it was an intended beneficiary of the construction contract because the contract contained an indemnification provision making defendants liable to “all persons” for damages arising from their work. Federal Insurance Co., 277 Ill. App. 3d at 269, 660 N.E.2d at 132. The court disagreed, stating: “[T]he indemnification provisions in the instant case does not identify any third parties. The contract language and attending circumstances do not indicate that the parties intended to benefit anyone but themselves. As such, Midwest has failed to identify any language in the subcontract which constitutes an express declaration to overcome the presumption that the parties contracted only for themselves.” Federal Insurance Co., 277 Ill. App. 3d at 269, 660 N.E.2d at 132. Thus, the appellate court affirmed the trial court’s ruling that Midwest was not a third-party beneficiary. Federal Insurance Co., 277 Ill. App. 3d at 269, 660 N.E.2d at 132.  Here, the provision relied upon by plaintiff, which makes defendant liable to “any person entitled to benefits payable by this insurance” does not identify any third parties. Moreover, plaintiff is not a “person entitled to benefits” pursuant to the Illinois Workers’ Compensation Act. See 820 ILCS 305/4(g) (West 2004) (only “the employee, his or her personal representative or beneficiary” is entitled to benefits under a workers’ compensation policy and have standing to sue an insurer to enforce such a policy). Plaintiff has failed to identify any provision in the policy that references himself or “medical providers,” the class to which he belongs. He has not sustained his burden of proving that he was a third-party beneficiary of the workers’ compensation policy. See 155 Harbor Drive, 209 Ill. App. 3d at 647, 568 N.E.2d at 375; Swaw, 137 Ill. App. 3d at 70, 484 N.E.2d at 787. Because plaintiff is not a third-party beneficiary of the workers’ compensation policy, he has no right to enforce it. See Swavely, 298 Ill. App. 3d at 973, 700 N.E.2d at 185. Thus, plaintiff’s breach of contract action must be dismissed. Since plaintiff’s breach of contract claim is the only cause of action upon which his class action was allowed, plaintiffs class action against defendant must also be dismissed. See Saldana, 97 Ill. App. 3d at 338, 422 N.E.2d at 863. II  Plaintiff argues that if we dismiss his breach of contract action, we should reconsider the trial court’s dismissal of his unjust enrichment claim. However, plaintiff did not file a cross-appeal of the trial court’s decision dismissing his unjust enrichment claim, as required by Supreme Court Rule 303(a)(3) (210 Ill. 2d R. 303(a)(3)). Appellees may not argue alleged errors unless they timely file a cross-appeal. Lagen v. Balcor Co., 274 Ill. App. 3d 11, 14, 653 N.E.2d 968, 970 (1995). In the absence of a cross-appeal, an appellee will not be permitted to challenge or ask the reviewing court to modify a portion of the trial court’s order. People ex rel. Wray v. Brassard, 226 Ill. App. 3d 1007, 1011, 589 N.E.2d 1012, 1015 (1992). When an appellee does not file a cross-appeal, the reviewing court is confined to the issues presented by the appellant. Brassard, 226 Ill. App. 3d at 1011, 589 N.E.2d at 1015. Because plaintiff did not file a cross-appeal, we may not address his argument that the trial court improperly dismissed his unjust enrichment claim. See Lagen, 274 Ill. App. 3d at 14. Nevertheless, if we were to address plaintiffs argument, we would find that the trial court properly dismissed plaintiffs unjust enrichment claim. The doctrine of unjust enrichment underlies a number of legal and equitable actions and remedies. HPI Health Care Services, Inc. v. Mt. Vernon Hospital, Inc., 131 Ill. 2d 145, 160, 545 N.E.2d 672, 678 (1989). Unjust enrichment is not a separate cause of action that, standing alone, will justify an action for recovery. Mulligan v. QVC, Inc., 382 Ill. App. 3d 620, 631, 888 N.E.2d 1190, 1200 (2008); Lewis v. Lead Industries Ass’n, 342 Ill. App. 3d 95, 105, 793 N.E.2d 869, 877 (2003). “ ‘Rather, it is a condition that may be brought about by unlawful or improper conduct as defined by law, such as fraud, duress or undue influence, and may be redressed by a cause of action based upon that improper conduct.’ ” Alliance Acceptance Co. v. Yale Insurance Agency, Inc., 271 Ill. App. 3d 483, 492, 648 N.E.2d 971, 977 (1995), quoting Charles Hester Enterprises, Inc. v. Illinois Founders Insurance Co., 137 Ill. App. 3d 84, 90-91, 484 N.E.2d 349, 354 (1985). When an underlying claim of fraud, duress or undue influence is deficient, a claim for unjust enrichment should also be dismissed. See Mulligan, 382 Ill. App. 3d at 631, 888 N.E.2d at 1200. For a cause of action based on a theory of unjust enrichment to exist, there must be an independent basis that establishes a duty on the part of the defendant to act and the defendant must have failed to abide by that duty. Lewis, 342 Ill. App. 3d at 105, 793 N.E.2d at 877. A plaintiff fails to state a cause of action for unjust enrichment absent an allegation of duty. See Lewis, 342 Ill. App. 3d at 105, 793 N.E.2d at 877. Plaintiff alleged that defendant violated the Illinois Consumer Fraud Act, but the trial court found that plaintiff could not prevail on that count. Because there was no valid underlying fraud claim, the trial court properly dismissed plaintiffs unjust enrichment claim. See Mulligan, 382 Ill. App. 3d at 631, 888 N.E.2d at 1200. Additionally, plaintiff failed to allege that defendant owed him a duty. Absent an allegation that defendant was under a duty to plaintiff, plaintiff failed to state a cause of action for unjust enrichment. See Lewis, 342 Ill. App. 3d at 105, 793 N.E.2d at 877. CONCLUSION The judgment of the circuit court of Tazewell County is reversed and remanded. Reversed and remanded. O’BRIEN, P.J., concurs.  The trial court did not rule on counts V through VII of plaintiff’s complaint.   We are aware of the decision issued by the Seventh Circuit, which contains the following statement: “Illinois law does not allow a provider of medical care to sue a workers’ compensation carrier.” Foster McGaw Hospital of Loyola University of Chicago v. Building Material Chauffeurs, Teamsters & Helpers Welfare Fund of Chicago, Local 786, 925 F.2d 1023, 1024 (7th Cir. 1991). However, the Seventh Circuit did not determine whether a medical provider was a third-party beneficiary to a workers’ compensation policy nor did the court expand or elaborate on the above statement or cite to any Illinois cases.

=== CASE 9740386 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:34:14.267029+00 ===

Boyles, J.
(dissenting). The facts are correctly stated in Justice Dethmers’ opinion. However, I •think that there were allegations of facts in the petition sufficient to give the probate court jurisdiction. ■The statute in effect at .the time the petition was filed* required that a petition for an order directing the admission of a person alleged to be insane, feeble-minded or epileptic .to a hospital, home or institution for the care of the insane, feeble-minded or epileptic shall “contain a statement giving the facts and not the conclusions upon which the allegation of such mental disease is based.” I think that there were allegations of facts stated in the petition, where it alleged that the respondent was “simple, childish, immature, cannot read or write, I.Q. of 41, behavior typical of an imbecile,” to comply with the statute.
Similarly, the statute† required the certificates of 2 physicians which “must show that it is their opinion that the person is actually insane, or feeble-minded, or epileptic, as the case may be, and shall contain the facts and circumstances upon ivhich the opinion of the physician is based.” The statute did not require that the physicians have personal knowledge of said facts and circumstances, or swear to the truth of them. I think there were facts and circumstances stated in the 2 physician^’ certificates (correctly quoted by Justice Dethmers) which satisfied the statutory requirement.
*490For tbe above reasons, I do not concur in issuing an order for the discharge of the patient.
North and Butzel, JJ., concurred with Boyles, J.
OL 1948, § 330.21 (Stat Ann 1947 Cum Supp § 14.811). The later amendment by PA 1949, No 313, does not apply.
CL 1948, § 330.20 (Stat Ann 1947 Cum Supp § 14.810). The later amendment by PA 1949, No 313, does not apply.

=== CASE 2223309 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:58.682654+00 ===

905 N.E.2d 536 (2009)
LAKE COUNTY PROPERTY TAX ASSESSMENT BOARD OF APPEALS, Petitioner,
v.
ST. GEORGE SERBIAN ORTHODOX CHURCH, Respondent.
No. 49T10-0712-TA-72.
Tax Court of Indiana.
May 7, 2009.
Mark A. Thiros, Attorney at Law, Merrillville, IN, Attorney for Petitioner.
David M. Austgen, Timothy R. Kuiper, Joseph C. Svetanoff, Austgen Kuiper & Associates, PC, Crown Point, IN, Attorneys for Respondent.
FISHER, J.
The Lake County Property Tax Assessment Board of Appeals (PTABOA) challenges the final determination of the Indiana Board of Tax Review (Indiana Board) which granted St. George Serbian Orthodox Church (St.George) a property tax exemption for the 2003 tax year (year at issue). On appeal, the PTABOA argues that the Indiana Board erred when it determined *537 that St. George prima facie demonstrated that its cultural center qualified for the religious purposes exemption as provided in Indiana Code § 6-1.1-10-16.
FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
St. George is an Indiana not-for-profit corporation; its stated purpose is "to build, sustain and promote ... [its] church, school and [] institutions beneficial to Orthodoxy, and to work towards promoting among [its] members love and unityto mutually aid one another in moral and spiritual development; to assist in the administration and maintenance of local church property for their benefit and religious life."[1] (Cert. Admin. R. at 197 (footnote added).) To that end, St. George owns and operates its "Church-School Congregation" (Parish) in Schererville, Indiana. St. George's Parish consists of its church, a priest's residence, a garage, a community hall, a cultural center, and the 73.2 acres of land upon which those improvements stand. The cultural center is the subject of this appeal.[2]
The cultural center, at 39,000 square feet, contains church administration offices, conference rooms, and a banquet facility complete with its own kitchen. St. George uses the cultural center for church events including, inter alia, choir practice, folklore practice, church meetings, and fish fries. The cultural center's banquet facility is also available to the public for rent.
On March 3, 2003, St. George filed an application with the PTABOA, seeking a religious purposes exemption on the cultural center for the year at issue. On August 15, 2006, the PTABOA denied St. George's application because it believed the cultural center's predominant use was as a commercial banquet hall. (See Cert. Admin. R. at 375-76.) On September 12, 2006, St. George filed a Petition for Review (Form 132) with the Indiana Board. On October 22, 2007, after conducting a hearing on the matter, the Indiana Board reversed the PTABOA and held that St. George's cultural center was entitled to the exemption for the year at issue.
On December 3, 2007, the PTABOA initiated this original tax appeal. The Court heard the parties' oral arguments on February 6, 2009. Additional facts will be supplied as necessary.
STANDARD OF REVIEW
This Court gives great deference to final determinations of the Indiana Board when it acts within the scope of its authority. Knox County Prop. Tax Assessment Bd. of Appeals v. Grandview Care, Inc., 826 N.E.2d 177, 180 (Ind. Tax Ct.2005). Consequently, the Court will reverse a final determination of the Indiana Board only if it is:
(1) arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with law;
(2) contrary to constitutional right, power, privilege, or immunity;
(3) in excess of statutory jurisdiction, authority, or limitations, or short of statutory jurisdiction, authority, or limitations;
(4) without observance of procedure required by law; or
*538 (5) unsupported by substantial or reliable evidence.
IND.CODE ANN. § 33-26-6-6(e)(1)-(5) (West 2009). The party seeking to overturn the Indiana Board's final determination bears the burden of demonstrating its invalidity. See Osolo Twp. Assessor v. Elkhart Maple Lane Assocs., 789 N.E.2d 109, 111 (Ind. Tax Ct.2003).
DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
In Indiana, all tangible property is subject to taxation. See IND.CODE ANN. § 6-1.1-2-1 (West 2009). Nevertheless, the Indiana Constitution provides that the legislature may exempt certain categories of property from taxation. See IND. CONST. art. X, § 1. Pursuant to this grant of authority, the legislature enacted Indiana Code § 6-1.1-10-16 which, during the year at issue, provided that "[a]ll or part of a building is exempt from property taxation if it is owned, occupied, and used ... for... religious ... purposes." IND.CODE ANN. § 6-1.1-10-16(a) (West 2003). This exemption also generally extended to the land on which the building was situated, as well as the personal property contained therein. See id. at (c), (e).
The taxpayer bears the burden of proving that it is entitled to the exemption it seeks. Indianapolis Osteopathic Hosp., Inc. v. Dep't of Local Gov't Fin., 818 N.E.2d 1009, 1014 (Ind. Tax Ct.2004) (citation omitted), review denied. In order to meet that burden, the taxpayer must present probative evidence at the Indiana Board hearing that not only demonstrates that it owns, occupies, and uses its property for an exempt purpose, but that the exempt purpose is the property's predominate use. See id. (citation omitted). See also IND.CODE ANN. § 6-1.1-10-36.3 (West 2003) (defining "predominate use" as more than 50% of a property's total use.)
In its final determination, the Indiana Board held that St. George met this burden. Indeed, the Indiana Board explained that during the administrative hearing, St. George not only presented evidence as to which church-affiliated organizations regularly used the cultural center, but it also provided a month-by-month listing of events that took place in the cultural center during tax years 2000, 2001, 2002, and 2003 ("calendar summaries"). (Cert. Admin. R. at 134-35.) (See also Cert. Admin. R. at 213-14, 229-46, 347-54.) The Indiana Board determined that these documents prima facie established that the cultural center was used 63% of the time for a religious purpose. (Cert. Admin. R. at 134-35.) The Indiana Board then explained that because the PTABOA failed to rebut this evidence during the administrative hearing, the cultural center was entitled to the exemption for the year at issue. (Cert. Admin. R. at 135-36.)
In its appeal to this Court, the PTABOA argues that the Indiana Board's determination is not supported by substantial or reliable evidence. (Pet'r Br. at 2.) Indeed, the PTABOA maintains that St. George's evidence was not only not detailed enough for the Indiana Board to determine whether the cultural center was predominantly used for religious purposes, but it was essentially the "wrong" evidence to make a prima facie case.[3] (See Pet'r Br. at 5-6 *539 (footnote added).) The PTABOA is incorrect.
Where the Indiana Board understands a taxpayer's evidence and assigns probative value to that evidence, this Court will not overturn the Indiana Board's final determination absent an abuse of discretion. See French Lick Twp. Tr. Assessor v. Kimball Int'l, Inc., 865 N.E.2d 732, 739 (Ind. Tax Ct.2007). To demonstrate an abuse of discretion, however, the PTABOA must do more than assert that St. George should have tried its case differently. Rather, the PTABOA must show this Court that there is probative evidence in the administrative record that affirmatively demonstrates that St. George did not predominately use its cultural center for religious purposes. The PTABOA has not met this burden, and therefore the Indiana Board's final determination must stand.[4]
CONCLUSION
For the above stated reasons, the Indiana Board's final determination in this matter is AFFIRMED.
NOTES
[1]  St. George has also been designated a 501(c)(3) organization by the Internal Revenue Service; as a result, its income is exempt from federal taxation. (See Cert. Admin. R. at 196.)
[2]  Apart from the cultural center, all of St. George's property was granted a religious purposes exemption for the year at issue. (See Pet'r Br. at 2.)
[3]  For instance, the PTABOA argues that St. George's calendar summaries were "absolutely silent as to the amount of space or time that any scheduled event occupied the [cultural c]enter." (Pet'r Br. at 5.) (See also Oral Argument Tr. at 4-6.) Furthermore, the PTABOA argues that instead of presenting the "calendar summaries," St. George should have offered into evidence the original calendars and rental contracts, as they would have been "more accurate." (Pet'r Br. at 5.) (See also Oral Argument Tr. at 7.)
[4]  The lesson of this case is this: assessing officials should defend their assessment decisions with their own evidence at the Indiana Board hearing, even if they think a taxpayer has failed to make a prima facie case. Thus, to the extent the PTABOA believed that St. George's original calendars and rental contracts were necessary for the Indiana Board to make an accurate final determination, the PTABOA was responsible for getting that information into the administrative record. The PTABOA could have accomplished this through a variety of discovery tools. Because the PTABOA failed to do so, the Court will not now reweigh St. George's initial case.

=== CASE 2223324 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:59.005892+00 ===

905 N.E.2d 1034 (2009)
JACOBSVILLE DEVELOPERS EAST, LLC, Appellant/Plaintiff,
v.
WARRICK COUNTY, Indiana by and through the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF WARRICK COUNTY, Indiana and the Warrick County Area Planning Commission, Appellees/Defendants.
No. 87A01-0809-CV-420.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
May 5, 2009.
*1036 James D. Johnson, Krista B. Lockyear, Rudolph, Fine, Porter & Johnson, LLP, Evansville, IN, Attorneys for Appellant.
Maurice E. Doll, Morrie Doll & Associates, LLC, Newburgh, IN, Attorney for Appellee Warrick County Area Planning Comm'n.
Shawn M. Sullivan, Terrell, Baugh, Salmon & Born, LLP, Evansville, IN, Attorney for Appellee Board of Comm'rs of Warrick County.
OPINION
CRONE, Judge.
Case Summary
Jacobsville Developers East, LLC ("JDE"), appeals the trial court's dismissal of its complaint for inverse condemnation against the Warrick County Board of Commissioners ("County") and the Warrick County Area Planning Commission ("APC"). We affirm.
Issue
The dispositive issue is whether the trial court erred in dismissing JDE's inverse condemnation action for lack of subject matter jurisdiction.
Facts and Procedural History[1]
JDE owns real property in Warrick County. The County's Thoroughfare Plan *1037 had designated that, as a part of the County's long-range transportation plan, a public road be placed across a portion of JDE's property. In 2007, JDE filed an application with the APC seeking approval of a two-lot subdivision. Lot 2 of the subdivision consists of approximately four acres, upon which JDE planned to construct a physicians' center.[2] JDE's proposed plat designated a fifty-foot strip of land adjoining its northern boundary of Lot 2 as a building setback. The County Subdivision Control Ordinance ("Ordinance"), however, required that the fifty-foot strip be designated and dedicated as a right-of-way:
The Street and Highway design shall conform both in width and alignment to any Comprehensive Plan or Thoroughfare Plan of Streets and Highways approved and/or adopted by any participating city or town or the County as indicated in the Thoroughfare Plan being a part of the Long Range Transportation Plan. Right-of-way for any such street or highway indicated on said Thoroughfare Plan shall be dedicated.
Appellant's App. at 64 (quoting Subdivision Control Ordinance, Article IV § 2(1)) (emphasis added).
On July 11, 2007, following a public hearing, the APC voted to deny JDE's application on the grounds that the proposed plat failed to comply with the Ordinance's dedication provision. On August 10, 2007, JDE filed a certiorari action in Warrick Circuit Court, alleging that the required dedication was not reasonably or rationally related to the impact of the proposed subdivision and that the denial of the proposed plat constituted an unconstitutional exaction without just compensation. On September 5, 2007, JDE's attorney sent a letter to the County's attorney stating that the County must be named as a party to the certiorari action because it, not the APC, possessed the power to amend the Ordinance. Appellant's App. at 155. However, the County was never made a party to this action. On October 9, 2007, JDE and the APC agreed to dismiss the certiorari action.
On October 10, 2007, JDE filed a second application with the APC for approval of a plat that included a dedicated right-of-way along the northern boundary of Lot 2. During the hearing on the second application, JDE objected to including the dedicated right-of-way, but indicated that it needed to proceed with the plat approval process to avoid increased economic losses. On that date, the APC voted unanimously to approve JDE's second application.
On December 20, 2007, JDE filed a three-count inverse condemnation action against the County and the APC, alleging that the Ordinance's dedication requirement constituted a "taking" without just compensation.[3] On February 18, 2008, the County and the APC filed a motion to dismiss for lack of subject matter jurisdiction pursuant to Indiana Trial Rule 12(B)(1) and for failure to state a claim upon which relief may be granted pursuant to Trial Rule 12(B)(6). On July 21, 2008, the trial court heard arguments on the motion. On August 14, 2008, the trial court granted the motion and dismissed all three counts. The trial court did not enter specific findings. This appeal ensued. Additional facts will be provided as necessary.
*1038 Discussion and Decision
JDE asserts that the trial court erred in dismissing its inverse condemnation action for lack of subject matter jurisdiction. Our standard of review of a trial court's ruling on a Trial Rule 12(B)(1) motion "is a function of what occurred in the trial court and is dependent upon: (i) whether the trial court resolved disputed facts; and (ii) if the trial court resolved disputed facts, whether it conducted an evidentiary hearing or ruled on a paper record." H.D. v. BHC Meadows Hosp., 884 N.E.2d 849, 852 (Ind.Ct.App.2008), trans. denied. If the facts before the trial court are undisputed, then the question of subject matter jurisdiction is purely one of law, and we give no deference to the trial court's conclusion. Id. If a factual dispute exists and the trial court conducts an evidentiary hearing, we defer to its findings and judgment. Id. at 852-53. If the trial court does not conduct a hearing and make such findings, then we are in as good a position as the trial court to determine the issue of subject matter jurisdiction and therefore will not defer to its judgment. Id. One basis upon which a trial court may lack subject matter jurisdiction is a party's failure to exhaust its administrative remedies. Austin Lakes Joint Venture v. Avon Utils., Inc., 648 N.E.2d 641, 644 (Ind.1995).
Here, the trial court dismissed JDE's complaint for lack of subject matter jurisdiction based on JDE's failure to exhaust its administrative remedies. Because the facts are undisputed and the trial court did not enter findings, we review the subject matter jurisdiction issue de novo. JDE asserts that it exhausted the administrative remedies available to it by obtaining a final decision within the agency and, as such, was not required to seek and complete the certiorari review process before initiating its inverse condemnation action.
In Indiana, if a party is required by the Administrative Orders and Procedures Act ("AOPA") to exhaust its administrative remedies before an agency before obtaining judicial review of the agency decision, courts are completely ousted of subject matter jurisdiction to hear the case at all. Id. at 644; see also Ind.Code § 4-21.5-5-4 ("A person may file a petition for judicial review under this chapter only after exhausting all administrative remedies within the authorized agencies"). "Even when neither statute nor agency rule specifically mandates exhaustion as a prerequisite to judicial review, the general rule is that a party is not entitled to judicial relief for an alleged or threatened injury until the prescribed administrative remedy has been exhausted." Austin Lakes, 648 N.E.2d at 644. The purpose of the exhaustion rule is to defer judicial review until controversies have been channeled through the complete administrative process, providing the parties and courts the benefit of the agency's expertise and providing the agency an opportunity to correct its own errors and to compile a record adequate for any subsequent judicial review. Id.
Here, JDE initially filed an application for plat approval with the APC pursuant to Indiana Code Section 36-7-4-703. Next, when the APC denied the application, JDE sought certiorari review. See Ind.Code § 36-7-4-708 (stating APC's primary disapproval of plat is a final decision reviewable by writ of certiorari pursuant to Ind.Code § 36-7-4-1016). Then, JDE sent a letter to the County stating its desire to add the County as a party because only the County possessed authority to modify the Ordinance. Finally, before the certiorari process was complete, JDE dismissed the action and went back to the APC with a new plat application.
*1039 JDE claims that it was not required to fully pursue the certiorari process because the certiorari court lacked authority to provide the kind of remedy JDE sought.[4]See LHT Capital, LLC v. Indiana Horse Racing Comm'n, 895 N.E.2d 124, 126 (Ind.Ct.App.2008) (stating futility exception to exhaustion requirement requires showing that exercise of obtaining review would be impossible or fruitless or that the agency would have been powerless to effect a remedy), trans. denied (2009). Indiana Code Section 36-7-4-1009 places limits upon a certiorari court's remedies. Pursuant to the statute, the certiorari court may consider supplementary evidence and pass on the legality of the area plan commission's action by affirming, modifying, or reversing the action. As such, the certiorari court lacks authority to impose a compensatory remedy. See Daniels v. Area Plan Comm'n of Allen County, 306 F.3d 445, 455 (7th Cir. 2002) (stating that an inverse condemnation claimant need only exhaust administrative procedures for obtaining compensation before bringing their takings claim). In Daniels, the court addressed the issue of whether certiorari review is a required component of exhaustion of remedies in takings cases. The court concluded that if the remedy sought was monetary, and the certiorari court could not provide that remedy, then exhaustion would not require a decision from the certiorari court. 306 F.3d at 455; see also Williamson County Reg'l Planning Comm'n v. Hamilton Bank, 473 U.S. 172, 194, 105 S.Ct. 3108, 87 L.Ed.2d 126 (1985) (stating that litigants bringing takings claim need only exhaust administrative procedures for obtaining compensation).
Thus, if JDE was seeking monetary compensation from the certiorari court, then its voluntary dismissal would not result in a failure to exhaust, as the certiorari court would have been without authority to provide a monetary remedy anyway. Conversely, if JDE was seeking a declaratory judgment reversing the APC's decision, then the certiorari court could have provided a remedy. As such, the dismissal would amount to a failure to exhaust available administrative remedies. We conclude that, at the time it sought certiorari review, JDE was seeking to avoid the dedication provision, not to be compensated for an actual taking.
JDE's substantive claim was essentially one for excessive exaction.[5] Exactions are "land-use decisions conditioning approval of development on the dedication of property to public use." City of Monterey v. Del Monte Dunes at Monterey, Ltd., 526 U.S. 687, 702, 119 S.Ct. 1624, 143 L.Ed.2d 882 (1999). In analyzing whether an exaction passes constitutional muster, the United States Supreme Court has applied a two-part test: (1) an "essential nexus" must exist between a legitimate government interest and the exaction; and (2) the exaction must be "roughly proportional" *1040 to the impact of the proposed development. Dolan v. City of Tigard, 512 U.S. 374, 387-88, 391, 114 S.Ct. 2309, 129 L.Ed.2d 304 (1994).[6]
Here, JDE sought approval of its first application, in which it proposed to subdivide and develop its property with a fifty-foot setback, not a fifty-foot dedicated right-of-way. Thus, it sought to avoid the dedication requirement altogether. At this point, JDE filed its petition for certiorari review. At oral argument, JDE admitted that an actual, compensable taking did not occur until its second application was approved. Therefore, at the time it sought certiorari review, JDE cannot properly be said to have been seeking compensation. As such, certiorari review would not have been futile. Had JDE fully pursued its certiorari action, the certiorari court could have taken evidence to supplement the record submitted and entered a declaratory judgment affirming, reversing, or modifying the APC's decision. Moreover, two of the available statutory remedies reversal or modification of the APC's decisioncould have obviated the filing of an inverse condemnation action in the first place.[7]
In sum, when the APC denied JDE's first plat application on the basis that the fifty-foot strip was not dedicated, JDE had a potential Dolan claim for excessive exaction and not a claim for an actual, uncompensated taking.[8] However, JDE never went before the certiorari court to attempt to establish an excessive exaction.[9] Instead, it sought approval of a second application in which it included the *1041 very dedication it now claims to constitute an unconstitutional taking. "[T]he exhaustion requirement generally refers to administrative and judicial procedures by which an injured party may seek review of an adverse decision and obtain a remedy if the decision is found to be unlawful or otherwise inappropriate." Williamson County, 473 U.S. at 193, 105 S.Ct. 3108 (emphases added). Therefore, in failing to fully pursue the judicial review remedy available in the certiorari court, JDE failed to exhaust its available administrative remedies.[10] As a result, the trial court lacked subject matter jurisdiction to hear JDE's substantive exaction claim. Accordingly, we affirm the trial court's dismissal of JDE's complaint.
Affirmed.
DARDEN, J., and BROWN, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  We heard oral argument on April 16, 2009, and we commend the parties for their presentations.
[2]  The disposition regarding Lot 1 is not at issue in this case.
[3]  Count I was a statutory takings claim, Count II was a federal takings claim, and Count III claimed an unconstitutional exaction.
[4]  The County and the APC argue that JDE's claim constitutes a "facial" challenge to the Ordinance and that, as such, JDE is required to demonstrate that no set of circumstances exists under which the Ordinance would be valid. Baldwin v. Reagan, 715 N.E.2d 332, 337 (Ind.1999). However, both on appeal and throughout the proceedings, JDE has consistently characterized its claim as an application challenge; thus, we address it as such.
[5]  To the extent JDE bases its claims on any actual taking via the APC's approval of its second application, we note that, by filing this application which included the dedication, JDE effectively sought permission to develop the land with the dedication and thereby agreed to the Ordinance's dedication requirement. Having received APC approval of its second application, it would not have been necessary to seek certiorari review of a favorable decision.
[6]  In Dolan, the government's act of conditioning the landowner's permit to expand her retail store and parking lot upon her dedication of a portion of her property as a greenway for a bicycle/pedestrian path was deemed an unconstitutional exaction. In Dolan, the court determined that unless the essential nexus and rough proportionality tests were met, the government could not, without paying the compensation otherwise required to effect such a taking, demand dedication of property as a condition for granting a development permit. Lingle v. Chevron U.S.A. Inc., 544 U.S. 528, 546-47, 125 S.Ct. 2074, 161 L.Ed.2d 876 (2005) (citations omitted). In addressing whether an essential nexus exists between an exaction and a legitimate government interest, the Dolan court stated that "[d]edications for streets, sidewalks, and other public ways are generally reasonable exactions to avoid excessive congestion from a proposed property use." 512 U.S. at 395, 114 S.Ct. 2309. After establishing essential nexus, the municipality must determine whether the exaction is roughly proportional to the impact of the proposed development. Id. at 391, 114 S.Ct. 2309. In determining rough proportionality, the municipality "must make some sort of individualized determination that the required dedication is related both in nature and extent to the impact of the proposed development." Id.
[7]  JDE also claims that its letter requesting modification of the Thoroughfare Plan constituted a final attempt to gain an administrative resolution. Appellant's App. at 155; see also id. at 93 (Thoroughfare Plan, § 5, stating that person desiring modification of Ordinance must file request with Warrick County Commissioners). We note, however, that JDE did not even wait for a response from the County before it voluntarily dismissed the certiorari action and submitted a second application for plat approval, which included the fifty-foot dedication as required by the Ordinance.
[8]  Cf. Goss v. City of Little Rock, 90 F.3d 306, 310 (8th Cir.1996) (reversing trial court's dismissal of landowner's exaction case where record was too sparse to permit inquiry into whether city's action in conditioning rezoning on dedication of strip of property met essential nexus and rough proportionality tests).
[9]  As discussed supra, the United States Supreme Court's decision in Dolan indicates that JDE may have had a legitimate claim that the dedication requirement amounted to an excessive exaction. 512 U.S. at 395, 114 S.Ct. 2309. Curiously, however, instead of establishing this in the certiorari action, as the petitioner did in Dolan, JDE dismissed the action.
[10]  To the extent JDE argues that it filed the second application solely as a practical matter to avoid increased construction costs, we note that businesses are often compelled to make economically expedient decisions for which the law makes no provision.

=== CASE 2223328 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:59.056363+00 ===

331 Mich. 474 (1951)
50 N.W.2d 132
DE LONGPRE
v.
CARROLL.
Docket No. 26, Calendar No. 45,209.
Supreme Court of Michigan.
Decided December 3, 1951.
Irving H. Smith, for plaintiffs.
Linsey, Shivel, Phelps & Vander Wal, for defendant Nettie Carroll.
DETHMERS, J.
Defendant Nettie Carroll owns and operates kennels housing a large number of dogs at a location about a mile outside the city of Grand Rapids. There are several commercial establishments in the immediate vicinity, including a beer tavern, a garage, a drive-in restaurant, a bait sales place, a trailer camp, a resort pavilion and a trailer sales and camp supplies business, and also, within a radius of a quarter of a mile therefrom, about 20 homes. Some of the occupants keep chickens, horses or dogs on and about their premises. Plaintiffs reside in the neighborhood. They brought this suit to enjoin operation of the kennels, charging that they constitute a private nuisance by reason of noisome odors and noises emanating therefrom. From decree dismissing plaintiffs' bill of complaint, they appeal.
Testimony in behalf of plaintiffs strongly supported their claims of nuisance. That adduced in behalf of defendant discounted plaintiffs' claims and tended to show that defendant's business was well conducted, did not unreasonably interfere with others in the neighborhood in their use and enjoyment of their homes and places of business and was *476 not, under all the circumstances, a nuisance. After hearing all the testimony and inspecting the premises and observing the manner of conducting the business and the conditions there existing the trial judge concluded that plaintiffs' claims and testimony as to noises and smells were exaggerated, that defendant's recent installation of a gas incinerator for disposal of kennel refuse had remedied such condition relating to odors as may theretofore have existed, that the kennels were in excellent condition and very clean and that, as a matter of fact, the operation of the kennels did not constitute a nuisance.
Plaintiffs cite Ensign v. Walls, 323 Mich 49, and a number of other cases in support of their position. As we view it, however, the difficult question presented is one not so much of law as of fact. Did a nuisance exist as a matter of fact? The law applicable is not so difficult of ascertainment. No one is entitled, in every location and circumstance, to absolute quiet, or to air utterly uncontaminated by any odor whatsoever, in the use and enjoyment of his property; but when noises are unreasonable in degree, considering the neighborhood in which they occur and all the attending circumstances, or when stenches contaminate the atmosphere to such an extent as to substantially impair the comfort or enjoyment of adjacent premises, then an actionable nuisance may be said to exist; and in applying these tests the question presented is one of fact rather than law. See 39 Am Jur, Nuisances, §§ 47, 53, 59, and People v. Wabash R. Co., 197 Mich 404, and Waier v. Peerless Oil Co., 265 Mich 398. In affirming the trial court's finding of fact that a nuisance existed in the Ensign Case, this Court said:
"Plaintiffs' witnesses testified to conditions of such character as to clearly constitute a nuisance. On the other hand, defendant and her witnesses *477 claimed that the business was well conducted and was not so obnoxious in character as to interfere with plaintiffs or other residents in the neighborhood in the use and enjoyment of their homes. The trial judge inspected the premises of the defendant, and it appears from the record that his observations confirmed, in many respects at least, the proofs offered by plaintiffs with reference to the existing conditions. * * *
"As before stated, the testimony of the witnesses for the plaintiffs was not in accord with that given by the defendant and by others in her behalf. It was therefore for the trial court to weigh the conflicting testimony and to determine the actual facts. In so doing he was aided by his own observations of the premises and the manner in which the business was conducted. In Northwest Home Owners Ass'n v. City of Detroit, 298 Mich 622, 643, it was said:
"`We are appreciative of the fact that the trial court is in a much better position to pass upon the credibility of the witnesses than is the appellate court, by reason of the opportunity as well as the advantage of seeing and hearing the witnesses during their examination, direct and cross. The appellate court is limited to a perusal of the record. We should not, therefore, reverse or modify the decree entered herein unless we are persuaded that it is not in accordance with the just rights of the parties. Langdell v. Langdell, 285 Mich 268; Moore v. Moore, 231 Mich 209.'
"The principle stated in the language above quoted may well be applied in the case at bar. It is apparent from the record that the facts were gone into fully and carefully by the trial judge. The finding as to the facts was clearly supported by proofs and justified the conclusion that defendant's business constituted a nuisance as to the plaintiffs. * * *
"Looking to all the facts and circumstances involved, the question invariably presented is whether *478 the discretion of the court should be exercised in favor of the parties seeking relief."
Similarly, in the instant case, we conclude that the trial court's finding of facts, supported by competent evidence, ought not to be disturbed by us and, being unpersuaded that it is contrary to the just rights of the parties, that the decree ought not to be modified or reversed.
Decree affirmed. Costs to defendant Nettie Carroll.
REID, C.J., and BOYLES, NORTH, BUTZEL, CARR, BUSHNELL, and SHARPE, JJ., concurred.

=== CASE 2223329 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:59.087619+00 ===

905 N.E.2d 539 (2009)
ST. GEORGE SERBIAN ORTHODOX CHURCH, Petitioner,
v.
LAKE COUNTY PROPERTY TAX ASSESSMENT BOARD OF APPEALS, Respondent.
No. 45T10-0712-TA-79.
Tax Court of Indiana.
May 7, 2009.
*540 David M. Austgen, Timothy R. Kuiper, Joseph C. Svetanoff, Austgen Kuiper & Associates, PC, Crown Point, IN, Attorneys for Petitioner.
Gregory F. Zoeller, Attorney General of Indiana, Andrew W. Swain, Chief Counsel, Tax Section, Jessica E. Reagan, Deputy Attorney General, Indianapolis, IN, Attorneys for Respondent.
FISHER, J.
St. George Serbian Orthodox Church (St.George) challenges the final determination of the Indiana Board of Tax Review (Indiana Board) which denied it a property tax exemption for the 2001 and 2002 tax years (years at issue). The issue on appeal is whether St. George's cultural center is entitled to the religious purposes exemption for the years at issue.
RELEVANT FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
In 2000, St. George, an Indiana not-for-profit corporation, applied for, and received, a property tax exemption on the property it owned and operated in Schererville, Indiana. At that time, St. George's property consisted of its church, a priest's residence, a garage, a community hall, and the 73.2 acres of land upon which those improvements stood.
In 2001, St. George completed construction on a 39,000 square foot cultural center.[1] On March 3, 2003, St. George filed two applications with the Lake County Property Tax Assessment Board of Appeals (PTABOA) seeking a religious purposes exemption on the cultural center for each of the years at issue.[2] The PTABOA denied both applications because they were not timely filed pursuant to Indiana Code § 6-1.1-11-3.[3] St. George subsequently filed two Petitions for Review (Forms 132) with the Indiana Board.
The Indiana Board conducted a hearing on St. George's Forms 132 on July 25, 2007. During the hearing, St. George presented two arguments. First, it claimed that because its property had received a full exemption in 2000, it was not required to file another exemption application until 2002 pursuant to Indiana Code § 6-1.1-11-3.5(a). (See Cert. Admin. R. at 554-55.) In the alternative, St. George argued that its due process rights had been violated because it neither received notice of, or a tax bill with respect to, the increase in its assessment resulting from the newly-constructed cultural center for either of the years at issue as required by statute.[4],[5]*541 (See Cert. Admin. R. at 552-54 (footnotes added).) Consequently, St. George argued that the assessment increase was invalid and the assessment should therefore be returned to its 2000 status (i.e., 100% exempt). (See Cert. Admin. R. at 552-54.)
On October 22, 2007, the Indiana Board issued a final determination in which it upheld the PTABOA's denial. More specifically, the Indiana Board explained that the exemption St. George had in place for the 2000 tax year did not cover the newly-constructed building and St. George was therefore required to file exemption applications thereon by May 15th of the years at issue. (Cert. Admin. R. at 131-32 ¶¶ 27-28.) Moreover, the Indiana Board explained that St. George's tax bills constituted sufficient notice of the increase in its assessment and therefore St. George's due process rights had not been violated. (See Cert. Admin. R. at 132-33 ¶ 31.)
St. George filed an appeal with this Court on December 5, 2007. The Court heard the parties' oral arguments on February 6, 2009. Additional facts will be supplied as necessary.
ANALYSIS AND OPINION
Standard of Review
When this Court reviews an Indiana Board final determination, it is limited to determining whether it is:
(1) arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with law;
(2) contrary to constitutional right, power, privilege, or immunity;
(3) in excess of statutory jurisdiction, authority, or limitations, or short of statutory jurisdiction, authority, or limitations;
(4) without observance of procedure required by law; or
(5) unsupported by substantial or reliable evidence.
IND.CODE ANN. § 33-26-6-6(e)(1)-(5) (West 2009). The party seeking to overturn the Indiana Board's final determination bears the burden of demonstrating its invalidity. Osolo Twp. Assessor v. Elkhart Maple Lane Assocs., 789 N.E.2d 109, 111 (Ind. Tax Ct.2003).
Discussion
On appeal, St. George claims that the Indiana Board's determination that it received notice of the change in its assessment through its tax bills is not supported by the evidence. (See Pet'r Reply Br. at 1-2.) St. George explains, however, that the Court need not even address the issue given that pursuant to a recent, retroactive amendment to Indiana Code § 6-1.1-11-3, its exemption applications for the years at issue were in fact timely filed. (Pet'r Br. at 7-8.) St. George is correct.
In 2008, the legislature enacted a non-code statutory provision[6] which provided the following:
(a) The definitions in IC 6-1.1-1 apply to this SECTION.
(b) This SECTION applies only to an entity that meets all of the following conditions:
(1) The entity is:
(A) a nonprofit:
*542 (i) corporation; or
(ii) limited liability company;
that is organized for educational, literary, scientific, religious, or charitable purposes; or
(B) a local chapter of a nonprofit entity referred to in clause (A).
(2) For the assessment date in a calendar year after 2000:
(A) tangible property owned by the entity was, except for the entity's failure to timely file an application under IC 6-1.1-11 for property tax exemption, otherwise eligible for an exemption;
(B) the entity failed to timely file an application under IC 6-1.1-11 for property tax exemption for the tangible property for the assessment date; and
(C) the entity's tangible property was subject to taxation for the assessment date.
(3) The tangible property, or other property owned by the entity in the same county, was exempt from taxation in either:
(A) the calendar year before the year containing the assessment date described in subdivision (2); or
(B) the calendar year two (2) years before the year containing the assessment date described in subdivision (2).
(c) Notwithstanding any provision of IC 6-1.1-11 or any other law specifying the date by which an application for property tax exemption must be filed to claim an exemption for a particular assessment date, an entity described in subsection (b) may before January 1, 2008, file with the county assessor an application for property tax exemption for an assessment date described in subsection (b)(2).
(d) Notwithstanding any provision of IC 6-1.1-11 or any other law, an application for property tax exemption filed under subsection (c) is considered to be timely filed, and the county property tax assessment board of appeals shall grant an exemption claimed for the assessment date on the application upon the county property tax assessment board of appeals's determination that:
(1) the entity's application for property tax exemption satisfies all other applicable requirements; and
(2) the entity's tangible property was, except for the failure to timely file an application for property tax exemption, otherwise eligible for the claimed exemption.
* * * * * *
(f) This SECTION expires January 1, 2009.
2008 Ind. Acts 131, § 66 (eff.1-1-2001). This non-code section clearly evidences the legislature's intent to allow taxpayers until January 1, 2008 to file their exemption applications for the years at issue. Id. Because St. George's exemption applications were filed on March 3, 2003 for the years at issue, they were timely filed pursuant to Public Law 131-2008, § 66.[7],[8]
*543 CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, the Indiana Board's final determination in this case is REVERSED. The matter is REMANDED so that the Indiana Board may instruct the appropriate assessing officials to award St. George's cultural center the religious purposes exemption under Indiana Code § 6-1.1-10-16 for the years at issue.
NOTES
[1]  The cultural center contains church administration offices, conference rooms, and a banquet facility complete with kitchen.
[2]  Indiana Code § 6-1.1-10-16 provides that "[a]ll or part of a building is exempt from property taxation if it is owned, occupied, and used ... for ... religious ... purposes." IND. CODE ANN. § 6-1.1-10-16(a) (West 2009). This exemption also extends to the land on which the building is situated, as well as the personal property contained therein. See id. at (c), (e).
[3]  Indiana Code § 6-1.1-11-3 provided, in relevant part, that a taxpayer seeking a religious purposes exemption was required to file a certified application annually on or before May 15th. See IND.CODE ANN. § 6-1.1-11-3(a) (West 2001).
[4]  St. George argued that it was to either receive notice of the assessment increase pursuant to Indiana Code § 6-1.1-13-1, or through its tax bill pursuant to Indiana Code § 6-1.1-15-13. St. George maintained that it received neither. (See generally Cert. Admin. R. at 552-54.)
[5]  In other words, St. George argued that because it had "received an exemption [prior to 2001] equal to its assessed value and never paid real property taxes, [it] had no reason to inquire about or suspect that the assessed value had been changed." (Pet'r Br. at 3-4 (footnote omitted).)
[6]  "A `non-code' section is one which, though enacted with a piece of legislation, is not codified within the Indiana Code. Such `non-code' provisions ... are appropriately considered by a court when interpreting [] statute[s]." Sullivan v. Day, 661 N.E.2d 848, 851 n. 3 (Ind.Ct.App.1996), vacated in part on other grounds by 681 N.E.2d 713 (Ind.1997).
[7]  The PTABOA argues that because St. George did not raise the applicability of the non-code provision as an issue at the Indiana Board administrative hearing, the issue cannot be considered now on appeal. (Resp't Br. at 8 (citing Ind.Code Ann. § 33-26-6-3(b) (West 2009) (which states that this Court's review of Indiana Board decisions "is limited to only those issues raised before the [Indiana Board], or otherwise described by the [Indiana Board], in its final determination")).) The Court disagrees for two reasons.
First, the applicability of the non-code provision could not have been raised as an issue at the July 7, 2007 Indiana Board hearing, given it was not enacted until 2008. Second, and more importantly, in applying the law to this case now, the Court must not only consider and apply the terms of Indiana Code § 6-1.1-11-3, but its non-code provisions as well. See supra note 6.
[8]  Given that the Court has determined that St. George's exemption applications for the years at issue were timely filed, the PTABOA requests that the matter be remanded to the Indiana Board to decide whether the evidence demonstrates that the cultural center was being used for an exempt purpose during the years at issue. (See Resp't Br. at 8; Oral Argument Tr. at 14-15.) The Court declines the PTABOA's request.
In another case handed down today, this Court affirmed the portion of the same Indiana Board final determination that held that St. George's cultural center was entitled to the religious purposes exemption for the 2003 tax year. See Lake County Prop. Tax Assessment Bd. of Appeals v. St. George Serbian Orthodox Church, Case No. 49T10-0712-TA-72, slip op., 905 N.E.2d 536 (Ind. Tax Ct. May 7, 2009). The Court notes that in that portion of the final determination, the Indiana Board explained that not only did St. George present unrebutted evidence demonstrating that the cultural center was predominately used for religious purposes in 2003, but for the years at issue in this case as well. (See Cert. Admin. R. at 134-36.)

=== CASE 9740387 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:34:21.660186+00 ===

OPINION
SHARPNACK, Senior Judge.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
Defendant-Appellant Reynaldo Griffin appeals his conviction of possession of cocaine within 1,000 feet of school property, a Class B felony. We affirm.
ISSUE
Griffin raises one issue for our review, which we restate as: Whether the evidence is sufficient to support the enhancement of the felony.
FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
On June 24, 2006, at approximately 2:15 am., South Bend Police Officer Keith Walker was patrolling the area near Per-ley Elementary School when he observed Griffin guiding a moped down the middle of the street. Officer Walker, knowing that many thefts of mopeds had recently occurred, and observing that Griffin was pushing the moped, stopped Griffin to determine whether it had been stolen. At that point, Griffin had moved the moped to the curb immediately adjacent to school property. Officer Walker observed that the moped had significant amounts of tape on it and that a screwdriver was stuck in the ignition.
As Officer Walker continued his investigation, Griffin became frate. At one point, Officer Walker lifted the moped from where Griffin had placed it and observed some baggies on the ground directly underneath the moped. The baggies appeared to contain a white, rock-like substance that Officer Walker believed to be crack cocaine. Indeed, the substance was later identified as crack cocaine.
*523Griffin was arrested for possession of cocaine within 1,000 feet of school property. Griffin pled a defense pursuant to Ind.Code § 35-48-4-16 that he was "only briefly present near the school property and that no children were present." Griffin did not testify at trial, and no defense witness testified as to the defense. Officer Walker testified that he had watched Griffin for some time before stopping him..
Griffin was charged with possession of cocaine as a D felony and the enhanced B felony for possession of cocaine within 1,000 feet of a school. The jury found Griffin guilty of the enhanced offense, and Griffin now appeals.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
Griffin contends that the State failed to introduce sufficient evidence to sustain his conviction of the enhanced offense. When reviewing the sufficiency of evidence to support a conviction, an appellate court considers only the probative evidence and reasonable inferences supporting the verdict. Drane v. State, 867 N.E.2d 144, 146 (Ind.2007). Stated differently, the court looks only to the evidence favorable to the State and all reasonable inferences therefrom. Bennett v. State, 871 N.E.2d 316, 319 (Ind.Ct.App.2007), adopted by 878 N.E.2d 836 (Ind.2008). Courts of review must be eareful not to impinge on the fact finder's authority to assess witness credibility and to weigh the evidence. Drane, id. We will affirm the conviction unless " 'no reasonable fact finder could find the elements of the crime proven beyond a reasonable doubt.'" Id. (quoting Jenkins v. State, 726 N.E.2d 268, 270 (Ind.2000)).
In order to prove possession of cocaine as a Class D felony, the State must show that a person knowingly or intentionally possessed the drug. Ind.Code § 35-48-4-6(a). The offense is enhanced to a Class B felony if the person possesses cocaine in, on, or within 1000 feet of a public park. Ind.Code § 35-48-4-6(b)(2)(B)1 However, Ind.Code § 35-48-4-16(b) provides that it is a defense that (1) a person was briefly in, on, or within 1,000 feet of school property, and (2) no person under eighteen was in, on, or within 1,000 feet of school property.
Before we reach the sufficiency argument, we must address the parties' dispute over burden of proof. Griffin argues that Ind.Code § 35-48-4-16(b) contains mitigating factors that merely reduce, not exeuse, a defendant's culpability; therefore, the defendant has only the burden of placing the issue in question where the State's evidence has not done so. The State counters that the statute delineates an affirmative defense that must be proven by the defendant.
In Adkins v. State, 887 N.E.2d 934 (Ind. 2008), our supreme court analyzed Ind. Code § 35-47-4-3, a statute that reduces the Class D felony of pointing a firearm to a Class A misdemeanor upon the showing that the gun was unloaded. The court held that an unloaded firearm was a mitigating factor similar to sudden heat. We conclude that Adkins supports Griffin's argument.
In Adkins, the State charged the defendant with the Class D felony of pointing a firearm. Ind.Code § 35-47-4-3 provides, "A person who knowingly or intentionally points a firearm at another person commits a Class D felony. However, the offense is a Class A misdemeanor if the firearm was not loaded." At the conclu*524sion of the trial, the jury was instructed that a guilty verdict of the Class A misdemeanor pointing a firearm was possible if the defendant proved by a preponderance of the evidence that the firearm was not loaded. 887 N.E.2d at 9386. Adkins objected to the instruction, was overruled, and was subsequently found guilty of the Class D felony.
We affirmed the trial court but our supreme court took the case on transfer. The supreme court stated that "two respectable schools of thought have emerged in the opinions of the Court of Appeals": (1) "that the statute creates an affirmative defense with respect to which the defendant bears the burden of proof;" and (2) "that it is not an affirmative defense to demonstrate that the firearm is unloaded." Id. at 987. The court agreed with the second school of thought (expressed by Judge Crone in a separate opinion in Adkins ). The court held:
Judge Crone analogized the role that the unloaded firearm plays to that which "sudden heat" plays in prosecutions for murder. "Sudden heat" is not an affirmative defense in such a case (because it does not negate an element of the crime of murder) but a mitigating factor that reduces the defendant's culpability from murder to voluntary manslaughter. We agree with Judge Crone that the fact that a gun is unloaded is a mitigating factor that reduces a defendant's culpability from a felony to a misdemeanor, not an affirmative defense.
A defendant bears an initial burden by a preponderance of the evidence on any affirmative defense. But the defendant bears no burden of proof with respect to the mitigating factor of sudden heat, only the burden of placing the issue in question where the State's evidence has not done so. The State then assumes the burden of disproving the existence of sudden heat beyond a reasonable doubt. We hold the same rule applies with respect to Class A Misdemeanor Pointing a Firearm. That is, if a defendant charged with Class D Felony Pointing a Firearm seeks instead to be convicted of Class A Misdemeanor Pointing a Firearm, the defendant must place the fact of the gun having been unloaded at issue if the State's evidence has not done so. Onee at issue, the State must then prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the firearm was loaded.
Id. at 987-38. (Citations omitted).
Similarly, the statutory defense provided in Ind.Code § 35-48-4-16(b) does not excuse a defendant from culpability. It operates only to reduce the level of culpability when certain factors are present. Even if the factors are present, the defendant is still guilty of the base crime. Accordingly, we conclude that Ind.Code § 35-48-4-16(b) constitutes a mitigating factor that reduces culpability, and therefore the defendant does not have the burden of proof but "only the burden of place-ing the issue in question where the State's evidence has not done so." Adkins, 887 N.E.2d at 988. Once the defense is at issue, the State must rebut the defense by proving beyond a reasonable doubt either that the defendant was within 1000 feet of a public park more than "briefly" or that persons under the age of eighteen at least three years junior to the defendant were within 1000 feet of the school property.2
In the present case, the following cross-examination exchange between de*525fense counsel and Officer Walker put into evidence the defense pertaining to the length of Griffin's presence within 1000 feet of school property:
Q [Wlhen you saw Mr. Griffin here [near the school] he was pushing the moped down the street, is that correct?
A Down the center of Campeau [a street running alongside the school], yes.
Q He wasn't-and I think you said that you were watching him for five minutes or so?
A I said that to him. I was sitting at the end of the street watching him. I didn't time it.
Q During the time you did watch him he was moving down?
A Yes, his feet were-
Q Walking along?
A Yes.
(Tr. at 183).
The jury, which was instructed on the defense, determined that Officer Walker's approximate five-minute observation of Griffin's walk down Campeau Street was sufficient to show that he was not "briefly" within 1,000 feet of the school. As we stated above, we will not impinge on a jury's determination unless "no reasonable fact finder could find the elements of the crime proven beyond a reasonable doubt." Drane, 867 N.E.2d at 146. There is no ironclad rule as to what constitutes a "brief" presence, and we cannot say as a matter of law that the jury's determination was unreasonable under the circumstances of this case. Accordingly, the State's evidence was sufficient to rebut Griffin's defense.3
Affirmed.
MATHIAS, J., concurs.
FRIEDLANDER, J., concurring in part, dissenting in part.
. The enhancement also includes school property, a family housing complex, or a youth program center.
. We note that a panel of this court reached the same conclusion in Harrison v. State, 901 N.E.2d 635 (Ind.Ct.App.2009). Indeed, we have used a sizable portion of the language of that case in our discussion. However, our supreme court has not ruled on the State's petition for transfer, and the opinion has not been certified.
. Officer Walker also speculated about the presence of children in nearby houses. However, because we have found that the jury's determination was reasonable under the circumstances pertaining to the first part of Ind. Code § 35-48-4-16(b), we need not address the second part of the defense.

=== CASE 9740388 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:34:21.664532+00 ===

FRIEDLANDER, Judge,
concurring in part, dissenting in part.
I agree with the Majority's determination regarding the allocation of the burden of proof concerning the defense set out in Ind.Code Ann. § 35-48-4-16(b) (West, PREMISE through 2008 2nd Regular Sess.). I cannot, however, agree that under these cireumstances, a reasonable juror could conclude that Griffin's presence within 1000 feet of a school was anything other than "brief," within the meaning of 1.C. § 35-48-4-16(b). See Drane v. State, 867 N.E.2d 144 (Ind.2007).
I feel compelled to preface my comments on this case by noting another on which I served as a panel member. In Polk v. State, 822 N.E.2d 239 (Ind.Ct.App.2005), trams. denied, the defendant was a passenger in a moving vehicle that was stopped in the early morning hours by police for a traffic violation and discovered to be in possession of cocaine and a schedule IV controlled substance. The former offense was enhanced to a class A felony because the stop happened to occur in front of a school. Upon direct appeal to the Supreme Court, Polk challenged the school-zone enhancement of his possession conviction, arguing that the legislature did not intend the enhancement to apply to a passenger in a moving vehicle that is by happenstance stopped by police for a traffic violation within the 1000-foot *526zone. Polk v. State, 683 N.E.2d 567 (Ind.1997). Polk argued that the enhancement so applied did not advance the statute's underlying objective of protecting school children from the effects of drugs, and produced absurd and unintended results. The Supreme Court rejected that argument, stating:
Polk maintains that if we rule against his position police will wait to pull over suspected possessors of drugs until their cars are within 1000 feet of a school. However, the enhancement is triggered by possession within the zone, whether or not the defendant is pulled over within the zone. It is the act of entering the zone, and not the police action of pulling the defendant over, that triggers the enhancement. Nothing forces drug offenders to drive within the drug-free zone created by the legislature. To the contrary, they pass there at their own peril and in jeopardy of their own penal interests.
Id. at 571-72. In a special concurrence, Justice Sullivan characterized the school-zone enhancement as a "strict liability offense." Id. at 578. This comment can be construed as referring not only to the defendant's knowledge that he was within 1000 feet of a school at the time of the offense, which knowledge Polk clearly possessed, but also the circumstances under which the drugs were discovered there, i.e., a traffic stop that occurred, by chance, while the defendant was driving past a school.
The case subsequently came before this court upon petition for post-conviction relief. Pope argued that the circumstances of his case fit within the "briefly and without children present" exception set out in 1.C. § 35-48-4-16. This court determined that the issue of whether the offense was properly enhanced was res judicata. The majority opinion, in which I fully concurred, noted that I.C. § 35-48-4-16 is an ameliorative statute that did not become effective until after Polk was sentenced. Thus, it was unavailable to him. Although one could find support in the Supreme Court's opinion to reject Griffin's argument here, that decision predated the effective date of .C. § 35-48-4-16. Indeed, that provision was not even mentioned. Thus, I do not find my position here to be in conflict with my vote in Polk v. State, 822 N.E.2d 239.
Turning now to the instant case, the salient facts are that Griffin was walking a moped past a school when he was stopped by police. Although the term "briefly", as used in I.C. § 35-48-4-16(b)(1), clearly imparts a temporal connotation, the time span itself is not the only element in this equation. Whether a particular time interval is "brief" is also a function of surrounding cireumstances, including the defendant's intentions to be or remain near the school zone for any period of time, however short.
Officer Walker's estimate of the time interval involved here, i.e., five minutes, is probably accurate. First, five minutes is an objectively short span of time. Second, traveling on foot to, past, and 1000 feet beyond a school zone can hardly take much less than five minutes when pushing a moped. Third, there is no indication that, had he not been stopped, Griffin would have been within the proscribed 1000-foot zone any longer than it took him to traverse the necessary distance to get beyond it. Considering the very short time span and the fact that Griffin was moving steadily past the school zone as quickly as circumstances would permit until he was stopped, I would conclude that the jury's determination that Griffin was within the forbidden zone more than "briefly" was unreasonable.
*527Although I agree that the State bore the burden of rebutting the defense set out in 1.C. § 35-48-4-16(b), upon my conclusion that it failed to do so, I would reduce the possession offense to a class D felony and remand for sentencing on that offense.

=== CASE 2223333 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:59.135857+00 ===

331 Mich. 656 (1951)
50 N.W.2d 192
REBENTISCH
v.
KORDA.
Docket No. 77, Calendar No. 45,259.
Supreme Court of Michigan.
Decided December 3, 1951.
Rehearing denied January 7, 1952.
Clem II. Block, for plaintiff.
Frank J. Powers, for defendant.
BOYLES, J.
Plaintiff sued the defendant to recover damages for assault and battery. Her declaration alleges:
*657 "That on the early morning of January 3, 1950, the defendant threw the plaintiff into a ditch on Saranac road near M-21 in the vicinity of Ionia and left her there to die."
The defendant denied having molested her in any way, claimed that they both were drunk, and that he did not know how she got out of the automobile into the ditch. On jury trial plaintiff had a substantial verdict and judgment and the defendant appeals.
At the close of the testimony for plaintiff and again at the close of all testimony the defendant moved for a directed verdict on the ground that there was no proof that the defendant had assaulted or in any way harmed the plaintiff, beat her, or that he was liable for her injuries. The trial court reserved decision on the motions and after verdict for plaintiff the defendant moved for judgment non obstante veredicto, which was denied, and judgment entered on the verdict. The controlling question on the appeal is whether the court should have set aside the verdict and entered judgment for the defendant on the ground alleged.
The tale is a sordid one. Plaintiff was 37 years of age, divorced, with a 14-year-old daughter, and they lived with plaintiff's mother. Plaintiff worked at a place with a bar, where food and intoxicating liquors were sold. The defendant was a married man with 2 children. For several months before the alleged assault and battery these parties had been associating together in what is admitted to be a "vicious and immoral" relationship. Much of their time together was spent in taverns and bars, getting drunk and otherwise consorting together, taking various trips out of town, sleeping together at various places as husband and wife. Plaintiff's counsel claims she did not know that the defendant was a married man, but the plaintiff in her testimony admitted that she knew it on December 12, 1949, on *658 which day they left on a two-weeks' trip to New York and other places in the East where they stayed together. On December 27, 1949, they were arrested by the local Grand Rapids vice squad at her apartment for immorally living together and both pleaded guilty. After that occurrence the defendant went back to living with his family.
The time of the alleged assault is fixed as the night of January 3, 1950. Practically all of the defendant's testimony as to what occurred is not disputed. About noon, the defendant by prearrangement went to the home of plaintiff's mother and got the plaintiff. They went to a tavern, drank 3 or 4 whiskies, went back about 2 o'clock to get plaintiff's daughter, went south from Grand Rapids for a ride, drank beer in Middleville, went back to Grand Rapids to take the daughter to a show, then went to a tavern at Comstock Park near Grand Rapids where they stayed between 3 and 4 hours and drank whiskey during that time. They returned to Grand Rapids to pick up plaintiff's daughter, thence to a tavern about 8 p.m. where they had 2 or 3 whiskies. The daughter did not drink, they took her back to her grandmother's home about 9 o'clock and then started out again, about 9:30 or 10 o'clock. They drove around, and the defendant told plaintiff he wanted to call it quits, that he wanted to go back home to his family and forget the whole thing. Plaintiff was excited, threatened suicide, the defendant says she tried to jump out of the car going 50 miles an hour but was prevented by the defendant holding her around the neck. The plaintiff testified, however, that she did not at any time "try to jump from a moving automobile." Plaintiff asked the defendant to get a divorce and marry her but he said it wouldn't work. On the trip they drove around, first went west towards Coopersville, stopped at a tavern on the belt line about 15 miles west of Grand Rapids *659 where they stayed until closing time about 12:30 or 1 o'clock. From there they went southeast, then south on the belt line, driving almost to Cutlerville, 16 or 18 miles. She testified that he hit her on the jaw "on the belt line." This is the only testimony in the record which in any way tends to show that the defendant assaulted, beat or molested the plaintiff. He denies it happened. If it did, it was many miles distant from and some considerable time before the time and place where the plaintiff did leave the car and got into the ditch.
From the belt line near Grand Rapids they went east on dirt roads and wound up near Saranac and M-21 about 2 or 3 o'clock in the morning. Defendant claims that the plaintiff had climbed over and into the back seat. This she denies. But she did not testify at all as to the manner in which she left the car and got into the ditch. Her failure to so testify is claimed by her counsel to be because she was unconscious from the time she was hit on the jaw while they were on the belt line. The record does not support the claim. It is true that her power of speech was destroyed by her injuries in going into the ditch so that she had to testify by pointing to a chart. There is no question but that in some manner she got out of the automobile on a curve near Saranac into a ditch 15 or 18 feet deep and was seriously injured. The defendant, when asked how plaintiff got out of the car, testified:
"She was sitting in the front seat with me, and towards the last she got into the back seat, when she calmed down, she wasn't so excited, and I thought maybe she was going to go to sleep or maybe she was mad at me and she wanted to sit in the back seat. So, she went in the back seat of the car then. * * *
"Q. Do you know how she got out of the car?
*660 "A. I don't know exactly, if she opened the door or the door opened, but I was driving along and the first thing I knew she was out before I had a chance to stop. It was dark and I did stop the car and tried to find her, looked back, walked back a little ways, and I couldn't see her, so I don't know I must have got mixed up drinking and all that stuff. I started to drive away and I got a little ways down the grade, and I decided to stop again thinking she will come back in a little while, see. And when I stopped there, I must have fell asleep because the first thing I knew it was daylight when I woke up. I was drunk and so was she."
On cross-examination, he testified:
"Q. And you say she jumped out of the back seat?
"A. I don't know if she jumped or fell out or how it happened. I was driving and the first thing I knew she was out and the door open, and when I slowed the car down, it was dark, and quite a distance I stopped the car and I looked around and couldn't see her anywheres."
When he woke up in the morning his car was out of gas and he hunted up a friend in Saranac to borrow money to get gas. He heard some boys talking about a woman being found in a ditch, thought it would be the plaintiff, went to see Hudson Meyers, who he knew was an officer, and told him about being out with a woman and about her being missing. The officer suggested they go to the sheriff's office in Ionia and they did so. There the defendant told the sheriff the same facts he later testified to at the trial. A charge of drunk driving was placed against him to hold him for investigation. Later the charge was dismissed and defendant released.
There is no doubt but that the plaintiff did in some manner get out of the automobile and land in a ditch 15 or 18 feet deep. It had no water in it, but there was mud and stones. When found the next morning *661 after daybreak, she was unconscious, seriously injured, her face, neck, arms and legs scratched and bruised, both shoes off (one was found about 10 feet away). She was hospitalized, very seriously and permanently injured. If there were any testimony at all as to whether plaintiff jumped from the car at that place, was thrown or pushed, or fell out accidentally, there might have been a question of fact to be submitted to the jury as to whether the defendant had assaulted her or pushed her out, which then would bring up a question for the jury as to the credibility of the defendant's testimony. But the mere fact that plaintiff was in the automobile with the defendant, and later found in the ditch, badly injured, does not make a question of fact for the jury as to whether the defendant was guilty of any act as a result of which she went out of the car into the ditch. The doctrine of res ipsa loquitur is not adopted in this State and plaintiff had the burden of proving that her injuries were the result of an assault and battery by the defendant. The record does not support that claim.
While the plaintiff did testify at some length as to her relationship with the defendant, admitted that she was in love with him, and that on December 12th, when they went to New York together, she knew that he was married, she did not testify that she was thrown or pushed from the automobile, or that the defendant assaulted or even touched her at that time and place. In the complete absence of any such testimony in the record, we are constrained to hold that there was no question of fact to go to the jury as to the defendant's liability for an alleged assault and battery, and defendant's motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict should have been granted.
*662 Reversed for entry of judgment of no cause for action.
REID, C.J., and NORTH, DETHMERS, CARR, BUSHNELL, and SHARPE, JJ., concurred. BUTZEL, J., did not sit.

=== CASE 2223336 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:59.202677+00 ===

905 N.E.2d 816 (2009)
232 Ill.2d 522
328 Ill.Dec. 927
Edwin A. BURNETTE, Public Defender of Cook County, Petitioner,
v.
Honorable Lawrence TERRELL, Judge of the Circuit Court of Cook County, Respondent.
No. 106678.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
March 19, 2009.
*819 Lester Finkle, Assistant Public Defender, Chicago, for petitioner, and Edwin A. Burnette, Public Defender of Cook County, Chicago, petitioner pro se.
Lisa Madigan, Attorney General, Springfield (Michael A. Scodro, Solicitor General, and John P. Schmidt, Assistant Attorney General, Chicago, of counsel), for respondent.
Robert F. Harris and Kass A. Plain, Office of the Cook County Public Guardian, Chicago, for amicus curiae Cook County Public Guardian.
OPINION
Justice GARMAN delivered the judgment of the court, with opinion:
Petitioner, Edwin A. Burnette, in his capacity as public defender of Cook County, filed this original action pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 381 (188 Ill.2d R. 381), seeking either a writ of mandamus or a writ of prohibition against the Honorable Lawrence Terrell, Judge of the circuit court of Cook County. We allowed petitioner's motion for leave to file his petition. In addition, we allowed the Cook County public guardian to file a brief amicus curiae pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 345 (210 Ill.2d R. 345).
While we find merit in petitioner's claim, we decline to employ either of the extraordinary remedies requested. Rather, we choose to resolve the controversy by exercising this court's supervisory authority in the form of a supervisory order.
BACKGROUND
This controversy arises as a result of respondent's repeated removal of an individual assistant public defender (hereinafter identified as K.T.) from representing clients in his courtroom and his appointment of other assistant public defenders to represent those clients.
The record before us includes transcripts of several proceedings in respondent's courtroom and the affidavits of K.T., Parle Roe-Taylor, assistant public defender *820 and acting chief of the Fourth Municipal District for the office of the Cook County public defender, respondent, and the Honorable Edmund Ponce de Leon, presiding judge of the circuit court of Cook County, Fourth Municipal District.
On May 8, 2008, K.T., who was then one of three public defenders assigned by the public defender's office to represent clients in respondent's courtroom, petitioned for substitution of judge in two cases. Both petitions were allowed by respondent.
That same day, Roe-Taylor was called to the office of the presiding judge, where she was informed that respondent wanted K.T. "removed from his courtroom" because he was having "problems" of an unspecified nature with her. Roe-Taylor informed the presiding judge that she was not aware of any problems and had received no information from respondent regarding K.T. She noted that K.T. had recently had a jury trial before respondent in which her client was acquitted.
Between that date and May 21, 2008, respondent recused himself from over 20 cases in which K.T. represented the defendants.
On May 21, 2008, defendant Brad Scianna appeared in respondent's courtroom and requested that the court appoint a public defender to represent him. The following exchange occurred:
Respondent: "Where's the Public Defender?"
K.T.: "Assistant Public Defender [K.T.]"
Respondent: "All right. You can stand down."
K.T.: "Your Honor, it is my week."
Respondent: "All right now. I'm going to ask you again to stand down. You're either going to do it voluntarily or you are going to be put down."
Respondent then directed another assistant public defender, B.H., to speak with defendant Scianna.
The following day, May 22, 2008, K.T. appeared in the arraignment of defendant Kathy Neeld. Respondent again directed K.T. to "stand down," and directed B.H. to speak to defendant Neeld. On this occasion, Roe-Taylor, the immediate supervisor of Assistant Public Defenders K.T. and B.H., was present. The following exchange occurred:
Roe-Taylor: "Excuse me, your Honor."
Respondent: "You have no standing. Standing down, ma'am."
Roe-Taylor: "Attorney supervisor..."
Respondent: "Stand away from the bench."
Bailiff: "Step away, Counsel."
Respondent: "Refusal to do so will be contemptuous."
(K.T.'s motion to quash arrest and suppress evidence in Neeld's case was subsequently heard by a different judge. The motion was granted and the case was dismissed.)
Later that day, Roe-Taylor spoke to the presiding judge about respondent's "threat of contempt" against her. The presiding judge informed Roe-Taylor that he would speak to respondent about the matter. The presiding judge subsequently informed Roe-Taylor that respondent would recuse himself if he learned that K.T. was the assigned attorney on any matter in his courtroom.
Thereafter, according to K.T.'s affidavit, respondent recused himself from at least 27 cases in which she represented the defendants. He "dismissed" her or ordered her to "stand down" in at least 13 additional cases. She states that in several of these cases she had significant contact *821 with the client, the client's family members, and potential witnesses prior to being removed by the respondent.
On June 3, 2008, defendant Ramiro Nevarez appeared in respondent's courtroom for a hearing on his motion to quash arrest and suppress evidence. The motion and the supporting memorandum of law had been prepared and filed by K.T. The subpoenas duces tecum and witness subpoenas were prepared by K.T. In addition, orders that Nevarez participate in the Cook County Department of Corrections drug treatment program and that he be examined by a representative of the TASC program were prepared by K.T. and signed by respondent. K.T.'s affidavit states that she had interviewed a potential witness in this case, visited the scene of the alleged crime, referred the matter for expert witness analysis of the fingerprint evidence, and had significant client contact via telephone. According to respondent, the memorandum of law prepared by K.T. in support of the motion improperly cited a 1992 decision of this court that had been superseded in 1999 by an amendment to the Illinois Municipal Code.
When asked if he had a lawyer, defendant Nevarez said that he was represented by K.T. An unidentified Ms. O'Brien stated, "No, Judge, he has [B.H.], because on 05/28 you appointed [B.H.]" Respondent informed the defendant that he "can't pick a free lawyer." B.H. stated that he was not ready for the hearing at that time but that he would be ready if the matter could be passed. The matter was passed and recalled later that day. The hearing went forward with B.H. representing the defendant. The motion was denied.
On June 5, 2008, defendant Armando Gonzalez appeared in respondent's courtroom for a hearing on his motion to quash arrest and suppress evidence. Respondent asked Gonzalez if he had a lawyer. He responded, "Yes, I do, [K.T.] She's been assigned to my case." Respondent informed the defendant that "she's no longer assigned to your case" and "assigned" another assistant public defender to represent him. The matter was continued to July 7, 2008, at the request of the newly assigned assistant public defender. On July 7, 2008, K.T. again appeared with Gonzalez. Respondent recused himself. The case was assigned to another judge and eventually dismissed after the assigned judge granted defendant's motion to quash arrest and suppress evidence.
The record before this court contains transcripts of eight of the cases in which respondent ordered K.T. to "stand down." In none of these cases did respondent make a record of the reason for his removal of K.T. Respondent states that in each case, the matter was continued to allow newly appointed defense counsel time to consult with the client and to prepare the case.
On June 10, 2008, petitioner's motion for leave to file a petition for a writ of mandamus or a writ of prohibition was filed with this court. Thereafter, respondent recused himself from all matters assigned to K.T. According to Roe-Taylor's affidavit, these cases included "matters where he had presided over pre-trial motions, trials and matters of violation of probation, on which he was the sentencing judge." Further, the recusals "caused substantial delays to previously appointed clients' cases and representation."
Because these actions effectively barred K.T. from appearing or practicing in respondent's courtroom, Roe-Taylor assigned her to another felony courtroom. According to Roe-Taylor's affidavit, the reassignment was "not due to any agreement with or request from" the presiding judge or respondent, but was "due to the *822 continuing refusal by [respondent] to hear any cases involving [K.T.]"
Respondent's affidavit states that K.T. was transferred from his courtroom to a different courtroom "pursuant to an agreement between the public defender's office and the Honorable Edmund Ponce de Leon, Presiding Judge of the Circuit Court of Cook County, Fourth Municipal District." He further states that petitioner's brief "discusses several instances in which I ordered [K.T.] to stand down and another assistant public defender assigned to my courtroom to represent a defendant because of my concerns over her ability to provide adequate representation to felony defendants." As noted above, however, the transcripts of eight such instances do not contain any indication of the nature of respondent's "concerns." Finally, respondent states that K.T. is the "only attorney I have ever directed to stand down from representing a client during my judicial career."
The affidavit of the presiding judge states that "[b]ecause of concerns expressed to me by [respondent] and other judges about the ability of public defender [K.T.] to provide adequate representation to felony defendants, I met with officials of the public defender's office and they ultimately agreed to assign her to a different courtroom. [She] is no longer assigned to [respondent's] courtroom." However, K.T. is presently assigned to a felony courtroom.
ISSUES PRESENTED
The issues presented in the petition are whether respondent has the authority to refuse to allow an assistant public defender to represent clients in his courtroom, to remove an assistant public defender from representation of a defendant, or to assign a specific assistant public defender to represent a defendant in an individual case.
MOOTNESS
When intervening events preclude a reviewing court from granting effective relief to a complaining party, the matter is rendered moot. Felzak v. Hruby, 226 Ill.2d 382, 392, 315 Ill.Dec. 338, 876 N.E.2d 650 (2007).
Respondent argues that this case became moot when K.T. was assigned to another felony courtroom. His affidavit and the affidavit of the presiding judge aver that the reassignment was the result of an agreement with petitioner's office.
Petitioner responds that the issues raised in his petition are not moot because no such agreement was reached. He relies on the statement in Roe-Taylor's affidavit that the reassignment of K.T. to another felony courtroom was not the result of an agreement to resolve the dispute.
We conclude the conflicting accounts regarding the existence of an agreement are due to the different perspectives of the parties. Respondent's affidavit asserts that there was such an agreement, but he was not present at the meetings between the presiding judge and Roe-Taylor, so his assertion is not based on personal knowledge. The presiding judge likely perceives that he achieved a resolution acceptable to both parties when K.T. was reassigned. Roe-Taylor perceives that her reassignment of K.T. was merely an acquiescence to the status quo, pending resolution of the petition then pending before this court.
We believe that under the circumstances, the reassignment of K.T. was a wise and proper use of the resources of the public defender's office and the Cook County circuit court and that it was in the best interests of the public served by all parties to this case. However, the reassignment *823 of K.T. did not moot the underlying issue in this casethe scope of a judge's authority to remove or to assign individual public defenders in individual cases. Respondent could have mooted this issue by reaching an accord with petitioner regarding their respective roles in the process of assigning assistant public defenders in individual cases. However, the issues raised in the petition are not mooted by the existence of a stalemate that caused petitioner to adapt to the situation created by the challenged conduct.
We conclude that this matter is not moot and, therefore, it is not necessary to employ an exception to the mootness doctrine to reach the merits of the issues.
STANDARD OF REVIEW
Petitioner suggests that because this is an original action under Rule 381, this court is deciding the issue de novo, in its supervisory and administrative capacity.
Respondent suggests that the abuse of discretion standard of review is appropriate, arguing further the extraordinary writs of mandamus and prohibition are not proper to address a mere abuse of discretion.
We conclude that de novo review is appropriate, given the issues framed by the petition. Petitioner does not ask this court to review respondent's exercise of discretion in any individual case. Rather, he asks this court to determine whether a judge has the authority to remove a public defender from a case and assign the case to another public defender. As will be demonstrated below, the answer to that question is that a judge has such authority under certain circumstances but that such circumstances have not been shown in the present case.
ANALYSIS
Petitioner asserts that respondent's actions are "outside his judicial authority, an invasion of the attorney-client relationship, a violation of the Public Defender Act, and contrary to established case law."
Respondent characterizes this claim as "a broad attack on the judiciary's well-established discretion to remove attorneys when necessary to protect criminal defendants' Sixth Amendment right to effective assistance of counsel or because of the requirements of the court's calendar."
Attorney-Client Relationship
Petitioner asserts that respondent's removal of K.T. in 15 cases "create[d] a Sixth Amendment violation for each client of the Public Defender affected" by interfering with an established attorney-client relationship. He argues that if the attorney removed without explanation in case after case were "an associate of a large law firm" rather than a member of the public defender's office, it would be clear that the judge's actions "would run afoul of the Sixth Amendment and the right to counsel of one's own choice." See United States v. Gonzalez-Lopez, 548 U.S. 140, 143-45, 126 S.Ct. 2557, 2561, 165 L.Ed.2d 409, 416 (2006) (right of a defendant who does not require appointed counsel to choose who will represent him is an element of the sixth amendment right to counsel). Although indigent defendants are not entitled to choose which assistant public defender will represent them, petitioner's position is that removal of K.T. after she had been assigned to represent these defendants and after that representation had begun is the functional equivalent of depriving those defendants of the attorney of their choice.
Respondent answers that the individual defendants affected can assert their sixth amendment rights on direct appeal if they are ultimately convicted. Thus, he argues, *824 even if the removal of K.T. was improper, the remedy lies in the appellate process in the individual cases, not in the issuance of an extraordinary writ by this court.
We note, however, that the dispute before us is not about the rights of the affected defendants. Rather, it is a dispute between two public officials over the scope of the authority granted to each by constitution and statute.
Constitutional Authority
Respondent argues that not only does he have the authority to remove a defense attorney, he has an obligation to do so when necessary to ensure that a criminal defendant receives the level of representation guaranteed by the sixth amendment. He notes that "there are circumstances where a judge is authorized to remove appointed counsel in order to protect a defendant's Sixth Amendment right to effective assistance of counsel, including situations in which incapacity, impairment or incompetence precludes an attorney from providing effective assistance."
He cites several cases for the proposition that a judge may disqualify defense counsel when there is serious potential for a conflict of interest. See Wheat v. United States, 486 U.S. 153, 159, 108 S.Ct. 1692, 1697, 100 L.Ed.2d 140, 149 (1988) (sixth amendment right to choose one's own counsel does not permit a defendant to "insist on the counsel of an attorney who has a previous or ongoing relationship with an opposing party"); People v. Holmes, 141 Ill.2d 204, 217-18, 152 Ill.Dec. 268, 565 N.E.2d 950 (1990) (sixth amendment right to counsel of one's choosing is limited by need to disqualify chosen counsel if a conflict of interest exists); People v. House, 377 Ill.App.3d 9, 16, 316 Ill.Dec. 147, 878 N.E.2d 1171 (2007) (conflict of interest of defendant's chosen counsel warranted disqualification).
A judge may also remove defense counsel when the demands of the court's calendar necessitate the trial be held when current counsel is unavailable. See Gonzalez-Lopez, 548 U.S. at 152, 126 S.Ct. at 2566, 165 L.Ed.2d at 422 (distinguishing this case where defendant was deprived of his choice of counsel from cases where court makes "scheduling and other decisions that effectively exclude a defendant's first choice of counsel"); Morris v. Slappy, 461 U.S. 1, 11-12, 103 S.Ct. 1610, 1615-16, 75 L.Ed.2d 610, 618-19 (1983) (defendant's sixth amendment right to counsel was not violated when trial court appointed senior trial attorney from public defender's office to replace deputy public defender who was hospitalized for emergency surgery six days before trial); People v. Spurlark, 67 Ill.App.3d 186, 198-99, 23 Ill.Dec. 860, 384 N.E.2d 767 (1978) (after allowing multiple continuances due to defense counsel's unavailability for trial, trial court did not abuse its discretion by requiring defendant to proceed to trial with newly appointed attorney where defense counsel of defendant's choosing was again unavailable for trial).
Removal may also be necessary when counsel is intoxicated. See People v. Giles, 209 Ill.App.3d 265, 270, 154 Ill.Dec. 116, 568 N.E.2d 116 (1991) (trial judge protected defendant's right to a fair trial by declaring a mistrial and dismissing defendant's original counsel, who admitted that he was under the influence of alcohol during trial).
Finally, a judge may remove defense counsel whose performance is so inadequate that the defendant is not receiving the level of assistance of counsel guaranteed by the sixth amendment. See People v. Johnson, 192 Ill.2d 202, 207, 248 Ill.Dec. 926, 735 N.E.2d 577 (2000) (ordering reassignment of postconviction appeal to a staff attorney in the Capital Litigation *825 Division of the Office of the State Appellate Defender for rebriefing where the brief filed was "so fundamentally deficient that it precludes review"). See also Davenport v. State, 283 Ga. 29, 30-33, 656 S.E.2d 514, 516-17 (2008) (removal of defense counsel proper where trial court concluded that counsel was not performing competently).
Because the cited authorities "clearly recognize that a trial judge is vested with the discretion to remove defense counsel in criminal cases when necessary to protect the defendant's right to effective assistance of counsel," and because his actions were "motivated by a desire to protect the defendants' rights to fair trials and competent counsel," respondent argues that his actions were entirely justified.
The principle that a judge has the discretion to remove defense counsel for the reasons noted above is not in dispute. Respondent clearly has such authority in the proper case. However, the present situation is distinguishable from the cases cited by respondent in two significant respects.
First, in each of the cited cases, the judge who removed defense counsel made a record that was sufficient for a reviewing court to determine whether circumstances justified the removal. In none of the eight transcripts provided to this court is the sixth amendment right to counsel mentioned by respondent and in no case does the record show that there was a conflict of interest, that the court's calendar necessitated appointment of different defense counsel, that K.T. was intoxicated or otherwise impaired, or that her performance was inadequate. Because respondent made no record, it is impossible for this court to determine whether respondent was acting to ensure adequate representation of these defendants or for some other purpose.
Second, petitioner is not asserting that respondent improperly removed defense counsel in an individual case, but that he did so repeatedly and without explanation. Further, respondent's decisions to recuse himself in over 50 cases rather than allow K.T. to represent a defendant in his courtroom are entirely unreviewable although they clearly interfered with petitioner's managerial responsibilities.
We conclude that the underlying dispute cannot be resolved on the basis of either party's assertion of the need to protect the sixth amendment rights of the affected defendants.
Statutory Authority
Petitioner argues that respondent's actions violate the Counties Code (Code) (55 ILCS 5/3-4000 et seq. (West 2006)). He relies, in part, on the "unique situation" of Cook County, which he asserts allows the Cook County public defender to operate his office independently of the judiciary, to a degree not permitted in the rest of the state.
Until 1991, each public defender in the state was appointed by a majority vote of the circuit judges in the judicial circuit. Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 34, par. 3-4004. A 1991 amendment to the Code altered that practice in counties with a population of over 1 million. Thus, the public defender in Cook County is "appointed to the position by the President [of the county board] with the advice and consent of the Board [of commissioners]." 55 ILCS 5/3-4004.1 (West 2006). In all other counties, the public defender continues to be appointed by a majority vote of the circuit judges. 55 ILCS 5/3-4004 (West 2006).
Similarly, as a result of the 1991 amendments to the Code, the public defender in counties with a population of over 1 million "shall appoint assistants, all duly licensed practitioners, as that Public Defender shall deem necessary for the proper discharge *826 of the duties of the office, who shall serve at the pleasure of the Public Defender." 55 ILCS 5/3-4008.1 (West 2006). In less populous counties, the public defender has the power to appoint assistants "in the manner directed by the judges." These assistant public defenders also "serve at the pleasure of the Public Defender." 55 ILCS 5/3-4008 (West 2006).
Although the 1991 amendments to the Code altered the manner in which the public defender is appointed in Cook County and the manner in which assistant public defenders are selected there, the duties of the public defender's office with respect to the representation of criminal defendants do not vary from county to county: "The Public Defender, as directed by the court, shall act as attorney, without fee, before any court within any county for all persons who are held in custody or who are charged with the commission of any criminal offense, and who the court finds are unable to employ counsel." 55 ILCS 5/3-4006 (West 2006). Therefore, to the extent the Act is implicated in this case, it is not because of any circumstance that exists only in Cook County.
The unique circumstances of Cook County aside, petitioner claims that respondent has violated the Act in several waysby refusing to allow a particular assistant public defender to represent defendants when she was assigned by petitioner to respondent's courtroom, by removing the assistant public defender from representation of defendants to whom she had already been assigned, and by selecting another assistant public defender to represent these clients.
Respondent replies that the Act gives petitioner "the authority to hire and discharge assistants, but it does not preclude trial judges from removing individual attorneys from cases in particular where necessary to protect a criminal defendant's right to a fair trial and to competent counsel or because the demands of the court's calendar require a case to proceed when counsel is unavailable." He further states that he "did not encroach upon the Public Defender's statutory authority."
Under the Code, the circuit court has the authority to direct the public defender to represent an indigent defendant. 55 ILCS 5/3-4006 (West 2006) (the public defender shall act as the attorney for an indigent defendant "when directed by the court"). That is, the court appoints the office of the public defender to act as the attorney for an indigent defendant. The court does not appoint an individual assistant public defender. Once appointed, the public defender has the statutory authority and responsibility of assigning assistant public defenders to represent individual defendants whom the public defender's office has been directed to represent.
We note, however, that assistant public defenders are often assigned to a specific courtroom by the public defender for the purpose of representing, at least initially, any indigent defendant who may appear in that courtroom. Thus, in the Scianna case, when the defendant requested the appointment of counsel, K.T. responded that it was her "week." Petitioner and Roe-Taylor had assigned K.T. to this courtroom with the expectation that when the judge found it proper to direct the public defender's office to represent an indigent defendant, the assistant public defender for that week would be assigned the case.
However, in the present situation, respondent removed K.T. from representing clients to whom she had already been assigned and on whose behalf she had already performed significant work. He refused to assign her to represent defendants even when she was the person designated by petitioner to do so. And after *827 removing or refusing to assign K.T., he selected other members of petitioner's staff to represent several clients.
We conclude that because assistant public defenders serve at the pleasure of the public defender (55 ILCS 5/3-4004, 3-4004.1 (West 2006)), the public defender has the sole statutory authority to make work assignments to the assistant public defenders. Thus, absent a finding of contempt or other specific cause, it is beyond the scope of judicial authority for an individual judge to reject an assistant public defender assigned to his courtroom, to refuse to allow an assistant public defender to represent defendants when she has been assigned to do so, or to remove an assistant public defender from representation of a defendant.
Respondent's reassignment of K.T.'s former clients to other assistant public defenders presents a slightly different question. At oral argument, counsel for respondent stated that it was "logical to assume" that because the assistant public defenders to whom he assigned cases after removing K.T. were assigned to his courtroom by petitioner, the judge did not assume the authority of petitioner by assigning cases to them.
Counsel for petitioner responded that on one occasion when the judge removed K.T., Roe-Taylor was present in the courtroom, yet the judge assigned the case to B.H. when Roe-Taylor could have taken the case herself or made the reassignment. This, he argued, was an improper assumption of the statutory authority of the public defender.
We conclude that it is not within the authority of a judge to assign specific cases to specific assistant public defenders. Such actions usurp the statutory authority of the public defender to hire and manage his staff. When the public defender assigns several assistant public defenders to a particular courtroom, it is not a delegation of his authority to the judge who presides there to choose specific assistant public defenders to represent individual defendants. Rather, it is an assignment to the assistant public defenders to step up as directed by the public defender (who apparently employs a week-by-week rotation) when the court finds it necessary to direct the public defender's office to represent an indigent defendant.
Inherent Judicial Authority
Statutory authority aside, respondent argues that he has the inherent authority to manage his courtroom and the court's calendar. Petitioner responds by citing In re General Order of March 15, 1993, 258 Ill.App.3d 13, 196 Ill.Dec. 128, 629 N.E.2d 673 (1994).
In In re General Order, a circuit court judge announced from the bench that a particular assistant public defender was barred from appearing in his courtroom on any future case. This announcement followed a particularly contentious probable cause hearing in which the judge warned the attorney several times that her conduct bordered on contempt. In re General Order, 258 Ill.App.3d at 14-17, 196 Ill.Dec. 128, 629 N.E.2d 673.
The appellate court rejected the suggestion that the judge was exercising "his inherent authority to control his courtroom and to ensure that attorneys appearing before him exhibit[ed] proper respect for the authority of the court" (In re General Order, 258 Ill.App.3d at 17, 196 Ill.Dec. 128, 629 N.E.2d 673), stating that "the trial court's inherent power to control its courtroom and maintain the proper decorum extends no further than its ability to find someone in contempt." In re General Order, 258 Ill.App.3d at 17, 196 Ill.Dec. 128, 629 N.E.2d 673.
*828 The appellate court also considered whether a judge has the authority under section 6 of the Attorney Act (705 ILCS 205/6 (West 1992) ("any judge of a Circuit Court shall, for like cause, have the power to suspend any attorney or counselor at law from practice in the court over which he presides, during such time as he may deem proper")), to suspend an attorney from practice in a particular circuit or courtroom. The appellate court found this section unconstitutional on the basis that the Illinois Supreme Court has the sole authority to impose disciplinary sanctions on attorneys, which it exercises through the mechanism of the Attorney Registration and Disciplinary Commission. In re General Order, 258 Ill.App.3d at 21, 196 Ill.Dec. 128, 629 N.E.2d 673.[1] In reaching this result, the appellate court relied on this court's decision in People ex rel. Brazen v. Finley, 119 Ill.2d 485, 116 Ill.Dec. 683, 519 N.E.2d 898 (1988).
In Finley, this court considered the validity of a circuit court rule intended to enforce compliance with certain rules of professional responsibility. After noting that this court "`possesses the inherent and exclusive power to regulate the practice of law in this State and to sanction or discipline the unprofessional conduct of attorneys admitted to practice before it'" (Finley, 119 Ill.2d at 493, 116 Ill.Dec. 683, 519 N.E.2d 898, quoting In re Mitan, 119 Ill.2d 229, 246, 116 Ill.Dec. 179, 518 N.E.2d 1000 (1987)), this court stated that "the power to prescribe rules governing attorney conduct, and to discipline attorneys for violating those rules, rests solely in this court" (Finley, 119 Ill.2d at 494, 116 Ill. Dec. 683, 519 N.E.2d 898). Thus, the circuit court "was without authority to promulgate" the local rule at issue, "as it intrude[d] upon this court's exclusive judicial authority." Finley, 119 Ill.2d at 495, 116 Ill.Dec. 683, 519 N.E.2d 898.
Respondent attempts to distinguish In re General Order on the basis that he did not enter a general order banning an assistant public defender from appearing in his courtroom. Thus, he asserts that he has not encroached upon this court's exclusive power to discipline attorneys.
Although respondent did not enter a general order or purport to suspend K.T. from the practice of law in his courtroom, he did remove K.T. from representing at least 15 defendants and he recused himself in over 50 other cases. The effect on the public defender's ability to manage his office and his staff and on the disposition of the caseload in the Fourth Municipal District was indistinguishable from the entry of a general order.
In the absence of a finding of contempt or other cause, the actions taken by respondent were not within his inherent power to manage his courtroom and calendar. Rather, they were directed at an individual attorney and infringed upon the statutory authority of petitioner.
Case Law From Other Jurisdictions
Finally, petitioner finds support for his position in the case law from other jurisdictions. Respondent distinguishes these cases and notes that these decisions from our sister states are entitled to little weight.
As we have found no constitutional or statutory authority for respondent's actions in this case, we do not find it necessary to examine additional authority offered in support of petitioner's position.
*829 REMEDY
When he took the actions complained of, respondent did not first find K.T. in direct criminal contempt. See People v. Simac, 161 Ill.2d 297, 305, 204 Ill.Dec. 192, 641 N.E.2d 416 (1994) (direct criminal contempt is conduct that is calculated to embarrass, hinder, or obstruct the court in its administration of justice or derogate from its authority or dignity, thereby bringing the administration of law into disrepute). Thus, he was not acting pursuant to the court's inherent power to punish conduct that offends the dignity of the court.
If he was acting pursuant to his responsibility under the sixth amendment to ensure adequate representation for criminal defendants, he failed to make a record sufficient to justify his actions.
Further, the lack of an articulated reason on the record each time he removed K.T. from representing a client suggests that he was not exercising discretion on a case-by-case basis. Thus, he acted in a manner that was inconsistent with the responsibilities assigned to the public defender by statute.
Petitioner seeks a writ of mandamus or prohibition "to stop [respondent] from continuing with his removal of Assistant Public Defenders" and to "prevent [respondent], or any other judge, from standing in the shoes of the Public Defender and choosing who shall represent any particular client." (We note that any remedy this court might grant would be directed only at the respondent and not to "any other judge.")
Respondent argues that neither writ is justified under these circumstances because both are "inappropriate to address exercises of judicial discretion."
We explained the purpose of the writ of mandamus in People ex rel. Devine v. Stralka, 226 Ill.2d 445, 449, 315 Ill.Dec. 664, 877 N.E.2d 416 (2007):
"A writ of mandamus may be awarded if the petitioner establishes a clear legal right to relief, a clear duty of the public official to act, and a clear authority in the public official to comply with the writ, as well as the lack of other adequate remedies. People ex rel. Madigan v. Snyder, 208 Ill.2d 457, 465[, 281 Ill.Dec. 581, 804 N.E.2d 546] (2004). Although mandamus generally provides affirmative rather than prohibitory relief (People ex rel. Waller v. McKoski, 195 Ill.2d 393, 398[, 254 Ill.Dec. 729, 748 N.E.2d 175] (2001)), it can be used to compel the undoing of an act (Noyola v. Board of Education of the City of Chicago, 179 Ill.2d 121, 133[, 227 Ill.Dec. 744, 688 N.E.2d 81] (1997))."
In the present case, there is no specific act that petitioner seeks to compel respondent to perform and no specific act that petitioner seeks to have undone. Thus, a writ of mandamus is not appropriate.
In Stralka, 226 Ill.2d at 449-50, 315 Ill.Dec. 664, 877 N.E.2d 416, we also explained the purpose of the writ of prohibition:
"[A] writ of prohibition may be used to `"prevent a judge from acting where he has no jurisdiction to act or to prevent a judicial act which is beyond the scope of a judge's legitimate jurisdictional authority."' People ex rel. Foreman v. Nash, 118 Ill.2d 90, 97[, 112 Ill.Dec. 714, 514 N.E.2d 180] (1987), quoting Daley v. Hett, 113 Ill.2d 75, 80[, 99 Ill.Dec. 132, 495 N.E.2d 513] (1986). There are four requirements that must be met before a writ of prohibition may be issued: (1) the action to be prohibited must be judicial or quasi-judicial in nature; (2) the jurisdiction of the tribunal against which the writ issues must be inferior to *830 that of the issuing court; (3) the action prohibited must be outside the tribunal's jurisdiction or, if within its jurisdiction, beyond its legitimate authority; and (4) the petitioner must be without any other adequate remedy. Zaabel v. Konetski, 209 Ill.2d 127, 131-32[, 282 Ill.Dec. 748, 807 N.E.2d 372] (2004)."
In the present case, respondent has the "jurisdiction" (in the general sense of "authority" or "power," rather than the limited sense of subject matter or personal jurisdiction) to remove a public defender from representing an individual defendant if the removal is necessitated by documented sixth amendment concerns or a finding of contempt. Thus, while he may have acted improperly when he repeatedly removed K.T., he did not act without "legitimate authority."
Similarly, his assignment of her cases to other assistant public defenders was improper, but petitioner's assignment of those assistants to respondent's courtroom evinced his willingness to have those assistants at least temporarily assigned to cases arising there. A writ of prohibition is not justified under these circumstances.
Finally, we have held "that mandamus-type relief may be awarded when the issues involved are of great importance to the administration of justice even if all the normal criteria for its issuance are not satisfied." Stralka, 226 Ill.2d at 450, 315 Ill.Dec. 664, 877 N.E.2d 416, citing People ex rel. Carey v. White, 65 Ill.2d 193, 197, 2 Ill.Dec. 345, 357 N.E.2d 512 (1976). Because the present case involves one individual judge and the removal of one individual assistant public defender, we do not find it to be such a case.
In the end, we elect to utilize a supervisory order.
"As a general rule, this court will issue a supervisory order only when the normal appellate process will not afford adequate relief and the dispute involves a matter important to the administration of justice, or intervention is necessary to keep an inferior tribunal from acting beyond the scope of its authority. [Citation.] We have repeatedly noted that supreme court supervisory orders are nonprecedential." Cinkus v. Village of Stickney Municipal Officers Electoral Board, 228 Ill.2d 200, 220-21, 319 Ill. Dec. 887, 886 N.E.2d 1011 (2008).
As noted above, the appellate process available to the affected criminal defendants will not resolve the dispute between these parties over the scope of their respective responsibilities with regard to the removal and assignment of assistant public defenders. And, because this dispute involves only these two parties and is not symptomatic of a more widespread concern, it is not necessary to issue a writ with precedential effect.
Thus, we order the respondent, when he determines that an indigent defendant is entitled to appointed counsel, to assign the case to the assistant public defender then assigned to his courtroom for that purpose. Further, when he finds it necessary to exercise his constitutional duty and authority to remove an attorney for contempt or other cause, we order respondent to make a record of the factual basis for this action that will be sufficient for meaningful appellate review. In each such case, the cause asserted must demonstrate a nexus to the representation of the particular client by the particular attorney. Finally, if it should become necessary to remove an assistant public defender from representation of an individual defendant, we direct respondent either to allow petitioner to reassign the case or to follow a procedure for reassignment established by the petitioner.
Order entered.
*831 Chief Justice FITZGERALD and Justices FREEMAN, THOMAS, KILBRIDE, KARMEIER, and BURKE concurred in the judgment and opinion.
NOTES
[1]  This court did not review the appellate court's holding on the constitutionality of this provision.

=== CASE 9740389 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:34:24.281294+00 ===

ROBERTS, J.
On March 12, 1949, Ruth D. Wooley was killed, as the result of a collision between an automobile driven by her and a freight train operated by the Chicago & North Western Railway Company. The accident occurred at the intersection of the main street of Ree Heights, South Dakota, and the tracks of the defendant company. Harrold W. Wooley, husband of decedent, was appointed special administrator of her estate and brought this action seeking to recover damages for death by alleged wrongful act. The engineer and the conductor in charge of the train involved in the accident were also named as defendants. At the close of plaintiff’s evidence and again at the close of all the evidence defendants made motions for directed verdict, both of which motions were overruled, and the cause was submitted ■to the jury which returned a verdict for the plaintiff and against the railway company for the sum of $3460, but the verdict was silent as to the other defendants. The motion of the defendants not referred to in the verdict for a judgment of dismissal was sustained. Defendant company moved for judgment notwithstanding the verdict. The motion was granted and plaintiff appeals from the judgment.
It is the contention of plaintiff that the absence of a flagman at the crossing and the failure to provide automatic signals could be taken into consideration by the jury in determining whether under all the circumstances decedent failed to exercise reasonable care and that the evidence justified the jury in finding that decedent relying on the custom of the freight train to slacken its speed and stop at Ree Heights concluded that she had ample time to clear the crossing and that contrary to such custom the train approached the crossing at a high rate of speed. The questions *206presented on appeal are whether the evidence sustains a finding of negligence on the part of the railway company and whether decedent was guilty of contributory negligence as a matter of law. It is conceded that in considering these issues this court must view the evidence in the light most favorable to the plaintiff and that all conflicts must be resolved and all permissible inferences from the evidence must be drawn in favor of the plaintiff.
The tracks of defendant company run. approximately east and west at the point in question and the street north and south. Decedent was familiar with the crossing having resided several years on a farm two miles southeast of Ree Heights and having traveled frequently over the crossing.
Decedent approached the crossing from the south. The train was coming from the west at a rate of speed estimated at 35 miles an hour. The nearest building south of the tracks on the west side of main street is the post office. It is 327 feet from the main line track. The view to the west between this building and the crossing so far as other structures are concerned is obstructed only by the depot which is a one-story building 22 by 48 feet and is approximately 200 feet west from the center of main street. Other obstacles such as the telegraph poles paralleling the track and three trees located immediately west of the depot which were bare of foliage at the time of the accident did not appreciably obscure the view. The street and the terrain to the west are practically level. When decedent had driven past the post office, she had an unobstructed view of the track to the west for a distance of a mile or more and this contention remained until she reached a point 75 feet south of the crossing. The depot then obstructed her view to the west. The evidence further shows that from a point 50 feet south of the track there is an unobstructed view in the direction from which the train was coming of 297 feet and from that point to the crossing the range of vision increases. It is apparent that the depot could not have concealed the movement of the train consisting of a Diesel locomotive and 29 cars having a total length of slightly more than a- quarter of a mile. There were no other vehicles near the crossing or other conditions interfering with traffic. The day was *207cloudy, but visibility was not appreciably limited because of atmospheric conditions. There were no distracting circumstances.
There is a section line highway a quarter mile west of main street. Both the engineer and brakeman testified that as the train approached this section line highway the automatic bell ringer was turned on and the bell continued to ring until the train came to a stop after the accident. The last of four blasts of the whistle was sounded after the highway crossing was reached according to the testimony of the engineer and he then began to repeat two long and two short blasts of the whistle for the main street crossing. There was no negative testimony as to the warning signals. Two witnesses for the plaintiff admitted that they heard the sound of the whistle. The engineer was unable to stop the train after he discovered decedent’s peril. Mrs. Wooley was fatally injured and did not fully regain consciousness although she lived for several hours.
The law imposes upon an automobile driver approaching a railway crossing the duty of exercising his senses for the purpose of determining whether he can cross the track in safety. A failure to do so constitutes contributory negligence as a matter of law. Ulrickson v. Chicago, M., St. P. & P. Ry. Co., 64 S. D. 476, 268 N.W. 369; Johnson v. Chicago & Northwestern Ry. Co., 71 S. D. 132, 22 N.W.2d 725; Schuknecht v. Chicago, M., St. P. & P. R. Co., 74 S.D. 61, 48 N.W.2d 917, and cases cited. The rights and duties of railroads and travelers upon highway crossings are reciprocal. Neither has the exclusive right of passage. The danger is great and the care required of both is commensurate thereto.
It is argued that hi determining whether or not decedent was guilty of want of ordinary care the jury could take into consideration the absence of a flagman at the crossing. There is some evidence that the station agent occasionally gave warnings at the crossing of approaching trains. We shall not stop to consider whether the duty which the law imposes upon a traveler to exercise his senses to discover the approach of a train is lessened by reliance upon the usual maintenance of a flagman or whether in other words *208the withdrawal of a customary flagman is an indication of safety upon which a traveler may rely. Because of occasional warning decedent could not assume the usual maintenance of a flagman. As was said in Waitkus v. Chicago & N. W. Ry. Co., 204 Wis. 566, 236 N.W. 531, 533, 237 N.W. 259, wherein the evidence showed that a flagman was maintained at certain times of the day and the accident occurred after the flagman had left: “In this case no flagman was maintained at this crossing after 6 o’clock p. m. If the deceased knew what the custom really was, he could place no reliance upon it, because he was charged with knowledge that there was no' flagman there at the time of the accident. However, it is argued that he did know that a flagman was customarily maintained in the daytime. This inference may be permissible from testimony to the effect that he had crossed this crossing in the daytime when the flagman was present. But upon the evidence in this case, would the jury be permitted to find that he did place any reliance upon this custom at the time in question, and, if so, could they be permitted to find that he was justified in so relying? In order to justify such reliance, it is necessary to permit the deceased to assume a custom which did not in fact obtain. It would permit him to assume that, because a flagman was maintained at this crossing as certain times of the day, he was maintained there every hour of the day. This might be permissible if such be the general custom. There is no evidence to show that, where a flagman is maintained during the daytime when the traffic is heavy, he is generally so maintained during the night when there is little or no traffic. In the absence of such a custom, there was no reasonable basis for such an inference if it was in fact indulged and relied upon.”
Plaintiff cites and relies upon Licha v. Northern Pac. Ry. Co., 201 Minn. 427, 276 N.W. 813, wherein it was held that ordinary prudence may require safety devices at crossings in addition to those required by statute. The ruling is not here applicable. The evidence does not show that the crossing was more than ordinarily hazardous and dangerous and one requiring the stationing of a flagman or the installation of automatic signals.
We have considered and given weight to the *209argument of counsel that the jury could have found that decedent had reason to assume that the train would stop at the depot and that the slackening of its speed in so doing would.have permitted decedent to clear the crossing. If decedent exercised due care for her own safety, she looked and listened when she reached a point where she had an unobstructed view of the track. If she looked, she saw the train approaching. If she saw it, she must have concluded that it was safe for her to cross. There may be circumstances where the driver of an automobile makes observation, determines that he can safely cross and could, as a matter of fact, have done so but for an unexpected happening caused by the action of the defendant. A typical case is Peyla v. Duluth, M. & I. R. R. Co., 218 Minn. 196, 15 N.W.2d 518, 154 A.L.R. 505, cited and relied upon by plaintiff. Plaintiff in that case observed a railroad speeder approaching and started across the track ahead of it when it appeared that he could safely do so, but the speeder contrary to the custom of slowing down at the crossing suddenly increased its speed and a collision occurred. The court in that case concluded that the attempt of the plaintiff to cross in front of the speeder was not contributory negligence as a matter of law. In the instant case, there was no evidence from which the jury could find that the eastbound freight train made scheduled or customary stops at Ree Heights. Decedent had no right to assume that the train would stop at the depot.
The evidence beyond reasonable dispute shows that decedent was guilty of more than slight negligence which under the so-called comparative negligence statute defeats a recovery and required the setting aside of the verdict returned.
We find no. reversible error and the judgment entered notwithstanding the verdict is affirmed.
RUDOLPH, P. J., and SMITH and LEEDOM, JJ., concur.
SICKEL, J., dissents.

=== CASE 9740390 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:34:24.28534+00 ===

SICKEL, J.
(dissenting). The question here presented is whether decedent was negligent in failing to avoid the *210collision at the railroad crossing. The majority opinion states that “When decedent had driven past the post office, she had an unobstructed view of the track to the west for a distance of a mile or more and this condition remained until she reached a point 75 feet south of the crossing. The depot then obstructed her view to the west.”
The blue print introduced in evidence at the trial shows the depot to be a building 22 feet wide and 48 feet long located on the south side of the track and 150 feet west of the street upon which decedent was traveling; that at a point 75 feet south of the crossing and at the center of the highway decedent’s vision of the tracks was obstructed by the depot from a point 250 feet west of the place of observation, to a point 740 feet west of the same place, or a total distance of 490 feet. In addition, her view was further obscured by three cottonwood trees located west of the depot. As she approached the crossing her visibility of the tracks to the west of the depot decreased and to the east of it increased. It is true that the depot and the cottonwood trees could not conceal the entire train from decedent’s view from any particular position after she passed the drugstore. There is no evidence to show the distance between decedent and the railroad tracks at the time the train came from behind the depot into her range of vision.
This had for many years been regarded by the employees of the railroad company and others as a dangerous crossing. There was a crossbuck sign at the crossing, but no stop sign or other warning of danger. The company was. aware of the need for a warning signal at the crossing, but failed and neglected to install it, leaving the determination to the state highway commission.
This was a local freight train. It was the practice to stop at the station unless there was no business of loading or unloading to be done. When it stopped at the station on the eastward trip the engine would be stationed near but west of the street. Decedent resided two miles from the town. She was familiar with the crossing and had passed that way many times during the years. It is therefore fair to assume that she had often seen the train standing in this *211position. It may be true that decedent had no right to assume that the train would stop at the depot. She did, however, have the right to assume that the train would either stop at the depot or that it would reduce its speed to a reasonable rate under the circumstances, and in either case she could have crossed the tracks in safety.
It is undisputed that the train was traveling at about 35 miles per hour as it approached the town and this speed was not reduced before the accident. The speed of decedent’s car has not been shown but she approached the crossing through the main street of the town and her car skidded a distance of 32 or 36 feet on all four wheels, before being struck by the train, and there is no evidence, circumstantial cr otherwise, to show that her speed was excessive.
To say that had she looked she could have seen the train as it approached the depot from the west is not enough. Even if she did look and did observe the train as it approached the depot it would not necessarily follow that she could or should accurately judge the speed of the train at that point and thereby determine whether it would stop at the depot, or that it would pass through the town without reducing its speed to a reasonable rate. It is quite obvious that when the train emerged from behind the depot and when it became apparent that it was neither going to stop nor reduce its speed it was then too late for decedent to avoid the collision. By failure to stop at the station or to reduce the speed of the train the defendant introduced a danger where none existed before. Peyla v. Duluth, M. & I. R. R. Co., 218 Minn. 196, 15 N.W.2d 518, 154 A.L.R. 505.
It is therefore my opinion that the negligence of.the defendant was the proximate cause of the collision; that the attempt of decedent to cross the tracks was not negligence as a matter of law and that the circuit court erred in granting defendant’s motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict.

=== CASE 9740391 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:34:24.557179+00 ===

JUSTICE WRIGHT delivered the opinion of the court: A grand jury of La Salle County issued a bill of indictment charging defendant, Marc A. Close, with one count of felony driving while license revoked. Following a hearing on April 18, 2008, the trial court granted defendant’s motion to quash arrest and suppress evidence. The State filed a certificate of substantial impairment pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 604(a)(1) (210 Ill. 2d R. 604(a)(1)) and appeals the trial court’s ruling. FACTS On August 7, 2007, a grand jury of La Salle County issued a bill of indictment charging defendant with one count of felony driving while license revoked. The indictment alleged that on or about June 24, 2007, defendant knowingly drove a 1987 Chevrolet upon a public highway, Argyle Street, at a time when defendant’s driver’s license was revoked for a conviction for the offense of driving under the influence of alcohol and the defendant had been previously convicted of the offense of driving while license revoked. On December 5, 2007, defendant filed a “motion to quash and suppress” alleging in part that defendant’s conduct did not give rise to probable cause. Defendant sought the suppression of any statements or physical evidence obtained as a result of defendant’s arrest and the dismissal of the charges. After multiple continuances, the trial court conducted a hearing on the motion to quash and suppress on April 18, 2008. Defense counsel called Thomas Belski to testify. Belski, a sergeant with the La Salle police department, testified that he had been employed with the department for four years. Prior to that, he worked as a deputy with the Bureau County sheriffs department for eight years. On June 24, 2007, he conducted routine patrol in the city of La Salle. At approximately 7:13 p.m., he performed a registration check on a motor vehicle with license plate 12293B while he followed the vehicle on a roadway. The registration check revealed that the driving privileges of the registered owner of the vehicle were revoked. From the registration check, he also learned that the registered owner had been issued a restricted driving permit, but he did not know the terms of the permit. Belski explained that he used the computer equipment in his squad car to retrieve a photograph of the registered owner, Marc A. Close. He believed Marc A. Close to be the driver of the vehicle after comparing the photograph to the face of the driver he observed operating the vehicle. Belski stopped the motor vehicle without witnessing the driver commit any violations of the vehicle code. When asked by defense counsel if he stopped the vehicle because he “had a hunch” that the driver was not complying with the terms of his restricted driving permit, Belski stated, “That’s correct.” Upon further questioning, Belski stated that he stopped the vehicle based upon his observations of the driver, his clothing, the day of the week, and the time. He further stated that the stop occurred on Sunday, and he knew from prior experience that restricted driving permits were issued for work purposes or hardship issues only. After stopping the vehicle, Belski approached the driver and inquired about the driver’s driving privileges. Upon learning that the driver’s privileges were revoked, Belski arrested the driver. At that time, the trial court interjected about a recent case on the issue. Defense counsel provided the court with a copy of a case entitled People v. Johnson, but failed to offer a citation on the record. Defense counsel then continued his questioning of Belski. Belski indicated that the traffic stop occurred in a residential area of La Salle. Belski explained that he observed the driver wearing a baseball cap, sunglasses, and a tank top. Defense did not call any other witnesses. The State did not offer any evidence. At the conclusion of the evidence, defense counsel again argued the relevance of the case of People v. Donnell Johnson, without reference to the citation. Defense counsel further argued that the officer lacked an adequate basis to stop the vehicle. The State argued that the special needs doctrine allowed the officer to stop the driver to determine compliance with the restricted driving permit. The State also argued that the doctrine of inevitable discovery also applied. The State explained that if the officer had not stopped the vehicle, the officer could have later determined the terms of the restricted driving permit. Based upon the officer’s observations, he could still issue a ticket and warrant for defendant, if deemed appropriate. At the conclusion of the hearing, the trial court granted the motion to quash and certified the question for review by the appellate court. The trial court indicated that it “would like some instruction [from the appellate court] because I can understand why they [law enforcement] believe they could do that.” On April 30, 2008, the State filed a certificate of substantial impairment pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 604(a)(1). On May 16, 2008, the trial court entered an order granting the certificate of impairment and directing the clerk of the court to prepare a notice of appeal. Pursuant to the order, the clerk of the court filed a notice of appeal on May 16, 2008. Following leave of the court, the State filed an amended notice of appeal on June 13, 2008. ANALYSIS On appeal, the State asserts People v. Johnson, 379 Ill. App. 3d 710 (2008), was incorrectly decided, and consequently, this court should not follow the Second District’s decision. Alternatively, the State argues that the additional circumstances considered by the offleer in this case are readily distinguishable from those facts relied upon by the court in Johnson. In addition, the State suggests the special needs doctrine applies and requires reversal of the trial court’s ruling on defendant’s motion to suppress. At issue in this case is the officer’s basis for a traffic stop to investigate whether a driver, reasonably suspected to be the registered owner of the vehicle, was driving while his license was revoked. The ultimate question of whether the evidence should be suppressed requires de novo review. People v. Lee, 214 Ill. 2d 476, 483-84 (2005); People v. Pitman, 211 Ill. 2d 502, 512 (2004); People v. Sorenson, 196 Ill. 2d 425, 430-31 (2001). The standards for a lawful investigative traffic stop evolved from case law developed after the United States Supreme Court’s landmark decision in Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 20 L. Ed. 2d 889, 88 S. Ct. 1868 (1968). Based on Terry, a police officer may temporarily stop and approach a person for the purposes of investigating suspected criminal behavior, even though the officer acts on less information than is necessary to support probable cause to make an arrest. People v. Moore, 378 Ill. App. 3d 41, 46 (2007). Hunches are not enough to support a Terry stop. People v. Sparks, 315 Ill. App. 3d 786, 792 (2000). An officer must have specific knowledge such that the officer is able to articulate sufficient facts present at the time of the encounter to justify the officer’s reasonable suspicion that the person in question has committed or is about to commit a crime. People v. Moore, 378 Ill. App. 3d at 46; People v. Chavez, 327 Ill. App. 3d 18, 32 (2001); People v. Sparks, 315 Ill. App. 3d at 792. It is well established that an officer can lawfully conduct a Terry stop of a vehicle after learning or receiving information that the license of the registered owner of the vehicle is revoked or suspended. See People v. Blankenship, 353 Ill. App. 3d 322, 325 (2004); Village of Lake in the Hills v. Lloyd, 227 Ill. App. 3d 351, 352-53 (1992). The purpose of the stop is to allow the officer to check the status of the operator’s privilege to drive. Village of Lake in the Hills v. Lloyd, 227 Ill. App. 3d at 353, citing People v. Barnes, 152 Ill. App. 3d 1004, 1006 (1987). In this case, the officer learned from reliable law enforcement records that the registered owner of the vehicle had a revoked driver’s license. Additionally, the officer also learned from the same reliable records that the registered owner had been issued a valid restricted driving permit (RDP). Consequently, we are called upon to determine whether the existence of an RDP demands an added layer of information before an officer develops a sound articulable basis to stop a suspected revoked driver. The issue is whether an officer, knowing the suspected driver has been issued an RDR may initiate a traffic stop based solely on the knowledge that the suspected driver’s license has been revoked; or whether the officer must delay stopping a suspected revoked driver, known to have received an RDR until the officer considers additional information that excludes a reasonable possibility that the driver may be operating the automobile within the scope of the restricted permit. The answer can be found in the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/1— 100 et seq. (West 2006)) and existing case law. The case law provides that once a “person’s privilege to drive has been revoked the restoration of that privilege is not an automatic matter.” Agans v. Edgar, 142 Ill. App. 3d 1087, 1089 (1986), citing People v. Turner, 64 Ill. 2d 183, 186 (1976). A restricted driving permit does not restore a person’s driving privileges but merely allows the person with a revoked driver’s license to drive upon a highway “subject to the restrictions provided therein and not otherwise.” People v. Manikas, 106 Ill. App. 2d 315, 320 (1969). Due to the exigent circumstances created by a moving vehicle, the investigation of this type of driving offense requires swift decision making on the part of the officer. Presumably to assist in the enforcement of driving restrictions, our legislators have imposed a requirement on all drivers to carry their valid license or permit at all times when driving. 625 ILCS 5/6 — 112 (West 2006). This is not a meaningless requirement. It is a legislatively created tool available to law enforcement to remove drivers who are unlawfully operating their vehicles from the roadway without delay. We next examine the language selected by our lawmakers to define the elements of the offense of driving while license revoked. The relevant provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code provide as follows: “§6 — 303. Driving while driver’s license, permit or privilege to operate a motor vehicle is suspended or revoked. (a) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (a — 5), any person who drives or is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle on any highway of this State at a time when such person’s driver’s license, permit or privilege to do so *** is revoked or suspended as provided by this Code or the law of another state, except as may be specifically allowed by a *** restricted driving permit issued pursuant to this Code or under the law of another state, shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor. * * ❖ (d) Any person convicted of a second violation of this Section shall be guilty of a Class 4 felony ***, if the revocation or suspension was for a violation of Section 11 — 401 or 11 — 501 of this Code, or a similar out-of-state offense, or a similar provision of a local ordinance, or a statutory summary suspension under Section 11— 501.1 of this Code.” (Emphasis added.) 625 ILCS 5/6 — 303(a), (d) (West Supp. 2007). The language of the statute set forth above demonstrates the issuance of RDPs creates a statutory defense for revoked drivers who are not fully restored as licensed drivers, but have received an RDE In other words, the exception contained in the provisions of sections 6 — 303(a) and (d) (625 ILCS 5/6 — 303(a), (d) (West Supp. 2007)) does not create an additional element of the offense for the State to prove. Instead, the exception for specially permitted drivers allows a revoked driver to avoid a conviction by demonstrating the driver was “specifically allowed” by the permit to operate the vehicle at that point in time, even though his or her driving status remained revoked. Thus, we agree that an officer is not required to determine or verify the scope of the restricted driving permit before performing a traffic stop when a reasonable articulable basis exists to believe the license of the person behind the wheel is revoked. We conclude the mere existence of an RDE does not extinguish an officer’s reasonable and articulable basis to believe the officer has witnessed a revoked driver traveling on a highway of this state, in violation of the provisions of the Vehicle Code. However, if the visual inspection of the permit by the officer following a traffic stop does not support the officer’s suspicion that the driver is unlawfully operating a motor vehicle, the inspection itself defeats probable cause to continue the investigation of the driver’s license status or to make an arrest. Here, the officer visually confirmed that the facial characteristics of the person whom he observed driving the vehicle matched a photograph of the registered owner. The officer also learned the license of the registered owner was revoked. At this point, based on existing case law, we conclude that this officer, presented with the facts of this case, had a reasonable, articulable basis to believe that defendant was operating a motor vehicle upon a highway of this state at a time when his privilege to do so was revoked in violation of section 6 — 303(a) of the Illinois Vehicle Code. 625 ILCS 5/6 — 303(a) (West Supp. 2007). We hold that this officer lawfully initiated this investigatory stop after learning of the registered owner’s revoked driving privileges standing alone, regardless of the issuance of an RDE For purposes of this appeal, defendant does not suggest he was lawfully operating his vehicle within the terms of his restricted permit at the time of the stop. Instead, he simply challenges the basis for the initial stop and the evidence gathered from that stop. Next, we address whether the case of People v. Johnson, 379 Ill. App. 3d 710 (2008), controls the outcome in this case. In Johnson, the officer testified that on Sunday, February 12, 2006, at 4:30 p.m., he conducted a registration check of a motor vehicle and learned that the male, registered owner of the vehicle possessed a restricted driving permit. After observing “the driver was a male with an appearance consistent with that of the male owner,” the officer initiated a traffic stop on the vehicle. People v. Johnson, 379 Ill. App. 3d at 711. The appellate court upheld the trial court’s decision quashing the arrest and suppressing the evidence in Johnson. The appellate court ruled that the traffic stop was based on “a hunch, not reasonable suspicion,” in part, because the officer relied on the time of day alone to deduce the driver might not be operating his vehicle within the conditions of the permit. People v. Johnson, 379 Ill. App. 3d at 712-13. The court went on to acknowledge that under other circumstances, not present in that case, “some combination of factors, including the time the holder of an RDP was driving, might lead to a reasonable suspicion that the driver was outside the terms of his or her permit.” People v. Johnson, 379 Ill. App. 3d at 713. Unlike the court in Johnson, we deliberately reject the view that a combination of factors in this case provided the officer with an articulable suspicion to believe the driver was not complying with his permit based on the time, location, and driver’s attire. Such an approach invites abuse. Instead, we decline to follow the ruling in People v. Johnson, 379 Ill. App. 3d 710 (2008), based on existing case law discussed above and the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code. While the trial judge was required to follow Johnson in the absence of a contrary view from this court, we now expressly decline to follow Johnson. Therefore, we hold that this officer had a reasonable articulable basis at the time of this encounter to support a brief investigatory traffic stop to identify the driver, and after confirming the driver was in fact the registered owner, conduct an inspection or investigate the scope of the driver’s RDP Accordingly, the order granting the motion to quash and suppress is reversed, and the case is remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. In light of our conclusion that the officer possessed reasonable articulable suspicion to justify this traffic stop, it becomes unnecessary to address the State’s other argument regarding the special needs doctrine. CONCLUSION The judgment of the circuit court of La Salle County is reversed and remanded for further proceedings. Reversed and remanded.

=== CASE 9740392 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:34:24.561778+00 ===

JUSTICE SCHMIDT, specially concurring: I concur with the holding above that the officer’s knowledge of the registered owner’s revoked driving privileges (RDP) supported a Terry stop. I write separately to point out that in my opinion, the Johnson case, upon which defendant and the trial court relied, was wrongly decided. The Johnson court acknowledged that “ ‘[w]hile the facts supporting the officer’s suspicions need not rise to the level of probable cause, they must be based on more than a mere hunch.’ ” People v. Johnson, 379 Ill. App. 3d 710, 712, 885 N.E.2d 358, 360 (2008), quoting People v. Cox, 202 Ill. 2d 462, 467 (2002). It seems obvious that the case turned upon whether the officer’s conclusion that the RDP was not valid on Sunday afternoon was simply a hunch or a reasonable, articulable suspicion. New Webster’s Dictionary defines “hunch” as “an intuition or presentiment.” New Webster’s Dictionary & Thesaurus 188 (1991). The American Heritage College Dictionary defines “hunch” as “an intuitive feeling or premonition.” American Heritage College Dictionary 663 (3d ed. 1993). The Johnson court stated “McGreall was likely correct in believing that Sunday afternoons are times when many RDPs prohibit driving, but that insight was not enough to give rise to reasonable suspicion.” (Emphasis added.) Johnson, 379 Ill. App. 3d at 712, 885 N.E.2d at 360. One needs to think about what the Johnson court said. Three appellate judges acknowledged that the officer “was likely correct” and yet, nonetheless, they labeled his suspicion as a mere hunch. In Johnson, the officer knew that the driver was revoked, had an RDR and was driving on a Sunday afternoon. Apparently, the Johnson court wanted him to know that his RDP was not valid on Sunday afternoon. If the officer had proof positive that defendant’s RDP was not valid on this Sunday afternoon, he would have had enough to convict beyond a reasonable doubt. That is not the type of evidence that is required for a Terry stop. The appellate court in Johnson must have agreed that the officer’s articulated suspicion was reasonable, otherwise, how could it have noted that the officer “was likely correct”? Johnson, 379 Ill. App. 3d at 712, 885 N.E.2d at 360. If, in fact, the officer had nothing more than a hunch, how could three appellate judges unanimously agree that he was likely correct? The Johnson court described a reasonable, articulable suspicion and then labeled it as a mere hunch. In my opinion, the Johnson court, like many Illinois courts, has eroded the concept of reasonable, articulable suspicion. Since the officer might have been wrong and the defendant’s RDP might have been valid, courts simply say that there was no reasonable, articulable suspicion of wrongdoing. Since the issue before us is a fourth amendment issue, the United States Supreme Court is the guiding light for our analysis. The long-prevailing standard of probable cause protects citizens from rash and unreasonable interferences with privacy and from unfounded charges of crime, while giving fair leeway for enforcing the law in the community’s protection. Maryland v. Pringle, 540 U.S. 366, 157 L. Ed. 2d 769, 124 S. Ct. 795 (2003). Probable cause exists when there is fair probability that contraband or evidence of a crime will be found in a particular case. United States v. Grubbs, 547 U.S. 90, 164 L. Ed. 2d 195, 126 S. Ct. 1494 (2006). We have lost sight of the fact that reasonable, articulable suspicion is even a lower threshold than is probable cause. Reasonable suspicion entails some minimal level of objective justification for making a stop: something more than an inchoate and unparticularized suspicion or “hunch,” but less than the level of suspicion required for probable cause. Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 20 L. Ed. 2d 889, 88 S. Ct. 1868 (1968). Reasonable, articulable suspicion is considerably less than proof of wrongdoing by a preponderance of the evidence. United States v. Sokolow, 490 U.S. 1, 104 L. Ed. 2d 1, 109 S. Ct. 1581 (1989). We know that a preponderance of the evidence is that something is more likely true than not. Therefore, to form reasonable, articulable suspicion, the officer does not have to establish that it is more likely true than not that the subject of the stop is guilty of criminal wrongdoing. The Supreme Court has acknowledged that there will be circumstances in which wholly lawful conduct might justify the suspicion that criminal activity is afoot. Reid v. Georgia, 448 U.S. 438, 65 L. Ed. 2d 890, 100 S. Ct. 2752 (1980); United States v. Sokolow, 490 U.S. 1, 104 L. Ed. 2d 1, 109 S. Ct. 1581 (1989). Based on the facts set forth above, the officer clearly had a reasonable, articulable suspicion that the driver was operating in violation of his RDP It would be fair to say that most, but not all, people driving about on Sunday afternoons are not going to or from work. This commonsense observation is undoubtedly what led the Johnson court to conclude that the arresting officer was likely correct. Even had he been wrong and had the defendant actually been going to or coming from work, or going to or coming from the hospital, the brief investigatory stop was supported by reasonable, articulable suspicion and, therefore, constitutionally permissible. See United States v. Sokolow, 490 U.S. 1, 104 L. Ed. 2d 1, 109 S. Ct. 1581 (1989). Again, the concept of reasonable, articulable suspicion presupposes that the detained person’s conduct might very well be innocent. I believe the trial court, as did the Johnson court, held the State to a higher burden than that imposed by the law and, therefore, concur in the judgment to reverse and remand for further proceedings.

=== CASE 9740393 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:34:24.565584+00 ===

JUSTICE McDADE, dissenting: I dissent from the decision of the majority to reverse the trial court’s order granting defendant’s motion to quash arrest and suppress evidence. The majority holds that “an officer is not required to determine or verify the scope of the restricted driving permit before performing a traffic stop when a reasonable articulable basis exists to believe the license of the person behind the wheel is revoked.” (Emphasis omitted.) 389 Ill. App. 3d at 233. Stated another way, once the officer reasonably determines that the person behind the wheel has a revoked driver’s license, that officer can execute a traffic stop to investigate whether the driver was operating the vehicle outside the terms of his/ her RDE Thus, the terms or scope of the RDF have no bearing on the question of whether the officer had a sufficient basis to execute the traffic stop. Instead, the majority finds that an RDF merely creates a statutory defense which allows a revoked driver to avoid a conviction by demonstrating to the officer that he/she is “specifically allowed” by the permit to operate the vehicle at the time of the seizure. 389 111. App. 3d at 233. I believe the majority’s reasoning is flawed in that it ignores the fact that an officer is only allowed to stop and detain an individual if the officer has “knowledge of sufficient articulable facts at the time of the encounter to create a reasonable suspicion that the person in question has committed, or is about to commit, a crime.” (Emphasis added). People v. Love, 199 Ill. 2d 269, 275, 769 N.E.2d 10, 15 (2002), quoting People v. Smithers, 83 Ill. 2d 430, 434 (1980). Driving on a revoked license is not a crime if the individual is driving within the scope of his/her RDE Thus, in order to effectuate a valid traffic stop, I believe an officer must have a reasonable articulable suspicion that the driver is operating the vehicle outside the terms of his/her RDE As in the case of People v. Johnson, 379 Ill. App. 3d 710, 885 N.E.2d 358 (2008), the officer’s stop in the present case was based solely on a hunch, not reasonable suspicion. In the case where a driver of a vehicle has an RDl^ mere knowledge that the driver has a revoked driver’s license is insufficient to support a Terry stop. Johnson, 379 Ill. App. 3d at 712, 885 N.E.2d at 360. While the majority declines to adopt the reasoning set forth in Johnson, I believe Johnson was properly decided. Accordingly, I would affirm the judgment of the trial court granting defendant’s motion to quash arrest and suppress evidence.

=== CASE 9740394 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:34:25.970865+00 ===

OPINION
VAIDIK, Judge.
Case Summary
While working for the Northern Indiana Commuter Transportation District ("NICTD") as a carman, plaintiff Steven Januchowski alleged that he was injured by shifting panels as a result of NICTD's negligence. NICTD operates a passenger commuter rail service from South Bend, Indiana, to Chicago, Illinois. Januchowski brought his claim under the Federal Employers' Liability Act (FELA), which provides a federal cause of action for railroad employees injured as a result of negli-genee. Januchowski brought his claim more than two years, but less than three years, after the alleged injuries. At trial, Januchowski argued that FELA's three-year statute of limitation applied to his ease. NICTD argued that Indiana's general two-year statute of limitation for personal injury torts applied because of the Indiana Tort Claims Act (ITCA), and that, as a result, Januchowski's claim was time-barred. Agreeing with NICTD on this point, the trial court granted summary judgment in favor of NICTD. Because we find that FELA's three-year statute of limitation applies under statutory law and our Supreme Court's case law, we reverse and remand.
Facts and Procedural History
In Januchowski's complaint against NICTD, Januchowski alleges that, on or about October 5, 2004, while he was engaged in his duties as a carman for NICTD, he was moving panels weighing between 100 and 200 pounds using improvised equipment because the forklift usually utilized to move panels was out of service. Januchowski stated that one of these panels shifted onto him, causing severe injuries to his back and lower extremities. Januchowski alleged that because NICTD engages in the business of operating a railway in interstate commerce, he was entitled to bring a cause of action against NICTD for its negligence under FELA, a federal statute.
Approximately sixty days after his alleged injury, Januchowski sent notice to the Indiana Secretary of State and to NICTD of his intent to sue NICTD for his injuries. Approximately 120 days after his alleged injuries, Januchowski also sent notice to the Indiana Attorney General's office of his intent to sue NICTD for his injuries. On October 31, 2006, a little over two years after the accident, Januchowski filed a complaint against NICTD in Lake County Superior Court. A few months later, the case was transferred to Porter County.
In June 2007, NICTD filed a motion for summary judgment, arguing that Janu-chowski failed to comply with the notice requirements of the TTCA, which provides *1044the conditions for suit when a party sues a governmental entity. NICTD also argued that Januchowski failed to comply with Indiana's two-year statute of limitation for personal injury actions. Januchowski responded, arguing that he had complied with the notice requirements of the ITCA and that his suit was timely because he complied with the three-year statute of limitation contained in FELA. The trial court held a hearing on the motion, and both sides presented argument.
In its well-reasoned order on the summary judgment motion, the trial court determined first that NICTD was a political subdivision. As a result, Januchowski was required under the ITCA to file notice with NICTD's governing body and the Indiana political subdivision risk management commission within 180 days after the loss occurred. The trial court next determined that Januchowski had substantially complied with the notice requirements. Even though he did not send notice within 180 days to the political subdivision risk management commission as required by the ITCA for political subdivisions, because Januchowski sent notice to NICTD within sixty days of his accident the purpose of the notice statute was fulfilled. Additionally, Januchowski did send notice to the Indiana Attorney General about 120 days after the accident and to the Indiana Secretary of State about sixty days after the accident.
Finally, the trial court determined that Indiana's general two-year statute of limitation for torts applied rather than FELA's three-year statute of limitation because suits against governmental entities must be brought in compliance with the terms of the ITCA, and that as a result Januchowski's claim was time-barred. The trial court granted summary judgment in favor of NICTD. Januchowski filed a motion to correct error, which was deemed denied. Januchowski now appeals.
Discussion and Decision
On appeal, neither party contests the trial court's determination that NICTD is a political subdivision 1 nor the determination that Januchowski substantially complied with the ITCA's notice requirements. But Januchowski argues that the trial court erred by granting summary judgment to NICTD, determining that Indiana's general two-year statute of limitation for personal injury torts applies to his suit. We therefore must decide whether the general two-year state statute of limitation for torts or FELA's specific three-year statute of limitation applies to FELA claims against governmental entities in Indiana courts. To do so, we must examine the ITCA, FELA, and Indiana's general statute of limitation for torts.2
*1045The purpose of summary judgment is to terminate litigation about which there can be no factual dispute and which may be determined as a matter of law. Bushong v. Williamson, 790 N.E.2d 467, 474 (Ind.2003). On appeal, our standard of review is the same as that of the trial court: summary judgment is appropriate only where the evidence shows there is no genuine issue of material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Williams v. Riverside Cmty. Corr. Corp., 846 N.E.2d 738, 743 (Ind.Ct.App.2006), trans. denied. We construe all facts and reasonable inferences drawn from those facts in favor of the non-moving party. Id. On appeal, the trial court's order granting or denying a motion for summary judgment is cloaked with a presumption of validity. Sizemore v. Erie Ins. Exch., 789 N.E.2d 1037, 1038 (Ind.Ct.App.2008). A party appealing from an order granting summary judgment has the burden of persuading the appellate tribunal that the decision was erroneous. Id. at 1038-39. However, where the facts are undisputed and the issue presented is a pure question of law, we review the matter de novo. Crum v. City of Terre Haute ex rel. Dep't of Redev., 812 N.E.2d 164, 166 (Ind.Ct.App.2004).
Statutory interpretation is purely a question of law. Id. On appeal, we must examine FELA and its statute of limitation, the ITCA, and Indiana's general statute of limitation for torts. When courts construe statutes, the goal is to determine and give effect to the legislature's intent. Cooper Indus., LLC v. City of South Bend, 899 N.E.2d 1274, 1283 (Ind.2009). The first place courts look for evidence is the statutory language. Id. We examine statutes as a whole. Id. We presume the legislature intended the statute's language to be applied logically and consistent with the statute's underlying policy. Id. Thus, we can look to the underlying purpose of the provisions and to similar sections within the Indiana Code for guidance. Id. at 1284. Another factor to consider when determining legislative intent is the statute's location within the Indiana Code. Roberts v. Sankey, 813 N.E.2d 1195, 1198 (Ind.Ct.App.2004), reh'g denied, trans. denied.
I. FELA Background
We first examine the language and purpose of FELA. Januchowski was an employee of NICTD. NICTD operates a commuter railway system. See Ind.Code ch, 8-5-15. FELA, 45 U.S.C.A. §§ 51-60 (2009), creates a negligence cause of action for railroad employees injured in the scope of their employment. It provides:
Every common carrier by railroad while engaging in commerce between any of the several States or Territories, or between any of the States and Territories, or between the District of Columbia and any of the States or Territories, or between the District of Columbia or any of the States or Territories and any foreign nation or nations, shall be liable in damages to any person suffering injury while he is employed by such carrier in such commerce ... for such injury or death resulting in whole or in part from the negligence of any of the officers, agents, or employees of such carrier, or by reason of any defect or insufficiency, due to its negligence, in its cars, engines, appliances, machinery, track, roadbed, works, boats, wharves, or other equipment.
Any employee of a carrier, any part of whose duties as such employee shall be the furtherance of interstate or foreign commerce; or shall, in any way directly or closely and substantially, affect such *1046commerce as above set forth shall, for the purposes of this chapter, be considered as being employed by such carrier in such commerce and shall be considered as entitled to the benefits of this chapter.
45 U.S.C.A. § 51 (2009). FELA's purpose is a humanitarian one. Burnett v. N.Y. Cent. R.R. Co., 380 U.S. 424, 434, 85 S.Ct. 1050, 13 L.Ed.2d 941 (1965). As a result, the United States Supreme Court has liberally construed FELA to further its remedial and humanitarian purpose. Urie v. Thompson, 337 U.S. 163, 181-82, 69 S.Ct. 1018, 93 L.Ed. 1282 (1949). In order to ensure that FELA's humanitarian purpose is met, the United States Supreme Court recognizes that FELA is meant to operate uniformly among the states. Burnett, 380 U.S. at 433, 85 S.Ct. 1050.
FELA contains a three-year3 statute of limitation:
No action shall be maintained under this chapter unless commenced within three years from the day the cause of action accrued.
Under this chapter an action may be brought in a district court of the United States, in the district of the residence of the defendant, or in which the cause of action arose, or in which the defendant shall be doing business at the time of commencing such action. The jurisdiction of the courts of the United States under this chapter shall be concurrent with that of the courts of the several States.
45 U.S.C.A. § 56 (2009). In an action against a private entity, the United States Supreme Court has determined that the right to bring a FELA claim within the time provided in the FELA statute of limitation is a substantive right that controls in an action brought in a state court, regardless of any state statute of limitation. Engel v. Davenport, 271 U.S. 33, 39, 46 S.Ct. 410, 70 L.Ed. 813 (1926) (considering whether state statute of limitation applied in California state court in claim against private ship owner under the Merchant Marine Act, which had incorporated FELA at a time when FELA's statute of limitation was two years). Our Court has previously recognized that "[allithough FELA actions may be adjudicated in state courts and therein follow state procedural rules, the proceedings are governed by federal substantive law." Gouge v. Ind. Commuter Transp. Dist., 670 N.E.2d 363, 365 (Ind.Ct.App.1996). Januchowski and NICTD agree that FELA's statute of limitation would apply if NICTD were a private entity. Although it is settled that the FELA statute of limitation applies over a state statute of limitation in suits against private entities, it has not been settled as to which statute of limitation applies in suits in Indiana against political subdivisions such as NICTD, where issues of sovereign immunity come into play.
II. ITCA Background
To answer this question, we turn to Indiana's body of sovereign immunity law. Because NICTD is a political subdivision, it is a governmental entity. Historically, a state may not be sued in its own courts unless it has waived its sovereign immunity by expressly consenting to such suit through a clear declaration of that consent. Oshinski v. N. Ind. Commuter Transp. Dist., 843 N.E.2d 536, 539-40 (Ind.Ct.App.2006) (citing Coll. Sav. Bank v. Fla. Prepaid Postsecondary Educ. Expense Bd., 527 U.S. 666, 680, 119 S.Ct. 2219, 144 L.Ed.2d 605 (1999)). In 1972, the Indiana *1047Supreme Court abolished the doctrine of common law sovereign immunity in this state, leaving several limited exceptions, and determined that the legislature alone was responsible for considering which specific types of governmental conduct would result in immunity from liability. Burns v. City of Terre Haute, 744 NE.2d 1038, 1040 (Ind.Ct.App.2001) (discussing Campbell v. State, 259 Ind. 55, 284 N.E.2d 733, 737 (1972)), trans. denied. In 1974, the General Assembly enacted the ITCA.4 Act of Feb. 19, 1974, Pub.L. No. 142, 1974 Ind. Acts 599.
The ITCA is comprehensive, and it provides that governmental entities are subject to liability for their torts in Indiana state courts, unless the activity giving rise to the tort falls within its list of enumerated exceptions.5 Ind.Code § 34-18-3-3; State v. Willits, 773 N.E.2d 808, 814 (Ind.2002). Because the ITCA is in derogation of the common law, the ITCA must be strictly construed against limitations on the claimant's right to bring suit. Burns, 744 N.E.2d at 1040. The governmental entity seeking to establish immunity bears the burden of proving that its conduct comes within the ITCA. Peavler v. Monroe County Bd. of Comm'rs, 528 N.E.2d 40, 46 (Ind.1988).
Our Supreme Court reaffirmed Campbell's abrogation of common law sovereign immunity in Benton v. City of Oakland City, 721 N.E.2d 224, 231 (Ind.1999) ("We hold that Campbell is properly applied by presuming that a governmental unit is bound by the same duty of care as a non-governmental unit except where the duty alleged to have been breached is so closely akin to one of the limited exceptions (prevent erime, appoint competent officials, or make correct judicial decisions) that it should be treated as one as well."); see also King v. Ne. Sec., Inc., 790 N.E.2d 474, 478-79 (Ind.2003), reh'yg denied. Under the ITCA, governmental entities are liable for the torts they commit unless the activity giving rise to the tort falls within an enumerated exception. Willits, 773 N.E.2d at 814. As a result, if the ITCA does not expressly shield the governmental entity and the activity does not meet one of the Campbell exceptions, the governmental entity will be treated like a private entity. See, eg., Patrick v. Miresso, 848 N.E.2d 1083 (Ind.2006) (declining to find immunity under the ITCA's "enforcement of ... a law" exception for governmental *1048entities for injuries caused by officer's negligent operation of a police vehicle while pursuing a fleeing suspect); but cf. Giles v. Brown County ex rel. Bd. of Comm'rs, 868 N.E.2d 478 (Ind.2007) (finding immunity under the ITCA's "operation" or "use" of an enhanced emergency communications system for injuries resulting from failure to provide requested emergency medical services in time to prevent the death of plaintiff's spouse).
HII. Which Statute of Limitation Applies?
Keeping the history of the ITCA in mind, we now consider what the ITCA does and does not say in order to determine the legislature's intent as to which statute of limitation applies to Janu-chowski's suit-the two-year Indiana statute of limitation for personal injury torts or the three-year statute of limitation for FELA claims. The ITCA is a clear declaration of Indiana's consent to be sued, provided that certain conditions are met. Oshinski, 848 N.E.2d at 544. Notice to the government is one such express condition contained within the ITCA. Ind.Code §§ 34-13-3-6 (governing notice to state agencies); 34-13-3-8 (governing notice to political subdivisions). The government's denial of the claim in whole or in part is another express condition contained within the ITCA. Ind.Code § 34-18-3-183. We have held that Indiana's qualified consent to suit applies to FELA claims because FELA claims are tort claims.6 Oshinski, 843 N.E.2d at 544. The parties agree, as do we, that the conditions contained within the ITCA, namely, notice and denial of claim, apply to FELA claims against governmental entities. What is not so clear is which statute of limitation applies.
Although the ITCA contains many requirements like notice and denial of claim, it is silent regarding a statute of limitation. As such, NICTD points to another part of the Indiana Code, Indiana Code § 34-11-2-4, which sets forth a general statute of limitation for torts. Indiana Code § 34-11-2-4 provides that
[ain action for:
(1) injury to person or character;
(2) injury to personal property; or
(3) a forfeiture of penalty given by statute;
must be commenced within two (2) years after the cause of action accrues.
This statute of limitation is not contained within the body of the ITCA; rather, it is contained within another article of the code entirely.
We find the omission of a statute of limitation in the ITCA to be significant. This is because the General Assembly knows how to include a statute of limitation into the body of an act. For example, the legislature has included a statute of limitation into the Indiana Contract Claims Act (@ICCA"). Indiana Code § 34-13-1-1(a) provides that "[aluy person having a claim against the state arising out of an express or implied contract may bring suit within ten (10) years after accrual of the claim." See also Ind.Code §§ 34-18-5-10(a) (providing a time limitation for lawsuits testing public improvements of municipal corporations); -6-1(b) (providing that an appeal from any action or decision of a municipality must be filed as an original complaint within thirty days of the challenged action or decision). The ten-year statute of limitation in the ICCA applies against contract actions against the State whether they arise out of express or *1049implied contract. I.C. § 34-13-1-1. However, the statutes of limitation for actions against individuals or entities other than the State provide for a six-year statute of limitation for actions on contracts not in writing, Ind.Code § 34-11-2-7, a six-year statute of limitation for actions on written contracts entered into after August 31, 1982, for payment of money, Ind.Code § 34-11-2-9, and a ten-year statute of limitation for actions on written contracts entered into after August 31, 1982, other than those for payment of money, Ind. Code § 34-11-2-11.
The ITCA contains many requirements, but a statute of limitation is not one of them. However, the General Assembly has included statutes of limitation into other acts, including the ICCA. This is crucial. See City of Evansville v. Zirkelbach, 662 N.E.2d 651, 654 (Ind.Ct.App.1996) (noting that it is just as important to recognize what a statute does not say as much as what it does say); see also State v. Am. Family Voices, Inc., 898 N.E.2d 293, 298 (Ind.2008); See. Trust Corp. v. Estate of Fisher ex rel. Roy, 797 N.E.2d 789, 794 (Ind.Ct.App.2003) (acknowledging the well-established rule of statutory construction known as expressio unius est exclusio al-terius, that is, the enumeration of certain things in a statute necessarily implies the exclusion of all others), trans denied. Because the ITCA does not expressly contain a statute of limitation, we find no support for NICTD's argument that Indiana's two-year statute of limitation applies to all tort claims against the State no matter the type of tort. If the legislature had intended for that statute of limitation to apply to all claims under the ITCA, it would have inserted such a requirement into the ITCA. We find that compliance with Indiana's personal injury statute of limitation is not a condition for suit under the ITCA when the claim is controlled by FELA.7
Further, our decision that the General Assembly did not intend to make compliance with Indiana's two-year personal injury statute of limitation for torts a condition for suit under the ITCA when the claim is governed by its own limitation period is consistent with Indiana's body of sovereign immunity law. As discussed above, through case law and the ITCA, Indiana law holds governmental entities liable for their actions unless the conduct falls within one of the enumerated exceptions of the ITCA. See Willits, 773 N.E.2d at 814. FELA suits are not an enumerated exception. Thus, NICTD's argument that the General Assembly must expressly consent to FELA suits within the ITCA to waive sovereign immunity is invalid. As the governmental entity claiming immunity, NICTD bears the burden of proving that its conduct falls within one of the ITCA exceptions. NICTD has failed to do so; indeed, NICTD makes no argument that one of the exceptions applies.
NICTD argues instead that we should apply the rule in Walker v. Memering, 471 N.E.2d 1202 (Ind.Ct.App.1984), reh'g denied. In Walker, we applied the two-year statutfe of limitation for personal injury actions to an inmate's claim for negligence against various Knox County governmental entities and employees as a result of injuries he allegedly received after being beaten by other inmates. Id. at 1203. The issue in that case was whether the statute of limitation should be tolled during the ninety days given to governmental entities by statute to determine whether to grant or deny the claim. The Court deter*1050mined that the statute of limitation would not be tolled.
NICTD's reliance on Walker is inapposite. The Court in Walker was not faced with two differing statutes of limitation but instead applied the only pertinent statute of limitation, the two-year statute of limitation for personal injury torts. If Januchowski had brought a personal injury suit against NICTD under Indiana law, Indiana's general two-year statute of limitation for personal injury suits would apply. See id. If Januchowski had brought a fraud suit against NICTD under Indiana law, Indiana's six-year statute of limitation for fraud suits would apply. See Orem v. Ivy Tech State Coll., 711 N.E.2d 864, 870 n. 7 (Ind.Ct.App.1999), trams. denied. We determine the appropriate statute of limitation based on the nature of the claim.
Because we are to treat governmental entities like private entities unless the ITCA commands otherwise and the ITCA does not do so here, we will apply FELA to NICTD as if it were a private entity. As discussed above, FELA's three-year statute of limitation is regarded as a substantive right. Having complied with the three-year statute of limitation, Januchowski's suit may proceed. We note as well that our decision is also consistent with the humanitarian purpose underlying FELA and the intent that FELA operate uniformly among the states.
Of course, the General Assembly, which determines the seope of governmental immunity now that common law sovereign immunity in Indiana has been abrogated, is free to amend the ITCA to make compliance with a particular statute of limitation a condition of suit for all tort claims against governmental entities See Raygor, 534 U.S. at 542-43, 122 S.Ct. 999. But we will not read such a condition into the statute ourselves. See S. Newton Sch. Corp. Bd. of Sch. Tv. v. S. Newton Classroom Teachers Ass'n, 762 N.E.2d 115, 120 (Ind.Ct.App.2001), trans. denied.
As a matter of statutory interpretation, we find that the General Assembly did not intend compliance with Indiana's general two-year tort statute of limitation to be a condition for suit under the ITCA when the claim is controlled by FELA. Consistent with Indiana's sovereign immunity law and our Supreme Court case law, we treat NICTD as though it were a private entity and apply FELA's three-year statute of limitation. Because we conclude that Januchowski's claim is not barred by the two-year state statute of limitation applied by the trial court, summary judgment was not appropriate. We remand for further proceedings on Januchowski's FELA claim.
Reversed and remanded.
RILEY, J., concurs.
DARDEN, J., dissents with separate opinion.
. The trial court correctly reached this determination before this Court's decision in Rudnick v. Northern Indiana Commuter Transportation District, 892 N.E.2d 204 (Ind.Ct.App.2008). In Rudnick, we noted that, although we did not decide at that time whether NICTD was a state agency or political subdivision, the statutory definition of "political subdivision" included municipal corporations and that NICTD was a municipal corporation. Id. at 209 n. 3. The distinction matters in part because, under the ITCA, a claim against a state agency is barred unless notice is filed with the state agency and the Indiana Attorney General within 270 days after the loss occurs. Ind.Code § 34-13-3-6(a). A claim against a political subdivision is barred unless notice is filed with the governing body of the political subdivision and the political subdivision risk management committee within 180 days after the loss occurs. Ind.Code § 34-13-3-8(a).
. The parties dispute whether the two-year statute of limitation should be considered a precondition to the right to bring suit under the ITCA or a jurisdictional bar based on sovereign immunity to bringing suit beyond two years after an injury. See Appellee's Br. *1045p. 7; Appellant's Reply Br. p. 4-5. We find no practical distinction.
. Originally, FELA's statute of limitation was two years. FELA was amended in 1939 to extend the statute of limitation to three years. FELA, Pub.L. No. 76-382, 53 Stat. 1404 (1939).
. As the United States Supreme Court has stated, a state may prescribe for itself the terms and conditions upon which it consents to be sued. Oshinski, 843 N.E.2d at 544 (citing Raygor v. Regents of the Univ. of Minn., 534 U.S. 533, 122 S.Ct. 999, 152 L.Ed.2d 27 (2002)).
. Regarding courts other than Indiana courts, the statute provides that this chapter should not be construed as an Eleventh Amendment waiver, consent by Indiana or its employees to be sued in any federal court, or consent to be sued in any other state's courts. Ind.Code § The dissent argues that Jan-uchowski had a choice of forums between federal court and state court, but he chose to bring his action in state court. Although the dissent is correct that both federal and state courts have concurrent jurisdiction over FELA claims, the dissent's position overlooks the Eleventh Amendment immunity enjoyed by NICTD as an arm of the State of Indiana. Pursuant to this immunity, federal courts dismiss FELA suits against NICTD. Lewis v. N. Ind. Commuter Transp. Dist., 898 F.Supp. 596, 602 (N.D.Ill.1995) (''Therefore, we follow the two district courts that have addressed this issue and hold that NICTD is an agency of the State of Indiana entitled to Eleventh Amendment immunity from suit by a citizen in federal court.... Because we hold that this action belongs in state court, not federal court, we need not decide whether to transfer the case to the Northern District of Indiana, and we deny that aspect of NICTD's motion.") (citations omitted).
. The proper statute of limitation for FELA claims against governmental entities was not at issue in Oshinski.
. In Rudnick, 892 N.E.2d at 206 n. 1, our Court noted that NICTD had provided no authority suggesting that Indiana's statute of limitation controlled over FELA's.

=== CASE 9740395 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:34:25.976836+00 ===

DARDEN, Judge,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent from the majority's conclusion that this action is not barred by Indiana's two-year statute of limitations. Despite my heartfelt sympathy for Mr. Januchowski, who suffered grievous injuries that gave rise to his claim, I agree with the trial court as to the law in this regard.
It is undisputed that Indiana courts and federal courts have concurrent jurisdiction with respect to a claim under FELA. 45 U.S.C.A. § 56. As a result, in my opinion, when a FELA action is adjudicated in an Indiana state court, we apply "state procedural rules" and "federal substantive law." Gouge v. Ind. Commuter Transp. Dist., 670 N.E.2d 363, 365 (Ind.Ct.App.1996).
*1051Here, the injury occurred on October 5, 2004, and Januchowski filed his claim in an Indiana state court on October 31, 2006. FELA provides for a three-year statute of limitation for filing a claim, see 45 U.S.C.A. § 56, whereas, the Indiana Tort Claims Act contains no express statute of limitation provision. The majority finds the latter dispositive, as constituting the choice of Indiana's legislature not to include a statute of limitation for the Indiana Tort Claims Act, thereby permitting application of FELA's statute of limitation provision when a FELA claim is filed in an Indiana state court. However, such ignores the fact that Indiana does have a statute of limitation for personal injury claims, to wit: two years, see Ind.Code § 34-11-2-4, and the long-standing principle that statutes addressing the same subject are in pari material and to be read in harmony if possible. See eg., Saintignon v. State, 749 N.E.2d 1134, 1137 (Ind.2001); United States Gypsum, Inc. v. Indiana Gas Co., Inc., 735 N.E.2d 790, 802 (Ind.2000).
Given the concurrent subject matter jurisdiction of Indiana and federal courts, Januchowski had a choice of forums. However, the forum he chose was the state court. He chose to pursue his FELA claim under the Indiana Tort Claims Act, complying with its notice requirements and subsequently filing this action in an Indiana state court. I find that by choosing to file his action in the state court, he brought himself within the jurisdiction of Indiana's procedural laws-including the Indiana procedural statute providing for a two-year statute of limitations for personal injury claims. Cf. Northern Indiana Commuter Transp. Dist. v. Marron, 812 N.E.2d 185, 188 (Ind.Ct.App.2004) (worker's choice to bring FELA action in state court subjected him to state venue procedure).
Accordingly, I would affirm the trial court's grant of summary judgment to NICTD.

=== CASE 9740396 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:34:28.194031+00 ===

OPINION
BROWN, Judge.
In this interlocutory appeal, the City of Gary appeals an order denying the City's motion to transfer venue and an order denying the City's motion for a preliminary injunction to compel Majestic Star Casino, LLC ("Majestic Star 1") and the Majestic Star Casino II, Inc. ("Majestic Star II") (collectively "Majestic Star") to make payments from adjusted gross receipts to the City. The City raises two issues, which we revise and restate as:
I. Whether the trial court erred by denying the City's motion for change of venue from Marion County to Lake County where the Indiana Gaming Commission (the "Commission") was named as a defendant in the declaratory judgment action; and
II. Whether the trial court abused its discretion by denying the City's motion for a preliminary injunction.
We affirm.
The relevant facts follow. In 1996, the City and Majestic Star I entered into a development agreement ("Majestic Development Agreement"). That same year, the City and Trump Indiana, Inc., entered into a development agreement ("Trump Development Agreement"). Both of the agreements provided that the developer shall pay the City an amount equal to three percent of adjusted gross receipts for each month in which the developer conducts riverboat gaming operations.
In 1999, the City and Gary New Century, LLC ("GNC") entered into an agreement entitled Assignment of Purchase Agreement and Development Agreement ("GNC Agreement"). The City agreed to *1079purchase property from the Lehigh Portland Cement Company for $25 million and assigned its rights to GNC. The City agreed to perform demolition and environmental remediation work on the Lehigh property and agreed to build certain infrastructure adjacent to the Lehigh property. GNC agreed to invest fifty million dollars to undertake certain development projects on the Lehigh property.
In 2000, an addendum to the GNC Contract was executed by the City and GNC. In 2004, GNC and Majestic Star I entered into an agreement in which GNC's rights to a portion of the Lehigh property were assigned to Majestic Star I.
In 2005, Majestic Star I purchased the riverboat casino from Trump Indiana, Inc., which casino is now known as Majestic Star II. That same year, a representative of Majestic Star I, a representative of Trump Indiana, Inc., and the City's mayor signed an agreement entitled Amendment Number One to Development Agreement ("the 2005 Amendment"). The 2005 Amendment stated that "the parties to this Amendment desire to make certain modifications related to the Majestic Development Agreement, the Trump Development Agreement and the GNC Development Agreement in light of the passage of time and change in cireumstances since the exe-ecution of the original Agreements." Appellant's Appendix at 99-100. The 2005 Amendment provided that it amended various portions of the Majestic Development Agreement, the Trump Development Agreement, and the GNC Agreement.
The parties disagree as to the validity and meaning of the 2005 Amendment. The City contests the validity of this agreement because it was never approved by the Board of Public Works. The City also argues that, even if the 2005 Amendment was valid, "it does not make the [adjusted gross receipts payments] conditional upon the City's separate obligations regarding the development of the Lehigh Property set forth in the GNC [Agreement]." Appellant's Brief at 8. Majestic Star argues that the City has accepted "millions without protest, for years" under the 2005 Amendment, which is interrelated with the development agreements. Majestic Star's Brief at 15.
In 2008, the Majestic Star I, the Majestic Star II, and GNC filed a complaint in Marion County against the City and the Commission. The complaint alleged that "[blecause the City has failed to fulfill its obligations under the GNC Agreement, both as initially entered and as thereafter amended by the 2005 Amendment, and has repudiated the 2005 Amendment, Majestic I and Majestic II are depositing into a segregated, interest-bearing bank account the amounts that would otherwise be paid to the City under the 2005 Amendment (and which the City has previously accepted under the Amendment that it now repudiates), with such segregated amounts to be disbursed thereafter in accordance with a confirmation arbitration award." Appellant's Appendix at 52. The complaint alleged that the City "has refused to comply with and has failed to fulfill its contractual obligations under the GNC Agreement, both as initially entered and as amended by the 2005 Amendment." Id. at 54. The complaint requested the trial court to issue a declaratory judgment stating that the Commission will be bound by the results of arbitration. The complaint also requested, "if and to the extent it may be determined in the Arbitration that the issue of whether the City has breached its obligations under the GNC Agreement and the 2005 Amendment is not subject to arbitration, the Majestic Companies request that the Court issue a declaratory judgment that the City has breached such obligations, and award the Majestic Companies all ap*1080propriate declaratory and other relief to which they are entitled as a consequence of such breach." Id. at 55.
On March 3, 2008, the City filed a motion to transfer for incorrect venue1 At the hearing on its motion,2 the City argued that proper venue was in Lake County because the contract dispute did not inherently involve the Commission and Majestic Star had "no standing over the [] Commission." Transcript at 13. On April 11, 2008, the trial court denied the City's motion to transfer.
On March 24, 2008, the City filed a motion for preliminary injunction that apparently sought to compel Majestic Star to resume making the payments from the adjusted gross receipts to the City under the development agreements and to cease depositing those amounts into a segregated account3. At a hearing, Mary Celita Green, the Controller for the City, testified that the payments from the adjusted gross receipts average about $600,000 a month. Green testified that the actions of Majestic Star prevented the City from paying overtime for police officers and firefighters and that garbage pickup and medical insurance claims would be affected. Green testified that the City has the capacity to issue general obligation bonds, that the Council approved revenue bonds in the amount of $25 million, and that the City used only $4.8 million.
After the hearing, the trial court denied the City's motion for a preliminary injunetion. The trial court concluded that the potential harm identified by the City was purely economic and an adequate remedy existed at law. The trial court also noted that the City has "unused bond-issuance authority of some $20.2 million," which is an alternative means by which to obtain money to cover any budgetary shortfalls. Appellant's Appendix at 37. The trial court also concluded that the City did not show that it has a likelihood of success on the merit s, that the balance of harms favors the denial of a mandatory preliminary injunction, and that the public interest would not be served by the grant of a mandatory injunction.
L.
The first issue is whether the trial court erred by denying the City's motion for change of venue. This court may dismiss appeals upon its own motion when it discovers it does not have jurisdiction. Moser v. Moser, 838 N.E.2d 532, 534 (Ind.Ct.App.2005), trans. denied. An appeal from an interlocutory order is not allowed unless specific authority is granted by the Indiana Constitution, statutes, or the rules of court. Id. Moreover, any such express authorization for an interlocutory appeal is "strictly construed." Id.; Schwedland v. Bachman, 512 N.E.2d 445, 449 (Ind.Ct.App.1987) ("Appeals from interlocutory orders are allowed only when expressly authorized, with such authorization being strietly construed.").
*1081Ind. Trial Rule 75 governs venue requirements and provides in part that "[an order transferring or refusing to transfer a case under this rule shall be an interlocutory order appealable pursuant to Appellate Rule 14(A)(8); provided, however, that the appeal of an interlocutory order under this rule shall not stay proceedings in the trial court unless the trial court or the Court of Appeals so orders." Indiana Appellate Rule 5(B) provides authority for the Court of Appeals to obtain "jurisdie tion over appeals of interlocutory orders under Rule 14." The City states that this court has jurisdiction over the appeal of the venue issue under Appellate Rule 14(A)(8). Appellate Rule 14(A) provides, in relevant part:
Appeals from the following interlocutory orders are taken as a matter of right by filing a Notice of Appeal with the trial court clerk within thirty (30) days of the entry of the interlocutory order:
oh ock ock
(8) Transferring or refusing to transfer a case under Trial Rule 75;
The order denying the City's motion to transfer venue is dated April 11, 2008. The City did not file its notice of appeal until June 2, 2008, fifty-two days after the trial court's order. The Indiana Supreme Court has "considered perfecting a timely appeal a jurisdictional matter." Claywell v. Review Bd. of Ind. Dep't of Employment and Training Services, 643 N.E.2d 330, 330 (Ind.1994). "The requirement of dismissal applies as well to appeals from interlocutory orders as to appeals from final judgments." 1A LLE. Appeals § 112 (2002) (relying upon Standard Electric Mfg. Co. v. Tuttle, 74 Ind.App. 559, 126 N.E. 438 (1920))..
Strictly construing Ind. Appellate Rule 14(A), we lack authority to exercise our appellate jurisdiction and we are unable to consider the merits of the City's arguments regarding venue4 See Young v. Estate of Sweeney, 808 N.E.2d 1217, 1221 (Ind.Ct.App.2004) (dismissing respondent's appeal and holding that "[blecause [the appellant's] notice of appeal was filed forty-five days after the interlocutory order was entered, Young's appeal is not properly before us pursuant to App. R. 14(8))"; Bowyer v. Vollmar, 505 N.E.2d 162, 165 167 (Ind.Ct.App.1987) (holding that appellant's argument that the trial court erred by denying his motion to transfer the case was waived because appellant failed to per-feet the appeal within thirty days of the trial court's order), reh'g denied, trans. denied.
IL.
The next issue is whether the trial court abused its discretion by denying the City's motion for a preliminary injunetion*10825 The grant or denial of a request for a preliminary injunction rests within the sound discretion of the trial court, and our review is limited to whether there was a clear abuse of that discretion. Ind. Famity and Soc. Servs. Admin. v. Walgreen Co., 769 N.E.2d 158, 161 (Ind.2002). When determining whether to grant a preliminary injunction, the trial court is required to make special findings of fact and state its conclusions thereon. Barlow v. Sipes, 744 N.E.2d 1, 5 (Ind.Ct.App.2001) (citing Ind. Trial Rule 52(A), trans. demied. When findings and conclusions thereon are made, we must determine if the trial court's findings support the judgment. Id. We will reverse the trial court's judgment only when it is clearly erroneous. Id. Findings of fact are clearly erroneous when the record lacks evidence or reasonable inferences from the evidence to support them. Id. A judgment is clearly erroneous when a review of the record leaves us with a firm conviction that a mistake has been made. CSX Transp., Inc. v. Rabold, 691 N.E.2d 1275, 1277 (Ind.Ct.App.1998), trams. denied. We consider the evidence only in the light most favorable to the judgment and construe findings together liberally in favor of the judgment. Barlow, 744 N.E.2d at 5.
"The power to issue a preliminary injunction should be used sparingly, and such relief should not be granted except in rare instances in which the law and facts are clearly within the moving party's favor." Id. The City requested a mandatory injunction seeking to compel Majestic Star to resume making the payments to the City under the development agreements and to cease depositing those payments into a segregated account.6
A mandatory injunction is an extraordinary equitable remedy which should be granted with caution. The plaintiff carries the burden of demonstrating injury which is certain and irreparable if the injunction is denied. In making its decision the trial court must weigh whether the plaintiff has an adequate remedy at law and the court must consider whether an injunction is in the public interest.
Dible v. City of Lafayette, 713 N.E.2d 269, 272 (Ind.1999) (quoting Campbell v. Spade, 617 N.E.2d 580, 583 (Ind.Ct.App.1993) (citations omitted)). See also Crossmann Cmtys., Inc. v. Dean, 767 NE.2d 1035, 1040 (Ind.Ct.App.2002) ("Although the "principles upon which mandatory and prohibitory injunctions are granted do not materially differ[, clourts are, however, more reluctant in granting the mandatory writ." ") (quoting Schwartz v. Holycross, 83 Ind.App. 658, 149 N.E. 699, 701-702 (1925)). "[Blefore ordering either declaratory or injunctive relief, a court is bound to consider alternate remedies available to the plaintiff" Dible, 713 N.E.2d at 272.
Generally, to obtain a preliminary injunction, the moving party has the burden of showing by a preponderance of the evidence that: (1) the movant's remedies at law were inadequate, thus causing irreparable harm pending resolution of the substantive action; (2) it had at least a reasonable likelihood of success at trial by establishing a prima facie case; (8) its threatened injury outweighed the potential harm to appellant resulting from the granting of an injunction; and (4) the public interest would not be disserved. Walgreen, 769 N.E.2d at 161. "If the movant *1083fails to prove any of these requirements, the trial court's grant of an injunction is an abuse of discretion." Id.
One purpose of a preliminary injunction is to prevent harm to the moving party that could not be corrected by a final judgment. Crossmann Cmtys., Inc., 767 N.E.2d at 1042. As such, an injunetion will not issue where the law can provide a full, adequate, and complete form of redress. Id. "A party suffering mere economic injury is not entitled to injunctive relief because damages are sufficient to make the party whole." Walgreen, 769 N.E.2d at 162. Although mere economic injury generally does not warrant the grant of an injunction, the trial court must determine whether the legal remedy is as full and adequate as the equitable remedy. Crossmanm Cmtys., Inc., 767 NE.2d at 1041.
The City relies upon Rees v. Panhandle Eastern Pipe Line Co., 176 Ind.App. 597, 610, 377 N.E.2d 640, 649 (1978), and De-Mayo v. State ex rel. Dep't of Natural Res., 182 Ind.App. 241, 245, 394 N.E.2d 258, 261 (1979), which held that "when the acts sought to be enjoined have been declared unlawful or clearly are against the public interest, plaintiff need show neither irreparable injury nor a balance of hardship in his favor."
The City argues that Majestic Star thwarts the public policy behind riverboat gambling because withholding the payments will cause the City to cut essential programs that will affect the citizens' safety and livelihood. The City also argues that Majestic Star's withholding of the payments causes "far-reaching harm to the City that surpasses mere economic damages" and that the harm "affects the citizenry in ways that cannot be calculated or corrected with a later money judgment." Appellant's Brief at 13. Specifically, the City points to "restricting police and fire pensions, police overtime, the City's infrastructure (eg., road maintenance), and summer employment programs." Id. at 15. The City argues that the loss of the payments negatively impacts the City's ability to "meet a myriad of obligations vital to the well-being of its citizens-including liquidity loans to the City employee's pension fund, loan repayment, the City's contribution to the Regional Development Authority, street and sidewalk repairs, bond payments, subsidies to the City's General Fund, the City's summer hiring program and interfund loans." Id. at 20.
We cannot say that Majestic Star's actions are clearly against the public interest. The City's alleged damages are merely speculative. Other options, such as issuing bonds, exist for the City instead of cutting essential services. Majestic Star's actions of making payments to a segregated, interest-bearing account rather than directly to the City during the pendency of this action are not "clearly" against the public interest. Thus, we conclude that the rule pronounced in Rees is not applicable.
Further, because Majestic Star is depositing the payments into a segregated, interest-bearing bank account, and the City has the capacity to issue general obligation bonds,7 we conclude that the City failed to demonstrate an inadequate remedy at law, *1084thus causing irreparable harm pending resolution of the substantive action. The City's damages are purely economic injuries and the legal remedy is as full and adequate as the equitable remedy. Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court did not abuse its discretion by denying the City's motion for preliminary injunction. See T.H. Landfill Co., Inc. v. Miami County Solid Waste Dist., 628 N.E.2d 1237, 1239 (Ind.Ct.App.1994) (holding that the movant was not entitled to a preliminary injunction because the movant's claim involved merely economic injury and it had an adequate remedy at law).
In summary, we conclude that we lack authority to exercise our appellate jurisdiction in considering the merits of the City's arguments regarding venue. We also conclude that the trial court did not abuse its discretion by denying the City's motion for preliminary injunction because the City has an adequate alternate remedy.
For the foregoing reasons, we dismiss the appeal from the order denying the City's motion for change of venue and affirm the trial court's denial of the City's motion for a preliminary injunction.
Dismissed in part, and affirmed in part.
BRADFORD, J., concurring in part and concurring in result with separate opinion.
CRONE, J., concurring in part and concurring in result in part with separate opinion.
. A copy of the City's motion to transfer venue is not included in Appellant's Appendix. We remind the City that Ind. Appellate Rule 50(A)(2) requires the appellant to include in its appendix the "pleadings and other documents from the Clerk's Record in chronological order that are necessary for resolution of the issues raised on appeal."
. We note that pages 41-42 are missing from the transcript.
. Copies of the City's motion for preliminary injunction and its brief in support of the motion are not included in Appellant's Appendix. We remind the City that Ind. Appellate Rule 50(A)(2) requires the appellant to include in its appendix the "pleadings and other documents from the Clerk's Record in chronological order that are necessary for resolution of the issues raised on appeal."
. Even if we considered the City's arguments, we could not say that the trial court erred by denying the City's motion for change of venue from Marion County to Lake County. To the extent that the City argues that the trial court did not have subject matter jurisdiction because Majestic Star did not exhaust its administrative remedies, we conclude that Majestic Star is not seeking review or challenging the action of the Commission, and the portions of the Indiana Code and Administrative Code cited by the City do not provide the Commission with the authority to interpret contracts, which are matters for judicial determination. See Fratus v. Marion Cmty. Sch. Bd. of Trustees, 749 N.E.2d 40, 46 (Ind.2001). To the extent the City argues that Majestic Star does not have standing to bring claims against the Commission because it has not indicated any controversy or threatened controversy between the Commission and Majestic Star, we reject the City's arguments because Majestic Star could not obtain relief from the City without also binding the Commission to the outcome and the Commission has an interest that would be affected by the declaratory judgment.
. The Commission takes no position in the appeal regarding the trial court's denial of the City's motion for preliminary injunction.
. A "mandatory injunction" is defined as "{aln injunction that orders an affirmative act or mandates a specified course of conduct." Brack's Law Dictionary 800 (8th ed.2004).
. The record reveals that the City has the capacity to issue general obligation bonds, that the Council approved revenue bonds in the amount of $25 million, and that the City used only $4.8 million. While the Controller for the City testified that the City used only $4.8 million because the City did not want to "over-obligate," we conclude that the City has the option to issue bonds to make up for any shortfall created by the withholding of the payments by Majestic Star. Transcript at 157.

=== CASE 9740398 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:34:28.203214+00 ===

CRONE, Judge,
concurring in part and concurring in result in part.
I fully concur with respect to issue I. As for issue II, I agree with the majority's conclusion that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in denying the City's motion for a preliminary injunction, but I respectfully disagree with its rationale in several respects.
First, I do not believe that we should consider the City's ability to issue bonds in assessing the nature and extent of its alleged damages and the availability of alternate remedies. Decisions regarding how and where municipal funds are raised and allocated are both incredibly complicated and inherently within the province of the legislative and executive branches. Only rarely should the judiciary intervene in such matters, and I believe that we should refrain from serving as the City's de facto budget director in this case.
Second, I do not believe that the City's alleged damages are merely economic. The City notes that the loss of Majestic Star's payments "prevents the City from paying overtime for police officers, firefighters, and garbage pick-up[,]" as well as impedes its payment of medical insurance claims and police and fire pension obligations. Appellant's Br. at 9. Likewise, the loss of Majestic Star's payments will negatively affect the City's ability to fund various infrastructure and social service projects. The City points out that if it
ultimately prevails in this action, its citizens cannot be made whole by, for example, having twice the additional security at future events. Nor will a victim of a crime during any period of reduced overtime have a claim that can be satisfied by Majestic Star. A municipality simply cannot be compensated for lost *1085revenue in the same manner that a for profit corporation like Majestic Star can be.
Id. at 15.
Third, in light of its negative impacts on the welfare of the City's residents, I believe that Majestic Star's withholding of its payments to the City is clearly against the public interest.
That being said, I find it significant that the 1996 Majestic Development Agreement contains an arbitration clause, which reads in pertinent part as follows:
In the event that [sic] any controversy or claim, except those pertaining to any default set forth in Section 5.01 [not applicable herel, the controversy or claim shall be settled by binding arbitration at Indianapolis, Indiana, in accordance with the rules of the American Arbitration Association, and judgment on the award may be entered in any court having jurisdiction thereof.
Appellant's App. at 123. The record indicates that the arbitration clause has not been affected by any subsequent amendment to the agreement. Thus, not only does the City have an alternate remedy, but it also specifically agreed to avail itself of that remedy in the event of a controversy with Majestic Star. For that reason, I conclude that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in denying the City's request for a preliminary injunction. Therefore, I respectfully concur in result as to this issue.

=== CASE 2223364 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:59.792078+00 ===

905 N.E.2d 513 (2009)
NUNN LAW OFFICE, Appellant-Petitioner,
v.
Peter H. ROSENTHAL, Appellee-Respondent.[1]
No. 49A05-0809-CV-523.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
May 4, 2009.
*515 David W. Stone IV, Stone Law Office & Legal Research, Anderson, IN, Dean Arnold, Nunn Law Office, Bloomington, IN, Attorneys for Appellant.
Peter H. Rosenthal, Law Office of Peter H. Rosenthal, Indianapolis, IN, Diamond Z. Hirschauer, Indianapolis, IN, Attorneys for Appellee.
OPINION
BRADFORD, Judge.
Appellant-Petitioner Nunn Law Office ("Nunn") appeals the trial court's award of $1462.88 in attorney's fees in its petition for division of attorney's fees arising out of Nunn's and Appellee-Respondent attorney Peter Rosenthal's successive representation of Joseph Carpenter in Carpenter's personal injury action against Terry Rosengarten. Upon appeal, Nunn claims that the trial court erred in failing to issue written findings of fact and conclusions thereon pursuant to Indiana Trial Rule 52 and in basing its award upon quantum meruit rather than upon Nunn's contingency fee agreement with Carpenter. We affirm.
FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
On April 3, 2004, Joseph Carpenter was involved in a motor vehicle accident with Terry Rosengarten in which Carpenter sustained injuries to his person. On May 17, 2004, Carpenter entered into an agreement with Nunn & Greene Law Office[2] ("Nunn") providing that Nunn would represent him for any of his claims arising out of the accident in exchange for "40% of all amounts recovered or offered." Plaintiff's Exh. 2. On October 27, 2004, Nunn, on behalf of Carpenter, sent a demand package to Rosengarten's insurer, Grange Insurance. In December of 2004, Grange Insurance made an oral settlement offer of $24,000 to Nunn. Carpenter rejected the offer, and Nunn initiated a lawsuit against Rosengarten on Carpenter's behalf on February 25, 2005.
On May 1, 2005, Carpenter discharged Nunn, and in late June of 2005, hired Peter H. Rosenthal to represent him instead. In April of 2006, Carpenter, represented by Rosenthal, received and accepted a settlement offer of $42,500. A portion of that settlement, specifically $15,500, constituted Rosenthal's attorney's fees.
On May 4, 2006, Rosenthal wrote a letter to Nunn indicating that Carpenter's case had been settled. Rosenthal's letter anticipated expenses for which Nunn should receive reimbursement and requested from Nunn an itemization of work *516 performed for purposes of Nunn's compensation for attorney's fees. On October 20, 2006, Nunn moved to reopen Carpenter's case for purposes of determining proper division of attorney's fees.
The trial court held hearings on October 26, 2007 and June 16, 2008, at the conclusion of which it orally calculated judgment in favor of Nunn in the amount of $1462.88. This calculation was determined according to the trial court's assessment, based upon quantum meruit, of fair compensation for Nunn's work on Carpenter's case.
Prior to the October 26, 2007 hearing, Nunn had filed a Motion for Special Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law, and counsel for Nunn reiterated this request following the court's oral calculation of judgment. The trial court acknowledged having overlooked Nunn's motion and set a date for submission of proposed findings and conclusions. Rosenthal indicated that, with the court's permission, he would not submit proposed findings. On July 1, 2008, Nunn submitted proposed findings and conclusions, including the proposed conclusion that its fee should be assessed according to the forty-percent contingency fee agreement. On July 14, 2008, the trial court, without entering written findings and conclusions, entered a general judgment for Nunn in the amount of $1462.88.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION[3]
I. Standard of Review
On appeal from an award of attorney's fees, this court applies the "clearly erroneous" standard to factual determinations, reviews legal conclusions de novo, and determines whether the amount of a particular award constituted an abuse of the trial court's discretion. See H & G Ortho, Inc. v. Neodontics Int'l, Inc., 823 N.E.2d 734, 737 (Ind.Ct.App.2005). See also Emergency Physicians of Indpls. v. Pettit, 714 N.E.2d 1111, 1115 (Ind.Ct.App. 1999), trans. granted and adopted in pertinent part, 718 N.E.2d 753, 757 (Ind.1999) (articulating above multi-step standard of review for award of attorney's fees in cases of frivolous lawsuit or bad-faith litigation). An abuse of discretion occurs when the trial court's decision is clearly against the logic and effect of the facts and circumstances before it. H & G Ortho, Inc., 823 N.E.2d at 737. A trial court has wide discretion in awarding attorney's fees. Id. The trial court may look to the responsibility of the parties in incurring the attorney's fees, and the trial judge has personal expertise that he or she may use when determining the reasonableness of the fees. Id.
II. Findings and Conclusions
A. Written Form
Upon appeal, Nunn first claims that the trial court erred as a matter of law in entering a general judgment rather than issuing written findings and conclusions. Nunn relies upon Carmichael v. Siegel, 670 N.E.2d 890, 891 (Ind.1996), wherein the Supreme Court held, based upon the "clear, mandatory language" of Trial Rule 52(A), that "a trial judge is not free to ignore a timely, written request for special findings." Nunn additionally relies upon McGinley-Ellis v. Ellis, 638 N.E.2d 1249, 1252 (Ind.1994), which provides that the purpose of special findings under Rule 52(A) is to provide the parties and the reviewing courts with the trial judge's theory *517 of the case in order to effectively preserve the right of review for error.
Rule 52(A) provides, in pertinent part, as follows:
In the case of issues tried upon the facts without a jury or with an advisory jury, the court shall determine the facts and judgment shall be entered thereon pursuant to Rule 58. Upon its own motion, or the written request of any party filed with the court prior to the admission of evidence, the court in all actions tried upon the facts without a jury or with an advisory jury ... shall find the facts specially and state its conclusions thereon.
In evaluating the proper format for Rule 52(A) findings and conclusions, we first observe that the Indiana Supreme Court has emphasized their formal nature. In the small claims case of Bowman v. Kitchel, 644 N.E.2d 878, 879 (Ind.1995), the Supreme Court overturned a determination by this court that Rule 52(A) findings and conclusions must be in writing, but it based its holding on the inapplicability of Rule 52(A) to small claims proceedings rather than on any suggestion that Rule 52(A) findings and conclusions should be made orally. Indeed, in articulating the purpose of Rule 52(A), the Bowman court emphasized the formality of its requirements, indicated that Rule 52(A) established "a particularized statement for examination on appeal," and distinguished small claims rulings by concluding that they did not warrant the "crafted detailed findings" provided for in Rule 52(A). Id. The Supreme Court's reasoning, emphasizing the formality of findings and conclusions and their purpose of facilitating appellate review through a "crafted" particularized statement, suggests that the preferred format for findings and conclusions is that they be in written form.
B. Oral Form
1. Permissibility
In spite of this preferred format, we nevertheless conclude that a trial court's failure to issue findings and conclusions in written form, in and of itself, does not constitute reversible error. Significantly, the plain language of Rule 52(A) does not require that the findings and conclusions be in writing. While the rule specifies that a request for findings and conclusions must be in writing, it imposes no similar writing requirement upon the trial court in issuing these findings and conclusions. Furthermore, the purpose of Rule 52(A) is to provide the parties and the reviewing court with the theory upon which the trial judge decided the case in order that the right of review for error may be effectively preserved. Carmichael, 670 N.E.2d at 891. We conclude that oral findings and conclusions can achieve this purpose so long as they are thoroughly detailed in the record.
Our conclusion on this point is supported by the Civil Code Study Commission's Comment on Rule 52(A) which reads, in pertinent part, that Rule 52(A) "does not eliminate the possibility that the facts may be found orally in open court and entered by the judge or the court reporter as evidence or other matters are put in the record." 3 William F. Harvey, Indiana Practice: Rules of Procedure Annotated § 52, at 587 (3d ed.2002); see also State ex rel. Harp v. Vanderburgh Circuit Court, 227 Ind. 353, 360, 85 N.E.2d 254, 257 (1949) (indicating Indiana Supreme Court's endorsement of a trial judge's oral announcement of its findings in open court).[4]
*518 Our conclusion is further supported by other jurisdictions' treatment of oral findings and conclusions. The Seventh Circuit has interpreted Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 52(a), which is similar in many respects to Trial Rule 52(A), to permit oral findings and conclusions. See Suson v. Zenith Radio Corp., 763 F.2d 304, 308 (7th Cir.1985); see also Fin. Servs. Corp. of Midwest v. Weindruch, 764 F.2d 197, 198 (7th Cir.1985). Of course FRCP 52(a) explicitly provides for oral findings and conclusions, so it is unremarkable that the Seventh Circuit, and other jurisdictions with similar versions of Rule 52(a), have deemed oral findings and conclusions permissible. See Bender v. Williams, 848 A.2d 590, 591 (D.C.2004); In re Marriage of Nies and Cooper, 315 Mont. 260, 68 P.3d 697, 699-700 (2000); Romanyshyn v. Fredericks, 597 N.W.2d 420, 421-22 (N.D.1999); and Stonehocker v. Stonehocker, 176 P.3d 476, 482 (Utah Ct.App.2008). Yet certain other jurisdictions, which like Indiana do not explicitly provide for oral findings and conclusions in their versions of Rule 52(a), have nevertheless interpreted their rules to permit oral findings and conclusions. See Noey v. Bledsoe, 978 P.2d 1264, 1275-76 (Alaska 1999); Colo. Kenworth, Inc. v. Huntley, 537 P.2d 1087, 1089 (Colo.Ct.App. 1975). Indeed, our research reveals that except in cases involving findings and conclusions where the rules require that they be written, see Foster-Gross v. Puente, 656 A.2d 733, 737 (D.C.1995) (rejecting oral findings based upon local Domestic Relations Rule 52(a) requiring written findings and conclusions), there is little if any authority supporting Nunn's contention that oral findings and conclusions are per se invalid. Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court did not err as a matter of law in entering oral findings and conclusions in the instant case.[5]
2. Adequacy
The question remains, therefore, whether the basis for the $1462.88 judgment was apparent from the trial court's oral explanation in the record. We conclude that it was. In announcing judgment the trial court found that Nunn's attorney, Dean Arnold, had spent three hours on Carpenter's case at a rate of what the court concluded should be $250 per hour[6] due to his experience, for a total of $750; that Nunn's staff had spent nine hours on the complaint and demand package, and five hours in phone calls (twenty-five calls at an average of .2 hour per call), at a rate of $45 per hour, for a total of what the court concluded was $675 ($450[7] + $225); and that Rosenthal still owed Nunn $37.88 of the $253.01 in costs and expenses. Accordingly, the court calculated Nunn's attorney's fees amounted to $1462.88. Although the trial court revised some of its findings while making calculations in the record, the basis for the trial court's calculations and judgment are fully apparent.
*519 Nunn additionally challenges the adequacy of the trial court's findings and conclusions on the grounds that they failed to justify the use of quantum meruit as the basis for the calculation of fees. Noticeably, the focus of the hearings was largely upon ascertaining the amount of time Nunn spent on Carpenter's case, demonstrating that the understood method for dividing fees involved quantum meruit rather than the terms of the contingency-fee agreement.[8] Furthermore, Nunn voiced no objection to Rosenthal's reference to quantum meruit or to the court's calculation of fees on this basis. In any event, any error in the trial court's failure to justify its use of quantum meruit as the proper measure for the determination of fees is harmless given our conclusion, as explained below, that this was the only proper measure for the fee determination in the instant case.
III. Quantum Meruit
A. Applicability
Nunn argues that the trial court erred in assessing fees on quantum meruit grounds rather than upon Nunn's forty-percent contingency fee agreement with Carpenter. In cases involving applicable contractual terms, "We assume that an agreement calling for a reasonable method of compensating a discharged lawyer may be enforceable according to its terms." Galanis v. Lyons & Truitt, 715 N.E.2d 858, 861 (Ind.1999); see Four Winds, LLC v. Smith & DeBonis, LLC, 854 N.E.2d 70, 74 (Ind.Ct.App.2006), trans. denied (citing Galanis proposition that fee agreement providing for hourly rate in the event of pre-contingency termination is "presumptively enforceable, subject to ordinary requirement of reasonableness.") Accordingly, had Nunn entered into a fee agreement with Carpenter expressly providing for compensation upon discharge, this agreement would be enforceable to the extent it was reasonable. See Galanis, 715 N.E.2d at 861.
Here, however, Nunn's contract with Carpenter is silent regarding his compensation upon pre-contingency discharge. To the extent Nunn argues that the provision "40% of all amounts recovered or offered" dictates his payment upon discharge, this provision contradicts the additional term, "If no recovery is obtained, no fee will be paid to my attorney," Plaintiff's Exh. 2, and creates a contractual ambiguity to be construed against the drafter. See MPACT Constr. Group, LLC v. Superior Concrete Constructors, Inc., 802 N.E.2d 901, 910 (Ind.2004) ("When there is ambiguity in a contract, it is construed against its drafter."). While the "40%" provision arguably permits payment of fees based upon settlements offered, whether or not they are recovered, the latter "no recovery, no fee" provision expressly states to the contrary that fees are not payable unless a recovery is obtained.[9] Accordingly, Nunn's contract, which is either silent with respect to its fee recovery upon discharge or ambiguous and must be construed against Nunn, does not dictate *520 the proper standard for determining fees under the instant circumstances.
In the absence of an applicable contractual provision, "The conventional rule is that `[a]n attorney who is employed under a contingent fee contract and discharged prior to the occurrence of the contingency is limited to quantum meruit recovery for the reasonable value of the services rendered to the client, and may not recover the full amount of the agreed contingent fee.'" Galanis, 715 N.E.2d at 861 ((quoting 7 AM. JUR. 2D Attorneys at Law § 181 (1997))). Nunn's fees, therefore, are properly based upon quantum meruit.
B. Measure
Having concluded that Nunn's fees were properly determined according to quantum meruit, we further conclude that the trial court's award of $1462.88 in this case did not constitute an abuse of discretion. See H & G Ortho, Inc., 823 N.E.2d at 737. "Quantum meruit is an equitable doctrine that prevents unjust enrichment by permitting one to recover the `value of work performed or material furnished if used' by another and if valuable." Galanis, 715 N.E.2d at 861 (quoting 17A C.J.S. Contracts § 440 at 553 (1963)). "Where there is a successor lawyer, the benefit the client received from the predecessor's work is either retained by the client in the form of obtaining a more favorable fee agreement, or it is transferred to the successor in the form of relieving the successor of the need to expend the same effort." Id. at 861-62. In the instant case, if Nunn is not compensated for the work it performed on Carpenter's case, either Carpenter or Rosenthal is unjustly enriched. See id. at 862. "The dollar value to offset the unjust enrichment is based on the value conferred on the client, not the effort expended by the lawyer, although the two may be the same in many instances." Id.
Determining the proper value of the predecessor's services is ultimately a question of fact for the trial court. Id. Significantly, the value of a discharged lawyer's work on a case is not always equal to a standard rate multiplied by the number of hours of work on the case. Id. "`In determining the reasonable value of the legal services rendered, the time expended by the attorney alone is not a controlling factor. Among other things, consideration may be given to the general quality of the effort expended by the attorney.'" Id. (quoting Kizer v. Davis, 174 Ind.App. 559, 569, 369 N.E.2d 439, 446 n. 9 (1977) (internal citations omitted)).
The Indiana Rules of Professional Conduct provide guidance for determining the reasonableness of attorney's fees, including the following non-exclusive list of factors to be considered:
(1) the time and labor required, the novelty and difficulty of the questions involved, and the skill requisite to perform the legal service properly;
(2) the likelihood, if apparent to the client, that the acceptance of the particular employment will preclude other employment by the lawyer;
(3) the fee customarily charged in the locality for similar legal services;
(4) the amount involved and the results obtained;
(5) the time limitations imposed by the client or by the circumstances;
(6) the nature and length of the professional relationship with the client;
(7) the experience, reputation, and ability of the lawyer or lawyers performing the services; and
(8) whether the fee is fixed or contingent.
*521 Ind. Professional Conduct Rule 1.5(a), cited in In re Order for Mandate of Funds, 873 N.E.2d 1043, 1049 (Ind.2007).
Here, following representation by Nunn and Rosenthal, Carpenter received and accepted a $42,500 settlement offer, $15,500 of which constituted attorney's fees. With respect to the value to Carpenter of Nunn's services, the trial court found that Nunn, through Arnold, had spent three hours on the case at the agreed-upon reasonable hourly rate, given his experience, of $250 per hour. The trial court further found that Nunn's staff, who the court concluded had performed the majority of Nunn's work on Carpenter's case with little to no oversight, had spent a total of fourteen hours at the agreed-upon going rate of $45 per hour.[10] The $24,000 settlement offer obtained by Nunn constituted only about fifty-six percent of the $42,500 offer ultimately obtained by Rosenthal. Significantly, Rosenthal spent an undisputed 95.8 hours on the case. Given Nunn's relatively minimal investment of time, specifically attorney time, in Carpenter's case, and Rosenthal's success in obtaining significantly more favorable results, we cannot say that the trial court abused its discretion in awarding Nunn $1462.88 in attorney's fees.
The judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
NAJAM, J., and BARNES, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  The instant action regarding attorney's fees arose out of the personal injury action of Joseph D. Carpenter v. Terry Rosengarten, also with lower cause number 49D13-0502-CT-7196.
[2]  Nunn Law Office was formerly named Nunn & Greene Law Office.
[3]  We held oral argument in this case on April 7, 2009, and wish to thank counsel for their advocacy.
[4]  Harp predates the adoption of the Trial Rules in 1970, so it is not an interpretation of Rule 52(A). Interestingly, however, Rule 52(A)'s predecessor statute, Burns' Ind. Stat. § 2-2102, which was presumably applicable to Harp, required written findings and conclusions.
[5]  We are particularly persuaded that oral findings and conclusions are permissible given the Supreme Court's view, with respect to sentencing statements in criminal cases, that a trial court's findings and conclusions may be discerned by examining the oral sentencing statement alongside the written statement. McElroy v. State, 865 N.E.2d 584, 589 (Ind. 2007).
[6]  The parties agreed that the court's use of a $250 hourly rate for an experienced plaintiff's lawyer and a $45 hourly rate for the lawyer's staff was reasonable.
[7]  In appears that the court miscalculated the value of nine staff hours at $45 per hour, which equals $405 rather than $450. Of course, this miscalculation, which overvalues Nunn's staff's services, is in Nunn's favor.
[8]  The parties do not dispute the accuracy of the court's evaluation of quantum meruit, which was largely based upon the standard rate multiplied by the number of hours worked.
[9]  Contingent fees are usually earned when a judgment is recovered or a settlement is paid. But the Nunn fee agreement provides that, "I agree to pay my attorney 40% of all amounts recovered or offered." Because of ambiguity in the agreement, we need not decide in this case whether a contingent fee agreement providing that a fee is earned when a settlement offer is received is reasonable, or whether such an agreement would interfere with the client's right to accept or decline a settlement offer.
[10]  In addition, the trial court found, and the parties did not dispute, that Rosenthal still owed Nunn $37.88 in costs and expenses, based upon the total $253.01 owed and Rosenthal's prior payment of $215.13.

=== CASE 2223408 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:00.863185+00 ===

905 N.E.2d 408 (2009)
In the Matter of Vincent M. CAMPITI, Respondent.
No. 71S00-0807-DI-400.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
May 7, 2009.
PUBLISHED ORDER APPROVING STATEMENT OF CIRCUMSTANCES AND CONDITIONAL AGREEMENT FOR DISCIPLINE
Pursuant to Indiana Admission and Discipline Rule 23(11), the Indiana Supreme Court Disciplinary Commission and Respondent have submitted for approval a "Statement of Circumstances and Conditional Agreement for Discipline" stipulating agreed facts and proposed discipline as summarized below:
Stipulated Facts: While representing a father at a child support modification hearing, Respondent made repeated disparaging references to the facts that the mother was not a U.S. citizen and was receiving legal services at no charge. These facts were irrelevant to the issues being considered at the hearing. Facts in aggravation are: (1) the mother felt that Respondent discriminated against her due to her non-citizen status; and (2) the remarks were made in a public courtroom. Facts in mitigation are that Respondent: (1) has no prior discipline; (2) cooperated with the Commission; (3) regrets his emotional involvement in the case and has made efforts to change his advocacy style; and (4) apologized to the grievant.
Violations: The parties agree that Respondent violated Indiana Professional Conduct Rule 4.4(a), which prohibits using means in representing a client that have no substantial purpose other than to embarrass a third party.
Discipline: The parties agree the appropriate sanction is a public reprimand. The Court, having considered the submissions of the parties, now APPROVES and ORDERS the agreed discipline and imposes a public reprimand.
The costs of this proceeding are assessed against Respondent. With the acceptance of this agreement, the hearing officer appointed in this case is discharged.
All Justices concur.

=== CASE 2223420 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:01.029805+00 ===

50 N.W.2d 516 (1951)
155 Neb. 70
SPREITZER
v.
STATE.
No. 33051.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
December 21, 1951.
*519 Francis M. Casey, Plattsmouth, Grenville P. North, Omaha, for plaintiff in error.
Clarence S. Beck, Atty. Gen., Clarence A. H. Meyer, Asst. Atty. Gen., Walter E. Nolte, Deputy Atty. Gen., for defendant in error.
Heard before SIMMONS, C. J., and CARTER, MESSMORE, YEAGER, CHAPPELL, WENKE, and BOSLAUGH, JJ.
CHAPPELL, Justice.
A jury found plaintiff in error, hereinafter called defendant, guilty of grand larceny. His motion for new trial was overruled, and the trial court sentenced him to be imprisoned in the Nebraska State Penitentiary for two years. Therefrom he prosecuted error to this court, assigning substantially: (1) That the information did not charge an offense under the statute; (2) that the trial court erred in failing and refusing to give him six peremptory challenges; (3) that the verdict was not sustained by the evidence but was contrary thereto and contrary to law; (4) that the jury was guilty of prejudicial misconduct by the manner in which it arrived at the value of the property allegedly taken; and (5) that the trial court erroneously failed to instruct on the law applicable to the case, and in giving instructions Nos. 1, 4, 5, 6, and 13. We conclude that the assignments have no merit.
The statute involved, section 28-506, R.R.S.1943, provides: "Whoever steals any money or goods and chattels of any kind whatever, whether the same be wholly money, or wholly in other property, or partly in money and partly in other property, *520 the property of another, of the value of thirty-five dollars or upwards * * * shall be imprisoned in the penitentiary not more than seven years nor less than one year."
In the light thereof, we have examined the information and conclude that it did sufficiently charge the offense of grand larceny. The information, insofar as important here, charged that on September 8, 1950, contrary to the form of the statutes in such cases made and provided, defendant "did unlawfully, wrongfully and feloniously and with the intent to steal, did take and carry away from the premises of the Union Pacific Railroad Company at Higgins Crossing in said County of Sarpy, State of Nebraska, property of value, towit: Fourteen (14) unused railroad crossties of the value of $35.00 and upwards, and being then and there the property of the said Union Pacific Railroad Company."
In Hans v. State, 147 Neb. 67, 22 N.W.2d 385, 389, this court held: "In charging the commission of an offense in an information, it is not necessary that the exact words of the statute be used, provided the words employed are the equivalents in meaning of those contained in the statute. * * *
"The court will give the words used in the information their ordinary and commonly accepted meaning, and when viewed in this light, if the words employed mean the same thing as those found in the language of the statute denouncing the offense, the information will be upheld."
In Pauli v. State, 151 Neb. 385, 37 N.W.2d 717, it was held: "An information which apprises the defendant, with reasonable certainty, of the accusation against him so that he may prepare a defense and plead the judgment as a bar to subsequent prosecution for the same offense, meets fundamental purposes of information, as well as constitutional requirements."
Only recently this court reaffirmed the rule that: "A complaint or information is fatally defective only if its allegations can be true and still not charge a crime." Phillips v. State, 154 Neb. 790, 49 N.W.2d 698.
The foregoing rules have application here, and affirm the sufficiency of the information.
For the first time, and that on motion for new trial, defendant complained that the trial court erroneously failed and refused to allow defendant six peremptory challenges. In that respect the record discloses as follows: "MONDAY, MARCH 19th, 1951, 10:00 A.M.: (Jury names drawn by the Clerk, examination for cause by attorneys for Plaintiff and Defendant.) MONDAY, MARCH 19th, 1951, 1:30 P.M.: (Impanelling of jury continued, and challenges exercised by Plaintiff and Defendant.) * * * Jury empaneled and sworn at 2:24 P.M."
It does not appear any place in the record that the court failed or refused to give defendant six peremptory challenges or that defendant requested the same. Rather, the record discloses that he exercised two such challenges then waived the third, and, without making any request or taking any exceptions, presumptively waived the other three. If the defendant did not exercise all of them, the court was not at fault. It can only be concluded that defendant was satisfied with the jury until it found him guilty, and then, as an afterthought, raised the question without anything in the record to sustain it.
As stated in Nash v. State, 110 Neb. 712, 194 N.W. 869, 871: "The record shows that the jury were duly impaneled and sworn, and, nothing appearing to the contrary, the presumption is that the jury were properly and lawfully selected. * * * The fact appearing in the record that no exceptions were taken to the jury by the defendants indicates that it was a fair and impartial jury, such as the Constitution guarantees to a party. The defendants were tried by a jury to which they took no exceptions, and this in itself should constitute a waiver of further peremptory challenges."
Also, as held in Hampton v. State, 148 Neb. 574, 28 N.W.2d 322, 323: "Whenever the facts stated in the record are consistent with the duty of the court, and nothing is shown to establish a contrary theory, *521 it will be assumed that the court acted properly and all things were rightly done." We conclude that the second assignment of error has no merit.
We turn then to the third assignment, relating to insufficiency of the evidence. In that connection, the record discloses that eye witnesses identified defendant as one of several men who, at the time and place alleged, loaded the 14 new and unused cross ties belonging to the Union Pacific Railroad in a truck identified by description and license number, and hauled them away without the owner's permission. In fact, defendant was identified as the driver of the truck. The ties were soon thereafter located at a feed lot just south of Omaha, on the Fort Crook road, where they were being used by the feeder to build a fence and loading chute. Such feeder, as a witness for the State, admitted that in accord with a prior arrangement, he bought the ties from defendant, paying him therefor the sum of $14. Such witness testified on crossexamination, but over objection by the State, and without any foundation, that on September 8, 1950, he considered that $14 was their fair value. There was competent evidence that defendant admitted to an investigator that, using his own truck, he hauled the ties to the feeder and sold them to him, but claimed that he had overtaken a panel truck driver under a highway overpass and purchased the ties from such truck driver, without knowing who he was or who owned the ties.
The ties were new creosoted railroad cross ties, designed for, purchased by, and belonging to the Union Pacific Railroad Company. They were identified by such railroad's particular brand or markings on the ties. They were not sold to the public but only to railroads or for the construction of adjoining railroad side tracks. The assistant general purchasing agent of the Union Pacific Railroad, who had served in that capacity for 23 years, and whose duties, among others, was to purchase ties for that railroad, testified that in his opinion the value of the ties when taken was $4 each, which made a total of $56. Contrary to defendant's contention, there was ample and sufficient foundation laid for the admission of such testimony by that witness. Defendant adduced no evidence in his own behalf.
The jury fixed the value of the property as $35. Such value was a question of fact for its determination, and examination of the record discloses that under the evidence it could as well have found that the property was worth more, up to $56.
In Edmonds v. State, 42 Neb. 684, 60 N.W. 957, this court held: "In a prosecution for grand larceny, proof of the value of the property stolen must be made by at least one witness affirmatively shown to possess knowledge of the value concerning which he is called upon to give evidence. Following Brooks v. State, 28 Neb. 389, 44 N.W. 436." That rule was complied with in every respect in the case at bar.
In Clark v. State, 151 Neb. 348, 37 N.W.2d 601, 602, this court held: "It is not the province of this court to resolve conflicts in the evidence in law actions, pass on the credibility of witnesses, determine the plausibility of explanations, or weigh the evidence. Those matters are for the jury.
"Where there is substantial evidence sustaining the jury's verdict, it will not be set aside."
In Smith v. State, 153 Neb. 308, 44 N.W.2d 497, 500, it was said: "The credibility of the witnesses and the weight of their testimony was for the jury to determine and the decision of the jury cannot be disturbed unless it is clearly wrong. Morrow v. State, 146 Neb. 601, 20 N.W.2d 602."
It was recently reaffirmed in Phillips v. State, supra [154 Neb. 790, 49 N.W.2d 700], that: "In a criminal case, this court will not interfere with a verdict of guilty based upon the evidence, unless it is so lacking in probative force that we can say, as a matter of law, that it is insufficient to support a finding of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt."
We conclude that the evidence adduced by the State was amply sufficient to sustain the verdict.
*522 Defendant contended that the jury was guilty of misconduct because it erroneously arrived at the value of the property by adding the evidence given by the two witnesses regarding value, and dividing that sum by two, thereby arriving at a quotient verdict. Upon motion for new trial the affidavits of two jurors so indicating were offered in evidence but refused. We conclude that the trial court properly refused to admit or consider them. Contrary to defendant's contention, there is no showing in this record which would justify any finding that the jury returned a quotient verdict upon the question of value. As stated in 53 Am.Jur., Trial, § 1031, p. 712: "The invalidity of quotient verdicts depends not upon the method of arriving at the verdict, or the result reached, but on the previous agreement to be bound by the result of the quotient process. The test to be applied in determining the validity of a verdict which is attacked as a quotient verdict is whether the jury agreed beforehand to be bound by the result reached; the existence of such agreement is the test in both criminal prosecutions and civil actions."
The applicable rule here is that: "* * * no affidavit, deposition, or other sworn statement of a juror will be received to impeach the verdict, to explain it, to show on what grounds it was rendered, or to show a mistake in it; or that they misunderstood the charge of the court; or that they otherwise mistook the law, or the result of their finding.'" Hamblin v. State, 81 Neb. 148, 115 N.W. 850, 855. See, also, Schindler v. Mulhair, 132 Neb. 809, 273 N.W. 217, and Bonacci v. Cerra, 134 Neb. 588, 279 N.W. 314, 318, wherein it was held: "`An affidavit of a juror as to what items the jury allowed or disallowed in computing the amount due, or what the jury believed they had a right to do under the instructions, is incompetent. Such matters are commonly held to inhere in the verdict.' Palmer v. Parmele, 104 Neb. 30, 175 N.W. 649."
Defendant argued that the trial court erred when it failed to instruct on the law applicable to the case. In that connection, defendant argued that the trial court should have given the jury some measuring stick to use in determining the value of the property allegedly stolen. Instruction No. 12, told the jury: "If you find the defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt as charged in the information, it is your province and duty to ascertain and determine the value of the property described in the information and alleged to have been stolen, as shown by the evidence beyond a reasonable doubt to have been taken as charged in the information, and you will state in your verdict such value of the property so taken, although it may not literally be the same value as set forth in the information." In that respect, the court complied with section 29-2026, R.R.S. 1943, which provides: "When the indictment charges an offense against the property of another by larceny * * * the jury, on conviction, shall ascertain and declare in their verdict the value of the property stolen, * * *."
The information submitted by instruction No. 1 alleged that on September 8, 1950, the property had a value of $35 and upwards. That was the only date involved in the case. All of the material evidence related to that date, and its fair value as of that date. The jury could not have been misled if they determined the value of the property from the evidence adduced, as they were required to do, and the mere failure to use the words "fair and reasonable" in instruction No. 12 could not have been error prejudicial to defendant.
Defendant assigned that the trial court erred in giving instructions Nos. 1, 4, 5, 6, and 13. The complaint with reference to instructions Nos. 1, 5, and 6 was predicated upon the contention that the information did not charge a crime, which we have heretofore concluded has no merit. Therefore, from an examination of the instructions and previous discussion it is apparent that such instructions clearly and correctly stated the law in every respect.
Instruction No. 4 told the jury in part: "By the words `reasonable doubt' as used in these instructions is meant an actual, substantial doubt of guilt arising *523 in your minds from the evidence or want of evidence in the case." (Italics supplied.) Defendant argued that the italicized words were prejudicial to defendant since he did not adduce any evidence in his own behalf. The contention has no merit. In Trimble v. State, 118 Neb. 267, 224 N.W. 274, 275, this court said: "`It is proper to charge, and error to refuse to charge, that a reasonable doubt may arise either from the evidence or from a want of the evidence, and that the absence of sufficiently satisfying evidence may be a ground for a reasonable doubt of defendant's guilt.'" See, also, McIntosh v. State, 105 Neb. 328, 180 N.W. 573, 12 A.L.R. 798, and Goemann v. State, 100 Neb. 772, 161 N.W. 421, together with cases cited therein, approving the very instruction here involved.
Instruction No. 13 read in part: "In determining the credibility and weight to be given to the testimony of witnesses, you should take into consideration their interest, if any, in the result of this case; their conduct and demeanor while testifying; their opportunities for seeing and knowing the things about which they testify; and the probability or improbability of their testimony." (Italics supplied.) Defendant complained that the words "probability or improbability" used therein, permitted the jury to convict on probable cause, instead of permitting it to determine that which was true and that which was not true. No authority was cited to support such contention. This court has on a number of occasions approved almost identical instructions. They are correlated in I Corcoran, Nebraska Instructions to Juries (2d ed.), sections 1432, 1433, 1434, pages 369 and 370.
As generally understood, the words, "probability or improbability of their testimony" mean whether their testimony has the appearance of truth or falsehood, that is, whether it is credible or incredible, believable or unbelievable.
As stated in Mulder v. State, 152 Neb. 795, 42 N.W.2d 858, 859: "It is elementary that in passing upon the validity of part of an instruction, it must be considered not only in the light of all the language used in the particular instruction of which it is a part, but also all other instructions given by the trial court." In the light thereof, we have examined all of the instructions given and conclude that they properly and fairly submitted the issues to the jury.
Other matters are discussed in defendant's brief, but they are entirely without merit, and to discuss them would serve no purpose except to unduly prolong this opinion.
Finding no error in the record prejudicial to defendant, we conclude that the judgment should be and hereby is affirmed.
Affirmed.