=== CASE 2212440 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:19.879389+00 ===

222 Cal. App. 2d 221 (1963)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
RAMON RODRIGUEZ, Defendant and Respondent.
Crim. No. 4270.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. One.
Nov. 13, 1963.
Stanley Mosk, Attorney General, Albert W. Harris, Jr., and Michael J. Phelan, Deputy Attorneys General, for Plaintiff and Appellant.
Henry B. Fulton, under appointment by the District Court of Appeal, for Defendant and Respondent. *222
MOLINARI, J.
This is an appeal by the People from an order setting aside Counts I and II of an information charging defendant with violation of Penal Code section 4501.5,  [fn. 1] which at all times pertinent to this appeal provided as follows: "Every person undergoing a sentence of less than life in a state prison of this State who commits a battery upon the person of any individual who is not himself a prisoner shall be guilty of a felony. ..."  [fn. 2]
Question Presented
[1a] Was defendant "undergoing a sentence of less than life in a state prison ..."?
The Facts
Defendant was committed to the Youth Authority after having been declared a ward of the Juvenile Court of Los Angeles County. Pursuant to such commitment defendant was sent to Deuel Vocational Institution and thereafter, on July 26, 1961, was transferred to the Correctional Training Facility at Soledad. While such an inmate of Soledad it is alleged that defendant, on April 27, 1962, struck one guard with his fist and another guard with a guitar handle. These alleged batteries are the basis of the first two counts of the information, which the court below dismissed pursuant to a motion under section 995. For purposes of this appeal, there is no question that at the time the alleged batteries were committed defendant was being lawfully held in custody in a state prison, and that said batteries, if committed, were perpetrated upon persons who were not prisoners. The trial court set aside these two counts on the ground that at the time of the alleged batteries defendant was not serving a sentence.  [fn. 3]
The People's Contentions
The People contend that a person committed to the Youth *223 Authority is a " 'person undergoing [a] sentence' " and that when such a person is transferred to the Correctional Training Facility at Soledad he is punishable for violations of section 4501.5. The People also contend that even if a Youth Authority transferee cannot be deemed a " 'person undergoing a sentence,' " such a person should still be amenable to punishment under section 4501.5.
Defendant's Status
Defendant, a person under 21 years of age, was adjudged and declared to be a ward of the Juvenile Court by the Superior Court of Los Angeles County on June 20, 1956, and was ordered committed to the care and custody of the Youth Authority for the time prescribed by section 1769 of the Welfare and Institutions Code.  [fn. 4] While under the custody of the Youth Authority at the Deuel Vocational Institution defendant was transferred by the Authority to the Correctional Training Facility at Soledad pursuant to section 1755.5 of the Welfare and Institutions Code, which provided, in pertinent part, as follows: "[T]he Youth Authority may transfer to and cause to be confined in ... the California State Prison at Soledad ... for general study, diagnosis, and treatment, or any of them, any person over the age of 18 years who is subject to the custody, control, and discipline of the Youth Authority; and the Director of Corrections may receive and keep ... any person so transferred thereto ... with the same powers as if the person had been placed therein or transferred thereto pursuant to the provisions of the Penal Code." Section 1755.5 further provided: "The provisions of part 3 of the Penal Code,  [fn. 5] so far as those provisions may be applicable, apply to persons so transferred to and confined ..., except that, whenever by reason of any law governing the commitment of a person to the Youth Authority or to an institution under the jurisdiction of the Youth Authority the person is deemed not to be a person convicted of a crime, the transfer or placement of the person in ... the California *224 State Prison at Soledad ... shall not affect the status or rights of the person and shall not be deemed to constitute a conviction of a crime. ..." (Italics added.)
The People do not contend that defendant is a person convicted of a crime, or that by reason of his transfer to Soledad he is to be deemed a person convicted of a crime. At the time of the juvenile court proceedings, section 736 of the Welfare and Institutions Code provided: "An order adjudging a person to be a ward of the juvenile court shall not be deemed to be a conviction of crime."  [fn. 6] The People do contend, however, that by virtue of the provisions of section 1755.5 of the Welfare and Institutions Code defendant became subject to section 4501.5 and was, accordingly, a " 'person undergoing [a] sentence.' " The People rely on In re Herrera, 23 Cal. 2d 206 [143 P.2d 345]; People v. Temple, 203 Cal. App. 2d 654 [21 Cal. Rptr. 633], and People v. White, 177 Cal. App. 2d 383 [2 Cal. Rptr. 202]. An analysis of each of these cases discloses that they are not applicable to the situation confronting us in the present case.
Herrera is not in point. That case merely involves the right to appeal. There the defendants were committed to the Youth Authority after conviction of the crime of assault with a deadly weapon. On petition for a writ of habeas corpus, they urged that their detention was illegal since they were not "sentenced" and could not, under the applicable statutes, appeal. The Supreme Court held that "This commitment is a judicial determination of the fact of defendant's conviction and a pronouncement of the sentence for the offense ..., and is therefore the court's judgment and sentence of the convict ..., and is appealable." (P. 214; italics added.) The important distinction between Herrera and the instant case is that in the former the minors were prosecuted criminally and convicted of a crime, while in our case defendant was not convicted of a crime but made a ward of the juvenile court.
Temple involves a situation where a minor, who had been convicted of armed robbery, was sent by the Youth Authority to the Correctional Facility at Soledad. While an inmate there he escaped. The question arose whether the escape was a felony or a misdemeanor. If section 1768.7 of the Welfare and Institutions Code were applicable then the offense would *225 only be a misdemeanor. That section provides that one committed to the Youth Authority and who attempts to or escapes from a facility from which he is confined, is guilty of a misdemeanor. The court held, however, that the provisions of section 1755.5 thereof, insofar as it directs that Part 3 of the Penal Code should apply to Youth Authority transferees at Soledad, were controlling, so that the escape was a felony under section 4530, regardless of the fact that the defendant was under the Youth Authority program. The basis of the holding in Temple was that the defendant was a "prisoner" within the meaning of section 4530, which provided that: "Every prisoner confined in a state prison who escapes or attempts to escape therefrom, is punishable by imprisonment in a state prison. ..."
The Temple case relied upon White. In that case the appellant had been adjudged a psychopathic delinquent pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code section 7058, and was committed to Mendocino State Hospital. He was later transferred to Atascadero State Hospital, then to the medical facility at Vacaville, and finally, to San Quentin. While incarcerated there he was convicted of violating section 4502, which provided in part as follows: "Every prisoner committed to a State prison who, while at such State prison ... possesses or carries upon his person [any deadly weapon], ... is guilty of a felony. ..." On appeal it was argued that the appellant was a patient and not a prisoner, and that therefore he could not come under the provisions of section 4502. The reviewing court held that he was "a prisoner" even though criminal proceedings had been suspended, and the appellant was in prison solely by virtue of section 7058 of the Welfare and Institutions Code, which provided for a 90-day period of commitment for observation.  [fn. 7] The holding of the appellate court was that a person in custody at a state prison as the result of due legal process is a prisoner within the meaning of section 4502, the rationale of the case being that "the significance of the word 'prisoner' is not the manner of commitment, but rather the fact of a judicial commitment." (P. 385.)
The holding of Temple and White is that a person who is legally confined in a state prison is a "prisoner" whether *226 his confinement results from a criminal conviction or from a commitment stemming from a proceeding of a noncriminal nature. Under the holding of these cases, defendant was a prisoner while an inmate of Soledad. However, the crucial question before us is not whether he was a "prisoner," but whether he was a "person undergoing a sentence. ..." Temple and White were not called upon to define this phraseology, nor, to our knowledge, are there any other cases directly interpreting this language.
[2] A "sentence" is the judgment in a criminal action (People v. Perkins, 147 Cal. App. 2d 793, 797 [305 P.2d 932]; People v. Tokich, 128 Cal. App. 2d 515, 519 [275 P.2d 816]; People v. Carlson, 177 Cal. App. 2d 201, 207 [2 Cal. Rptr. 117]); it is the declaration to the defendant of his disposition or punishment once his criminal guilt has been ascertained. (In re Anderson, 34 Cal. App. 2d 48, 50 [92 P.2d 1020].) [1b] A minor who has been made a ward of the juvenile court, as we have pointed out above, is not deemed convicted of a crime. Moreover, a transfer from the custody of the Youth Authority to that of the Director of Corrections does not constitute a conviction of a crime, nor does it in any way affect the rights or the status of the person so transferred. (Welf. & Inst. Code,  1755.5.) It is clear, therefore, that defendant, although an inmate of Soledad, was still a ward of the juvenile court. He was never prosecuted criminally and therefore was never sentenced. Accordingly, while he may be designated a prisoner in the sense that he was in custody as the result of a legal process (see People v. White, supra, pp. 384-385), he was not then undergoing "sentence." It should be noted, moreover, that at the time of defendant's commitment to the Youth Authority the sections of the Welfare and Institutions Code authorizing the custody and control of one decreed a ward of the juvenile court did not use the term "sentence" but spoke in terms of "care," "benefit" and "commitment" (Welf. & Inst. Code,  740, 743), while the Penal Code sections which dealt with punishment for a crime used, as they still do, the word "sentence." ( 12-13.)
The People would have us ignore the difference in language between the introductory sentences of the various code sections in part 3 of the Penal Code and interpret section 4501.5 as if it read "prisoner," instead of "person undergoing a sentence of less than life. ..." This argument may be answered by stating that when the Legislature intended the *227 code sections in part 3 to include a "prisoner" it specifically said so. (See  4502, 4503, 4530, 4531 and 4532.) Yet when the Legislature intended its provisions to apply only to a person "undergoing a sentence" it likewise said so without equivocation. (See  4500, 4501, 4501.5.) A comparison of section 4500, on the one hand, with sections 4501 and 4501.5, on the other, shows a legislative intent to impose a more severe punishment for proscribed assault activity in prisons when the offender is serving a life sentence than when he is serving a sentence of less than life. Again, when the Legislature was dealing with the possession of deadly weapons in state prisons, it specifically made the statute applicable to "[e]very prisoner. ..." ( 4502.) Similarly, when it dealt with damage to prisons the Legislature specifically made the statute applicable to "every person. ..." ( 4600.) It is apparent that the Legislature intended to make a distinction between a "prisoner" who was serving a sentence and one who was not when it enacted penal provisions applicable to the commission of a battery in a state prison. As to the former, section 4501.5 applied; as to the latter, section 242, applicable to batteries generally, was deemed adequate. [3] A legislative enactment should be construed in accordance with the ordinary meaning of the language used and it should be assumed that the Legislature knew what it was saying and meant what it said. (Pepper v. Board of Directors, 162 Cal. App. 2d 1, 4-5 [327 P.2d 928]; Pacific Gas & E. Co. v. Shasta Dam etc. Dist., 135 Cal. App. 2d 463, 468 [287 P.2d 841]; V. R. Dennis Constr. Co. v. City of San Diego, 188 Cal. App. 2d 833, 837 [10 Cal. Rptr. 894].) Apropos the legislative intent from the language used, it is significant to note that the subject statute was amended in 1963 to make it now applicable to "[e]very person confined in a state prison. ..." (Italics added.) Section 4501 underwent the same change as section 4501.5; yet the Legislature, in its wisdom, left section 4500 undisturbed so as to make it specifically applicable only to persons "undergoing a life sentence. ..."
[4] Furthermore, even if it could be said that the statute in question is capable of two constructions, we would still be confronted with the rule applicable to the construction of penal statutes that the construction more favorable to the defendant will be adopted. (People v. Smith, 44 Cal. 2d 77, 79 [279 P.2d 33]; People v. Ralph, 24 Cal. 2d 575, 581 [150 P.2d 401]; People v. Holtzendorff, 177 Cal. App. 2d 788, 795 [2 *228 Cal.Rptr. 676].)
The order is affirmed.
Bray, P. J., and Sullivan, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. All statutory references hereinafter made are to the Penal Code unless otherwise indicated, and all statutory references, unless otherwise indicated, are to the dates and periods applicable to this case.
[fn. 2]  2. In 1963, the Legislature amended section 4501.5. It now provides as follows: "Every person confined in a state prison of this State who commits a battery upon the person of any individual who is not himself a person confined therein shall be guilty of a felony and shall be imprisoned in the state prison not less than one year nor more than three years."
[fn. 3]  3. Defendant was also charged with a violation of section 4600, which made it a felony for any person to willfully destroy or injure a state prison where the damage exceeds $200. A motion to set aside this charge was likewise made under section 995, but it was denied in the court below and no appeal has been taken from such order.
[fn. 4]  4. Section 1769 of the Welfare and Institutions Code provided: "Every person committed to the Authority by a juvenile court shall be discharged upon the expiration of a two-year period of control or when the person reaches his twenty-first birthday, whichever occurs later."
[fn. 5]  5. Part 3, embracing sections 1999 to 10005, inclusive, provided generally, as it does now, for the imprisonment of prisoners in state prisons, state institutions, county jails, farms and camps, and for the offenses relating to prisons and prisoners, including section 4501.5 with which we are concerned in the instant proceeding.
[fn. 6]  6. Section 736 of the Welfare and Institutions Code is now section 503 and provides as follows: "An order adjudging a minor to be a ward of the juvenile court shall not be deemed a conviction of a crime for any purpose, nor shall a proceeding in the juvenile court be deemed a criminal proceeding."
[fn. 7]  7. The institutions to which the appellant had been transferred from time to time were legally designated institutions for the care and treatment of psychopathic delinquents. (See Welf. & Inst. Code,  7051.)

=== CASE 9737923 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:37:07.186676+00 ===

WUEST, Justice.
Hendrickson’s Home Health Care Service (HHCS) appeals an order of the circuit court which affirmed the determination of the South Dakota Department of Labor, Unemployment Insurance Division that HHCS was liable for unemployment insurance contributions. We affirm.
In an administrative appeal, we review the agency record in the same light as *656does the trial court. SDCL 1-26-37; In Matter of Application of Northwestern Bell Telephone Company, 382 N.W.2d 413, 416 (S.D.1986); In Matter of Application of Koch Exploration Company, 387 N.W.2d 530, 536 (S.D.1986) (Fosheim, C.J., dissenting). Deference is accorded an agency’s factual determination, and we review the record to determine whether the agency’s findings of fact are clearly erroneous in light of all the evidence in the record. SDCL 1-26-36; Karras v. State, Dept. of Revenue, 441 N.W.2d 678, 679 (S.D.1989); Sharp v. Sharp, 422 N.W.2d 443, 447 (S.D.1988) (Morgan, J., concurring specially; Henderson, J., dissenting); Permann v. South Dakota Dept. of Labor, Unemployment Insurance Division, 411 N.W.2d 113, 115-17 (S.D.1987) (Henderson, J., concurring in result). Conclusions of law, however, are given no deference on appeal and are freely reviewable. SDCL 1-26-36; Karras, supra, at 679; Sharp, supra, at 447; Permann, supra, at 115-17. Likewise, mixed law-fact questions which require us to apply a legal standard are reviewed as are questions of law: de novo. In Matter of Groseth International, Inc., 442 N.W.2d 229, 232 (S.D.1989) (Sabers, J., concurring in part and concurring specially in part); South Dakota Stockgrowers Assn., Inc. v. Holloway, 438 N.W.2d 561, 563 (S.D.1989); Permann, supra, at 119. With these standards of review in mind, we address the factual findings of the unemployment insurance division in this case.
Hendrickson’s Home Health Care Services, Inc., is a South Dakota Corporation in the business of providing in-home nursing services. HHCS advertises its services in the newspaper and the telephone directory, and also receives referrals from hospitals, doctors, clinics, and social services. Typically, prospective clients contact HHCS requesting home-care and nursing services and inform HHCS of the level of care required. HHCS maintains a list of nurses and nurse’s aides who possess varying degrees of nursing skill. Upon receiving a request for services, HHCS consults the list and contacts those individuals with sufficient skills for a referral. The care provider may accept or reject the referral by HHCS. Care providers are not removed from the list if they merely reject a referral. Once the referral is accepted, the client and the care provider establish the work schedule and the duties to be performed.
HHCS and the client then enter into an agreement which specifies the number of hours of care and the hourly rate the client will pay HHCS for the services of the care provider. HHCS bills the client for these services and collects the fee from the client. Clients are charged $5.00 per hour for unskilled nursing and $7.75 per hour for skilled nursing. Care providers are paid weekly by HHCS and receive $3.90 per hour for unskilled nursing and $6.25 for skilled nursing. The care provider is paid each week regardless of whether the client has paid HHCS. No income tax or social security is deducted from the care providers’ checks. The compensation paid to the care providers is reported to the Internal Revenue Service on Form 1099. Although HHCS sets the rate of pay, care providers are free to negotiate a different rate of pay with the client.
HHCS does not guarantee or require any particular number of hours of work, nor does HHCS supervise the care providers day-to-day activities in the client’s home. Typically, when a care provider is unable to work a scheduled shift, she informs HHCS and HHCS finds a replacement. Occasionally, a care provider locates her own replacement. In the latter case, HHCS is contacted to insure the replacement is paid and the bill is correct. Although care providers are free to hire their own assistants, there was no evidence that any care provider did so.
Standard forms for charting nurse’s notes are provided by HHCS. These forms are filed with HHCS so that the client’s doctor or the client’s family may review the care provided and the client’s condition. Name tags with HHCS’s name on them are also furnished by HHCS to the care providers. HHCS furnishes no equipment or training for the care providers. In addition, the care providers pay their own in*657surance and any other expenses associated with the referral.
The care provider and HHCS sign a document entitled, “Subcontractor’s Responsibilities,” which requires the care provider:
(1) Wear white or blue uniforms unless otherwise instructed.
(2) Not smoke on the job without the client’s permission.
(3) Not work extra hours or change hours unless it is cleared with HHCS. The care provider must give HHCS three hours notice if she is unable to work her scheduled shift. A care provider who does not show up for her shift or call in is subject to dismissal.
(4) Chart in nursing notes every shift and sign every entry.
(5) Not give medication if the care provider is a nurse’s aide.
(6) Provide her own lunch.
(7) Leave the home cleaner then when she arrived.
(8) Have $4.00 deducted from her first check to pay for a name tag.
(9) Carry her own liability insurance.
(10) Not accept gifts from the client.
(11) Not work for any current or past client of HHCS for ninety days after termination.
(12) Never give out phone numbers of the clients or care providers.
(13) Is subject to dismissal for violating the above suggestions.
Care providers are not restricted by HHCS from engaging in outside employment, including private nursing. One of HHCS’s listed care providers, who testified at the administrative hearing, did private nursing on her own for three months prior to starting to work for HHCS in January 1986. Since that time, she has worked exclusively for HHCS, except for seasonal work as a ticket-taker at a race track. Another of HHCS's listed care providers was employed as a nurse’s aide in a nursing home for one year and provided nurse’s aide services in her own home to an elderly man for four years prior to starting to work through HHCS in 1984. Since that time, she has not sought or accepted nurse’s aide work other than the referrals she receives from HHCS. She also has a baby-sitting service three days per week and is able to arrange her nurse’s aide work around the baby-sitting hours. Three other of HHCS’s listed care providers had outside jobs while working through HHCS. One of them was employed as a nurse’s aide somewhere else while she accepted referrals through HHCS. However, no listed care providers advertised or operated a business, independent of the referrals provided by HHCS, in the area of home health care services while accepting referrals through HHCS. Indeed, no evidence was presented to indicate that the care providers hold themselves out to the public as engaged in independent business, advertise their home health care services, have any clientele independent from that provided by HHCS, have any business premises or business cards, have any substantial investment in HHCS, nor have any going business to sell.
The factual findings of the agency are not questioned in this appeal, and having found support for such findings in the record, we cannot say the agency’s factual determinations were clearly erroneous. Under the facts presented, the agency concluded as a matter of law that:
(1) The care providers performed services for HHCS for wages, and HHCS therefore has covered employment under the South Dakota Unemployment Insurance Law;
(2) The care providers were not free from control or direction in the performance of their service. HHCS retained the right to direct and control their services;
(3) The care providers were not customarily engaged in an independently established trade, occupation or business; and,
(4) The care providers are employees of HHCS, not independent contractors, and therefore, HHCS is liable for contributions to the unemployment compensation fund.1
*658HHCS contends they are merely providing referral and billing services to the care providers for which a fee is charged, and that such fee is retained from each client payment. Consequently, the care providers are not HHCS employees, but are independent contractors, and therefore, HHCS is not required to contribute to the state’s unemployment insurance fund. We are thus presented with a mixed question of law and fact: “the historical facts are admitted or established, the rule of law is undisputed, and the issue is whether the facts satisfy the statutory standard[.]” Permann, 411 N.W.2d at 118 (quoting Pullman-Standard v. Swint, 456 U.S. 273, 289 n. 19, 102 S.Ct. 1781, 1790 n. 19, 72 L.Ed.2d 66, 80 n. 19 (1982). As we initially acknowledged, mixed law-fact questions are freely reviewable.
SDCL 61-1-11 distinguishes employees and independent contractors for purposes of unemployment insurance tax liability.
Service performed by an individual for wages is employment subject to this title unless and until it is shown to the satisfaction of the department of labor that:
(1) The individual has been and will continue to be free from control or direction over the performance of the service, both under his contract of service and in fact; and
[[Image here]]
(3) The individual is customarily engaged in an independently established trade, occupation, profession or business.
SDCL 61-1-11. In applying this test, the burden is upon the agency to show that the alleged employees perform services for wages. See In Matter of Balhorn-Moyle Petroleum Co., 315 N.W.2d 481, 484 (S.D.1982) (Dunn and Fosheim, J.J., dissenting); Weber v. South Dakota Dept. of Labor, Unemployment Insurance Division, 323 N.W.2d 117, 121 (S.D.1982). Once this has been shown, the burden shifts to the employer to prove the employees are independent contractors under the elements of SDCL 61-1-11. See Weber, supra at 120-21; Carr v. South Dakota Department of Labor, Unemployment Insurance Division, 355 N.W.2d 10 (S.D.1984). All elements of this test must be shown before the exemption applies. South Dakota Department of Labor, Unemployment Insurance Division v. Tri State Insurance Co., 315 N.W.2d 315, 316 (S.D.1982).
“[A]ll remuneration paid for services, including commissions and bonuses and the cash value of all remuneration paid in any medium other than cash” is wages for purposes of the unemployment compensation scheme. SDCL 61-1-1(9). It is clear that the care providers perform their services for wages. HHCS pays the care providers weekly, commensurate with the hours of nursing care provided HHCS clients and regardless whether the clients pay HHCS. These pay checks are remuneration paid for services. Cf. Balhorn-Moyle, supra (supplier-distributor relationship). It is not defeating that the nursing services were not provided to HHCS in a direct manner. The nursing services further HHCS’s ordinary course of business.
Having determined that the care providers perform services for wages, we examine the administrative record to determine whether HHCS demonstrated that the care providers are independent contractors under SDCL 61-1-11.
(1) Whether the individuals have been and will continue to be free from control or direction over the performance of their services, both under contract of service and in fact?
The facts demonstrate that the care providers are required to sign a contract which permits HHCS to control their conduct: care providers are required to wear a certain color uniform and a name-tag with the company’s logo embossed on it, making them' appear to be agents of HHCS; care providers cannot work extra hours or change their hours of work without clearing it with HHCS; HHCS prohibits care providers from smoking on the job; care providers must chart nursing notes and file *659them centrally with HHCS; and HHCS restricts care providers from employment with current or past HHCS clients for ninety days following termination. Furthermore, violation of any of these conditions is grounds for dismissal. These contract requirements are indicative of the control exercised by an employer over the performance of employee services; thus, HHCS fails the first prong of SDCL 61-1-11. See Miller Liquid Feeds v. South Dakota Dept. of Labor, Unemployment Insurance Division, 340 N.W.2d 185 (S.D.1983); Weber, supra. Cf. Tri State Insulation, supra; Balhorn-Moyle, supra.
(2) Whether the individuals are customarily engaged in an independently established trade, occupation, profession or business?
The requirement that the employee’s occupation be independently established and that he be customarily engaged in it calls for an enterprise created and existing separate and apart from the relationship with the particular employer; an enterprise that will survive the termination of that relationship. See Princess House, Inc. v. Department of Industry, Labor and Human Relations, 111 Wis.2d 46, 330 N.W.2d 169, 181 (1983) (Steinmetz, J., concurring). The individual must have a proprietary interest in the enterprise to the extent that she can operate it without hinderance from any other individual. See Tri State Insulation, 315 N.W.2d at 316.
In a broad sense, the care providers have a proprietary interest in their nursing skills. Cf. Tri State Insulation, 315 N.W.2d at 317-18 (proprietary interest in skills as salesman). However, it is not skill alone which determines whether an individual is established in a trade or business, but whether that individual by reason of such skill engages herself in an economic enterprise such that she bears the risk of her own unemployment. See Princess House, 330 N.W.2d at 181. Whether or not she is unemployed is solely a function of market forces and the demand for her skills, not the response of her master to similar economic realities. Here, there was no evidence that the care providers held themselves out to the public as engaged in an independent business which would exist separate and apart from HHCS; they did not advertise their health care services, they did not have any clientele independent of that provided by HHCS, and they did not have business premises or business cards. Furthermore, the care providers could be dismissed from HHCS for violating the provisions of the “Subcontractor’s Responsibilities” document. Thus, it is clear that the care providers were not assuming the risk of unemployment by engaging in an economic enterprise independent of HHCS. They were employed by HHCS and dependent upon it for their livelihood. Consequently, HHCS fails the second prong of SDCL 61-1-11.
We affirm the trial court on all issues.
MILLER, C.J., and MORGAN and SABERS, JJ., concur.
HENDERSON, J., concurs in result in part and dissents in part.
. The agency also found HHCS liable for any penalties or interests that may be due and ow*658ing on unpaid unemployment insurance contributions.

=== CASE 9737924 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:37:07.190787+00 ===

HENDERSON, Justice
(concurring in result in part; dissenting in part).
Reading is a rather subtle happiness which produces joy that does not seem to be dulled by age. It is somewhat of an unpunishable vice when one reads for recreation. However, it can prove to be a punishing lot for the appellate judge.
I read in this opinion written by Wuest, J., that registered nurses (RN’s), licensed practical nurses (LPN) and nurse’s aides are “care providers.” In fact, they are so denominated, and that phrase appears, 36 times throughout the writing.
I was always of the opinion that nursing was a profession and imbued with a high calling to watch over and care for the ill. I highly respect them, inter alia, for the care they have given to society and members of my family, to include myself. Doctor was often gone but nurse was everpresent. To the Florence Nightingales, I tip my hat. Our State Legislature, expressing the sovereign will, has been fully cognizant of their educational needs and professional standards. SDCL 36-9-1.1. A professional Board of Nursing is established under *660SDCL 36-9-7. Sioux Falls, from whence this litigation sprung, is the largest city in our state and I recognize the worth and dedication of these nurses, be they male or female and irrespective of their designation as an RN, LPN or nurse’s aide.
Back to reading. One can read so much legal formulae, terms, and phrases pouring from the reservoirs of formal law. I read in the Department of Labor’s decision that these people are “workers.” The Department refers to them, again and again, as “workers.” In the Department of Labor’s brief to this Court, they are called “nurses.” In appellant’s briefing, they are denominated as being nurses and nurse’s aides and occasionally referred to as “health care providers.” When the appellate reviewer reads the Administrative Law Judge’s decision, they are called “employees.” Circuit Court Judge Kean termed them “workers.” Hendrickson’s contract with them called them “independent contractors” to which the nurses, referring to their nurses services, acceeded to being called “independent contractors” and also “nurses.”
It is my understanding from reading these briefs and the decisions made below, that we are confronted with this question: What is the legal status of these “individuals?” Of the many terms ascribed to them, which term truly identifies their legal status?
It is noted in the majority writing of Wuest, J., that intermittently nurses are referred to as he, she, herself and her. Nurses may be male or female in point of fact and under the law.
These individuals, in my opinion, were nurses and they were receiving wages for their services. They deserve their rightful, professional status. They did not receive the money from the sick people they attended. The money was sent directly to Hendrickson by the sick person. Hendrick-son was handling the money and sent the money back to the nurses for their hourly wages, which they earned as a result of providing nursing services. This payment was by the week. Most importantly, Hen-drickson established the charge for the nurse’s time spent with the sick person. Therefore, this case is clearly distinguishable from Matter of Balhorn-Moyle Petroleum Co., 315 N.W.2d 481 (S.D.1982).
Under SDCL 61-1-11, these individuals were nurses “customarily engaged” in an independently established profession. However, they could not meet the exception that as nurses, they were free from the control or direction of Hendrickson’s Health Care Service. In my opinion, the majority opinion has used a term 36 times in order to cleverly supplant that term for the true role of these individuals in our society. Thus, to cast upon them the term of “care provider” seems contrary to our state statutes. This term aligns itself with “Hendrickson’s Health Care Service.” In a subtle way, this term detracts from their professional status. However, to emphasize that term by repetition — 36 times — intertwines and commingles the unifying concept of “Hendrickson’s Health Care Service” and “care providers” thereby buttressing the majority holding. These nurses should not be swept up in a generic term.
I dissent to that aspect of this decision which holds that these nurses were not customarily engaged in an independently established occupation or profession. As such, they had the right to subcontract but, under this factual scenario, they were controlled and directed in the performance of their services. Under Miller Feeds v. South Dakota Dept. of Labor, 340 N.W.2d 185 (S.D.1983), services are employment, as contemplated under SDCL 61-1-11 unless the employer satisfies every subdivision of the statute. Here, the employer failed to establish that these nurses were not free from its control.

=== CASE 2212451 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:20.004348+00 ===

462 N.W.2d 718 (1990)
STATE of Iowa, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Clinton Robert VARGASON, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 89-566.
Court of Appeals of Iowa.
September 26, 1990.
Raymond E. Rogers, State Appellate Defender, and B. John Burns, Asst. Appellate Defender, for defendant-appellant.
Thomas J. Miller, Atty. Gen., Ann E. Brenden, Asst. Atty. Gen., J. Patrick White, Co. Atty., and Tammy B. Roush, Asst. Co. Atty., for plaintiff-appellee.
Considered by SCHLEGEL, P.J., and SACKETT and HABHAB, JJ.
SACKETT, Judge.
Defendant Clinton Robert Vargason appeals his conviction of third-degree sexual abuse in violation of Iowa Code section 709.4 (1989). He contends the trial court erred in failing to instruct on lesser-included offenses of assault with intent to commit sexual abuse and assault. He also challenges the trial court's refusal to strike a challenged juror and contends he was compelled to disclose communications that were privileged under the attorney-client relationship. We determine it was error not to instruct on the lesser-included offenses of assault. We remand for new trial.
In the evening of June 24, 1988, defendant and the victim met in an Iowa City bar. The victim wanted a ride home. After leaving the bar, the couple went to three parties, and then parked on a gravel road heading out of town. The defendant admitted he wanted to have intercourse. He testified he felt the victim did too. The victim testified she only remained with the defendant to get a ride home.
*719 The victim testified defendant told her to take off her clothes and he ultimately removed some of them. She testified he hit her and she ultimately submitted to intercourse. She said she was on top and it lasted a very short time. She said she refused defendant's demand that she suck on his penis. Defendant testified they both took off their clothes and had intercourse. He testified she was on top. He testified she refused his request that she suck on his penis.
The defendant had initially denied any sexual encounter with the victim. He eventually admitted to consensual intercourse when a deoxyribonucleic acid pattern test using a semen sample from the victim's clothing determined the semen was defendant's. The pattern in defendant's blood and on the clothing sample were conservatively determined to appear in one out of 14,000 persons.
I.
Defendant contends the trial court erred in refusing his request that the trial court instruct the jury on the lesser-included offenses of assault with intent to commit sexual abuse[1] and simple assault.[2] The State concedes these offenses are lesser-included offenses of sexual abuse in the third degree[3] and recognizes that State v. McNitt, 451 N.W.2d 824, 825 (Iowa 1990), so holds. We agree. See also State v. Turecek, 456 N.W.2d 219, 222-23 (Iowa 1990).
The State contends, however, this case should be affirmed because defendant's admission he had intercourse was in fact a stipulation by defendant to the greater offense and served to establish the greater offense as a matter of law. The State argues in the alternative, even if there was error, it was harmless or not prejudicial. We reject the State's arguments.
In State v. Jeffries, 430 N.W.2d 728, 741 (Iowa 1988), the court suggested there may not be a need to instruct on a lesser offense when the defendant stipulates the dissimilar elements of the greater offense. See also State v. Greer, 439 N.W.2d 198, 200 (Iowa 1989). Any stipulation relied on must serve to establish the dissimilar element of the greater offense as a matter of law, Greer, 439 N.W.2d at 200, and requires more than merely lack of evidence to controvert the dissimilar element. Id. A defendant's unexplained and uncontradicted testimony may elevate a State's allegation to a verity and may establish a fact so no jury determination is necessary. See State v. Donelson, 302 N.W.2d 125, 134-35 (Iowa 1981); State v. Shepard, 247 Iowa 258, 266-67, 73 N.W.2d 69, 74 (1955), overruled on other grounds State v. Jensen, 189 N.W.2d 919, 923 (Iowa 1971).
The focal issue is whether defendant's admission that the parties had consensual intercourse is a stipulation to the greater element. In addressing the issue we recognize *720 the victim is an adult. We do not find an admission of consensual intercourse to be a stipulation or admission of the greater element of the crime. For in order for a sex act to meet the requirement of section 709.4, it must be done by force or against the will. We therefore reject the State's argument in this regard.
The State further contends any error was harmless or without prejudice because of defendant's admission and the absence of any evidence which would controvert the elevating element of sexual abuse. We reject the State's argument. First, the only admission defendant made was to consensual intercourse with an adult who was capable of consenting. Secondly, the State's argument was clearly rejected in State v. Turecek, 456 N.W.2d 219, 222 (Iowa 1990), which was filed after the State's brief was filed. We find the following language from Turecek instructive on this issue:
As the events of the crime were chronologically detailed in the testimony of the victim, J.B., there clearly was an assault committed prior to the alleged sexual abuse. If we continue to adhere to the rule that juries are free to accept part of a witness's testimony and reject other portions thereof, then there was an alternative scenario in the proof which would support a finding of guilt of the crime of assault. If, in addition, we continue to adhere to the principle that the law of lesser-included offense requires that the jury be given an alternative, we must reject the State's claim of harmless error.
Turecek, 456 N.W.2d at 222.
The jury in this case could have accepted the fact defendant hit the victim, yet accepted his testimony the intercourse was consensual. There was an alternate scenario in the proof which would support a finding of guilt of the crime of assault. The application of the direction of Turecek is not quite so clear with reference to the offense of assault with intent. However, defendant's request for the instruction on assault should compel him to accept the submission of the higher offenses. Turecek, 456 N.W.2d at 223. The trial court should have instructed on the lesser-included offenses. We reverse and remand for a new trial.
II.
Defendant also challenges the trial court's decision to overrule his challenge for cause to a juror who admitted to being sexually abused as a child. The juror said she could not guarantee her past experience would not affect her consideration. Defendant was forced to use a peremptory challenge to remove the juror. Defendant cites State v. Hatter, 381 N.W.2d 370 (Iowa App.1985), to support his position.
Because of our holding, we need not address the issue. The trial court has large but not unlimited discretion in ruling upon a challenge for cause. State v. Williams, 285 N.W.2d 248, 267 (Iowa 1979); State v. Winfrey, 221 N.W.2d 269, 273 (Iowa 1974); State v. Beckwith, 242 Iowa 228, 232, 46 N.W.2d 20, 23 (1951); State v. Hatter, 381 N.W.2d 370, 371 (Iowa App.1985). However, we remind the trial court that Iowa law dictates caution should be used in overruling challenges for cause in criminal cases when there appears to be a fair question as to their soundness. Beckwith, 242 Iowa at 238-39, 46 N.W.2d at 26; State v. Woodyard, 414 N.W.2d 654, 657 (Iowa App.1987).
It is better to give the accused the benefit of the doubt, so he or she is assured his or her rights are not invaded and there is confidence in the fairness and impartiality of each jury member. See Beckwith, 242 Iowa at 239, 46 N.W.2d at 26.
III.
Defendant's last contention is that he was impermissibly compelled to disclose communication contrary to the attorney-client privilege. We do not find error was preserved on this issue, the question was asked and answered before the objection was imposed. Additionally, defendant himself opened the door to the issue and consequently has no grounds to complain. See Wycoff v. State, 382 N.W.2d 462, 468 (Iowa 1986); State v. Hall, 235 N.W.2d 702, 728 *721 (Iowa 1975). We find no error on this issue.
AFFIRMED IN PART, REVERSED IN PART, AND REMANDED.
NOTES
[1]  Section 708.1 provides in applicable part:
Assault defined
A person commits an assault when, without justification, the person does any of the following:
1. Any act which is intended to cause pain or injury to, or which is intended to result in physical contact which will be insulting or offensive to another, coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act.
2. Any act which is intended to place another in fear of immediate physical contact which will be painful, injurious, insulting, or offensive, coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act.
* * * * * *
[2]  Section 709.11 provides in applicable part:
Assault with intent to commit sexual abuse
Any person who commits an assault, as defined in section 708.1, with the intent to commit sexual abuse is guilty of a class "C" felony if the person thereby causes serious injury to any person and guilty of a class "D" felony if the person thereby causes any person a bodily injury other than a serious injury. The person is guilty of an aggravated misdemeanor if no injury results.
[3]  Section 709.4 provides in applicable part:
Sexual abuse in the third degree
A person commits sexual abuse in the third degree when the person performs a sex act under any of the following circumstances:
1. The act is done by force or against the will, of the other participant, whether or not the other participant is the person's spouse or is cohabiting with the person.
* * * * * *
(emphasis added).

=== CASE 9737927 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:37:09.688827+00 ===

Levin, J.
(to affirm). The deposition testimony of *447plaintiff Ruby Falcon’s1 expert witness tended to show that had the defendant physician, S. N. Kelso, Jr., followed the procedures the expert witness claims should have been followed, the patient, Nena J. Falcon, would have had a 37.5 percent opportunity2 of surviving the medical accident that was a cause of her death.
The trial court dismissed the complaint3 because Falcon’s evidence did not show that Nena Falcon probably—defined as more than fifty percent— would have survived if the procedure had not been omitted. The Court of Appeals reversed, stating that Falcon need only "establish that the omitted treatment or procedure had the potential for improving the patient’s recovery or preventing the patient’s death.” Falcon v Memorial Hosp, 178 Mich App 17, 26-27; 443 NW2d 431 (1989). The Court added that "while a plaintiff must show *448some probability that the treatment would be successful, that probability need not be greater than fifty percent.”4 We affirm.
i
Plaintiffs claiming medical malpractice ordinarily contend that the act or omission said to have constituted medical malpractice caused physical harm to the patient. Falcon so contends in the instant case, claiming that although Nena Falcon would have had only a 37.5 percent opportunity of surviving the medical accident that was a cause of her death had the defendant physician followed the procedures the expert claims should have been followed, and hence less than a fifty-one percent *449opportunity of surviving, the defendants nevertheless caused Nena Falcon’s death.
The defendants contend that because the proofs at a trial of Falcon’s claim would not show that it was probable, measured as more than fifty percent, that Nena Falcon would have avoided physical harm had the procedure not been omitted, Falcon cannot show that the asserted negligence of defendants caused her physical harm. They also contend that Falcon cannot maintain an action for wrongful death because such an action can only be maintained where the plaintiff can establish that the act or omission caused death, and, again, Falcon’s proofs will fall short because they will show only that there would have been a 37.5 percent opportunity of avoiding death and not a more than fifty percent opportunity had the procedure not been omitted.
n
Some courts disallow recovery for lost opportunity unless the plaintiff can establish that the patient would not have suffered the physical harm but for the defendant’s negligence, or, at least, that it is more probable, measured as more than fifty percent,5 that, but for such negligence, the patient would not have suffered the physical harm.6_
*450Under the more probable, measured as more than fifty percent, approach to causation, a plaintiff who establishes that the patient would have had more than a fifty percent opportunity of not suffering physical harm had the defendant not acted negligently, recovers one hundred percent of the damages. The better than even opportunity is compensated as if it were a certainty, although the *451patient’s chances of a better result are significantly less than one hundred percent.7
To say that a patient would have had a ninety-nine percent opportunity of survival if given proper treatment, does not mean that the physician’s negligence was the cause in fact if the patient would have been among the unfortunate one percent who would have died. A physician’s carelessness may, similarly, be the actual cause of physical harm although the patient had only a one percent opportunity of surviving even with flawless medical attention.8
All this is simply to say that the more probable than not standard, as well as other standards of causation, are analytic devices—tools to be used in making causation judgments. They do not and cannot yield ultimate truth. Absolute certainty in matters of causation is a rarity.9
in
Other courts have permitted recovery for physi*452cal harm on a showing that the lost opportunity was a substantial, albeit fifty percent or less, factor in producing the harm:
An evolving trend has developed to relax the standard for sufficiency of proof of causation ordinarily required of a plaintiff to provide a basis upon which the jury may consider causation in the "lost chance of survival” cases. [McKellips v St Francis Hosp, Inc, 741 P2d 467, 471 (Okla, 1987).][10]
*453Some courts have held that the plaintiff need only show that the defendant’s conduct was a substantial factor in producing the physical harm.11 Other courts allow recovery for loss of a fifty percent or less opportunity of achieving a better result without clearly articulating a standard of causation.12 A number of courts have so held on the basis of language in the Restatement Torts, 2d.13
iv
Nena Falcon, a nineteen-year-old woman, gave birth to a healthy baby, Justice Eugene Falcon, in the early morning hours of March 21, 1973. Moments after delivery, Nena Falcon coughed, gagged, convulsed, became cyanotic, and suffered a complete respiratory and cardiac collapse. At*454tempts to revive her were unsuccessful.14 She was pronounced dead soon thereafter.
The autopsy report indicated that amniotic fluid embolism,15 an unpreventable complication that occurs in approximately one out of ten or twenty thousand births, was the cause of death. The survival rate of amniotic fluid embolism is, according to Falcon’s expert witness, 37.5 percent if an intravenous line is connected to the patient before the onset of the embolism. In this case, an intravenous line had not been established.16
Falcon’s theory is that had a physician or nurse anesthetist inserted an intravenous line before administering the spinal anesthetic to assist the physician in dealing with any of several complications, the intravenous line could have been used to *455infuse life-saving fluids into Nena Falcon’s circulatory system, providing her a 37.5 percent opportunity of surviving. By not inserting the intravenous line, the physician deprived her of a 37.5 percent opportunity of surviving the embolism.
v
The question whether a defendant caused an event is not readily answered,17 and is especially perplexing in circumstances such as those present in the instant case where the defendant’s failure to act is largely responsible for the uncertainty regarding causation.18
Had the defendants in the instant case inserted an intravenous line, one of two things would have happened, Nena Falcon would have lived, or she would have died.19 There would be no uncertainty *456whether the omissions of the defendants caused her death.20 Falcon’s destiny would have been de*457cided by fate and not possibly by her health care providers. The United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, observed:
When a defendant’s negligent action or inaction has effectively terminated a person’s chance of survival, it does not lie in the defendant’s mouth to raise conjectures as to the measure of the chances that he has put beyond the possibility of realization. If there was any substantial possibility of survival and the defendant has destroyed it, he is answerable. Rarely is it possible to demonstrate to an absolute certainty what would have happened in circumstances that the wrongdoer did not allow to come to pass. The law does not in the existing circumstances require the plaintiff to show to a certainty that the patient would have lived had she been hospitalized and operated on promptly. Harvey v Silber, 300 Mich 510; 2 NW2d 483 (1942).[21] [Hicks v United States, 368 F2d 626, 632 (CA 4, 1966).22 Emphasis in original.]_
*458VI
In an ordinary tort action seeking recovery for physical harm, the defendant is a stranger to the plaintiff and the duty imposed by operation of law is imposed independently of any undertaking by the defendant. In an action claiming medical malpractice, however, the patient generally is not a stranger to the defendant. Generally, the patient engaged the services of the defendant physician. The physician undertook to perform services for the patient, and the patient undertook to pay or provide payment for the services.
The scope of the undertakings by a physician or hospital to the patient and by the patient to the physician or hospital is not generally a matter of express agreement. There is, however, an understanding that the law enforces in the absence of express agreement. The patient expects a physician to do that which is expected of physicians of like training in the community, and the physician expects the patient to pay or provide payment for the services, whether the likelihood of there in fact being any benefit to the patient is only one through fifty percent or is greater than fifty percent.
The defendants assert, in effect, that the scope of their undertaking did not include acts or omissions likely to benefit the patient only to the extent of *459one through fifty percent—or at least they should not be subject to liability for acts or omissions likely to have caused harm to the extent only of one through fifty percent. They contend that they should be subject to liability only for acts or omissions likely, to the extent of more than fifty percent, to have caused physical harm to the patient:
The reasoning of the district court herein (which is similar to the extreme position taken in Cooper v Sisters),[23] in essence, declares open season on critically ill or injured persons as care providers would be free of liability for even the grossest malpractice if the patient had only a fifty-fifty chance of surviving the disease or injury even with proper treatment. [Roberson v Counselman, 235 Kan 1006, 1021; 686 P2d 149 (1984).]
Patients engage the services of doctors, not only to prevent disease or death, but also to delay death and to defer or ameliorate the suffering associated with disease or death. If the trier of fact were to decide, on the basis of expert testimony, that the undertaking of the defendant physician included the implementation of tasks and procedures that, in the case of Nena Falcon, would have enabled the physician and other medically trained persons, who were present at the time of delivery, to provide her, in the event of the medical accident that occurred, an opportunity to survive the accident, a failure to do so was a breach of the understanding or undertaking.24_
*460Nena Falcon, if the testimony of Falcon’s expert witness is credited, would have had a 37.5 percent opportunity of surviving had the defendants implemented the procedures Falcon’s expert asserts should have been implemented. In reducing Nena Falcon’s opportunity of living by failing to insert an intravenous line, her physician caused her harm, although it cannot be said, more probably than not, that he caused her death. A 37.5 percent opportunity of living is hardly the kind of opportunity that any of us would willingly allow our health care providers to ignore. If, as Falcon’s expert asserts, the implementation of such procedures was part of the understanding or undertaking, the failure to have implemented the procedures was a breach of the understanding or undertaking. The physician is, and should be, subject to liability for such breach, although Nena Falcon was likely, measured as more than fifty *461percent, to die as soon as the medical accident occurred and the negligence of the physician eliminated a less than fifty percent opportunity of surviving.
We thus see the injury resulting from medical malpractice as not only, or necessarily, physical harm, but also as including the loss of opportunity of avoiding physical harm. A patient goes to a physician precisely to improve his opportunities of avoiding, ameliorating, or reducing physical harm and pain and suffering.
Women gave birth to children long before there were physicians or hospitals or even midwives. A woman who engages the services of a physician and enters a hospital to have a child does so to reduce pain and suffering and to increase the likelihood of her surviving and the child surviving childbirth in a good state of health even though the likelihood of the woman and child not surviving in good health without such services is far less than fifty percent. That is why women go to physicians. That is what physicians undertake to do. That is what they are paid for. They are, and should be, subject to liability if they fail to measure up to the standard of care.
VII
A number of courts have recognized, as we would, loss of an opportunity for a more favorable result, as distinguished from the unfavorable result, as compensable in medical malpractice actions.25 Under this approach, damages are recoverable for the loss of opportunity although the opportunity lost was less than even, and thus it is *462not more probable than not that the unfavorable result would or could have been avoided.26
Under this approach, the plaintiff must establish more-probable-than-not causation.27 He must prove, more probably than not, that the defendant reduced the opportunity of avoiding harm.
In Aasheim v Humberger, 215 Mont 127, 133; 695 P2d 824 (1985), the plaintiff commenced an action against Dr. Humberger alleging that his failure to order diagnostic films of her knee area, resulted in her losing an opportunity for less radical surgery and of preserving her natural knee. The Supreme Court of Montana treated the reduction in the opportunity of avoiding physical harm as actionable in recognition that patients claiming medical malpractice are generally in*463jured or diseased at the time of the alleged malpractice:
We feel that including "loss of chance” within causality recognizes the realities inherent in medical negligence litigation. People who seek medical treatment are diseased or injured. Failure to diagnose or properly treat denies the opportunity to recover. Including this lost opportunity within the causality embrace gives recognition to a real loss consequence of medical failure.
The trier of fact should determine whether defendant’s negligence was a substantial factor in reducing plaintiff’s chances of obtaining a better result.
In DeBurkarte v Louvar, 393 NW2d 131, 135 (Iowa, 1986), the Supreme Court of Iowa explained the difference between viewing the injury as a loss of life and viewing it as a loss of opportunity to survive an illness:
We recognize that the plaintiff’s injury may be viewed as a shortening of her life, in which case we would agree with the defendant that the plaintiffs did not produce substantial evidence on causation: there was no evidence the plaintiff’s cancer probably spread after September, 1981, preventing her from being cured. [Citation omitted.] On the other hand, as the Restatement [§ 323(a)][28] indicates, her injury may also be viewed as a lost chance to survive the cancer. The jury could then find from the evidence that the defendant’s failure to diagnose and treat the cancer probably caused a substantial reduction in the plaintiff’s chance to survive it.[29]
The court concluded: "We believe the better approach[*46430] is to allow recovery, but only for the lost chance of survival.” Id., p 136. (Emphasis in original.)
The Supreme Court of Washington permitted the personal representative of the patient to maintain an action where there was expert testimony of a fourteen percentage point reduction—from thirty-nine percent to twenty-five percent—in the patient’s opportunity for survival, which was claimed to have resulted from a delay in diagnosis of lung cancer. Herskovits v Group Health Cooperative of Puget Sound, 99 Wash 2d 609; 664 P2d 474 (1983). The majority, in two separate opinions, agreed, that recovery for "[c]ausing reduction of the opportunity to recover (loss of chance) by one’s negligence, however, does not necessitate a total recovery against the negligent party for all damages caused by the victim’s death.”31
In a concurring opinion in Herskovits, in which four of six judges comprising the majority joined, the loss of opportunity case law was reviewed and the following conclusions were stated:_
*465First, the critical element in each of the cases is that the defendant’s negligence either deprived a decedent of a chance of surviving a potentially fatal condition or reduced that chance. To summarize, in Hicks v United States[32] the decedent was deprived of a probability of survival; in Jeanes v Milner [33] the decedent’s chance of survival was reduced from 35 percent to 24 percent; in O’Brien v Stover,[34] the decedent’s 30 percent chance of survival was reduced by an indeterminate amount; in McBride v United States[35] the decedent was deprived of the probability of survival; in Kallenberg v Beth Israel Hosp[36] the decedent was deprived of a 20 percent to 40 percent chance of survival; in Hamil v Bashline[37] the decedent was deprived of a 75 percent chance of survival; and in *466James v United States [483 F Supp 581 (ND Cal, 1980)][38] the decedent was deprived of an indeterminate chance of survival, no matter how small.
The three cases where the chance of survival was greater than 50 percent (Hicks, McBride, and Hamil) are unexceptional in that they focus on the death of the decedent as the injury, and they require proximate cause to be shown beyond the balance of probabilities. Such a result is consistent with existing principles in this state, and with cases from other jurisdictions cited by defendant.
The remaining four cases allowed recovery despite the plaintiffs’ failure to prove a probability of survival. Three of these cases (Jeanes, O’Brien, and James) differ signiñcantly from the Hicks, McBride, and Hamil group in that they view the reduction in or loss of the chance of survival, rather than the death itself, as the injury. Under these cases, the defendant is liable, not for all damages arising from the death, but only for damages to the extent of the diminished or lost chance of survival. The fourth of these cases, Kallenberg, differs from the other three in that it focuses on the death as the compensable injury. This is clearly a distortion of traditional principles of proximate causation. In effect, Kallenberg held *467that a 40 percent possibility of causation (rather than the 51 percent required by a probability standard) was sufficient to establish liability for the death. Under this loosened standard of proof of causation, the defendant would be liable for all damages resulting from the death for which he was at most 40 percent responsible.
My review of these cases persuades me that the preferable approach to the problem before us is that taken (at least implicitly) in Jeanes, O’Brien, and James. [Id., pp 631-632. Emphasis added.]
Finally, the opinion states "that the best resolution of the issue before us is to recognize the loss of a less than even chance as an actionable injury.” Id., p 634. (Emphasis added.)
In Ehlinger v Sipes, 155 Wis 2d 1, 13-14; 454 NW2d 754 (1990), parents were permitted to maintain an action alleging that the failure to diagnose a multiple pregnancy was a substantial factor in causing injuries to twins suffered when they were born prematurely. The court said:
We conclude that in a case of this nature, where the causal relationship between the defendant’s alleged negligence and the plaintiff’s harm can only be inferred by surmising as to what the plaintiff’s condition would have been had the defendant exercised ordinary care, to satisfy his or her burden of production on causation, the plaintiff need only show that the omitted treatment was intended to prevent the very type of harm which resulted, that the plaintiff would have submitted to the treatment, and that it is more probable than not the treatment could have lessened or avoided the plaintiff’s injury had it been rendered. It then is for the trier of fact to determine whether the defendant’s negligence was a substantial factor in causing the plaintiff’s harm. [Emphasis in original.]
In Waffen v United States Dep’t of Health & *468Human Services, 799 F2d 911 (CA 4, 1986), a lung cancer patient filed a medical malpractice claim, alleging failure to communicate, failure to supervise medical care, and abandonment.39 The United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, while retaining the requirement that a plaintiff must prove that the defendant’s conduct more likely than not caused the injury, recognized loss of opportunity as a distinct injury.40
VIII
The defendants contend, that the injury for which Falcon sought to maintain this wrongful death action, the failure to protect Nena Falcon’s *469opportunity of avoiding physical harm, cannot be maintained because the proofs at trial will not show that it is probable, measured as more than fifty percent, that, had they protected her opportunity of living, she would not have died. Recognizing loss of a substantial opportunity of avoiding physical harm as actionable makes it unnecessary to consider whether Falcon’s action for medical malpractice can be maintained as an action for wrongful death. Falcon may maintain a survival action against the defendants for their failure to protect Nena Falcon’s opportunity of living.
The harm resulting from defendants’ asserted malpractice occurred immediately before Nena Falcon’s death when the medical accident occurred and, by reason of the failure to have inserted an intravenous line, it became certain that she would die. At that moment, immediately before her death, Nena Falcon had a cause of action for the harm, the denial of any opportunity of living, that had been caused her.41 Her claim therefor survived her death because "[a]ll actions and claims survive death.” RJA § 2921.42_
*470We are persuaded that loss of a 37.5 percent opportunity of living constitutes a loss of a substantial opportunity of avoiding physical harm.43 We need not now decide what lesser percentage would constitute a substantial loss of opportunity.
*471IX
In the instant case, while Nena Falcon’s cause of action accrued before her death,44 she did not suffer conscious pain and suffering from the failure to implement the omitted procedures between the moment that the medical accident occurred and the time of her death a few minutes later—she was sedated throughout the entire time period. In this case, 37.5 percent times the damages recoverable for wrongful death would be an appropriate measure of damages.
The Supreme Court of Iowa differentiated loss of opportunity cases that allow a plaintiff to recover for the underlying injury from those45 that limit damages to the patient’s lost opportunity of survival. Criticizing the former group of cases, the court said:
Under this reasoning, a patient could recover all damages resulting from an injury for which a defendant may only be partly responsible. It effectively allows a jury to speculate on causation because expert testimony that a physician’s negligence probably caused the total damages is not required. This is an extreme position and clearly distorts the traditional principles of causation. [DeBurkarte v Louvar, supra, p 137. Emphasis in original.]
The court concluded that recovery should be allowed "only for the lost chance of survival.” Id. (Emphasis in original.)
In Mays v United States, 608 F Supp 1476, 1482 (D Colo, 1985), the court found that the malpractice reduced the patient’s opportunity of survival *472from forty to fifteen percent. In computing damages, the court multiplied the opportunity lost, twenty-five percent (forty percent less fifteen percent), by the net pecuniary loss to determine the damages caused by the defendant.46 The plaintiff thus was permitted to recover damages only for the reduction in the patient’s opportunity of survival.47
We would affirm the Court of Appeals reversal of the entry of summary judgment for the defendants, and remand the case for trial.
Archer, J., concurred with Levin, J.
The plaintiff is Ruby Falcon, administratrix of the estate of her granddaughter, Nena Falcon.
While "chance” and "opportunity” can be used interchangeably, "chance” includes "the absence of any cause of events that can be predicted, understood, or controlled,” Random House Dictionary of the English Language, 2d ed, unabridged, p 344, and "opportunity” includes "a situation or condition favorable for attainment of a goal.” Id., 1359.
At the trial in 1985, defendants moved for and were granted a directed verdict. The court ruled that Falcon’s experts were not familiar with the standard of care in Monroe, Michigan, the situs of the defendant hospital.
It was contended on Falcon’s appeal that without regard to whether the circuit court ruled correctly on the qualifications of Falcon’s medical experts, the court properly directed a verdict because Falcon had failed to present adequate evidence of causation.
The Court of Appeals reversed on the issue of the qualification of Falcon’s experts, declined to reach the causation issue, and remanded the case for trial. Falcon v Memorial Hosp, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals, decided August 12, 1986 (Docket No. 83193). Leave to appeal in this Court was denied. 428 Mich 884 (1987).
On remand, a motion for summary judgment was filed, in which it was again argued that Falcon would be unable to provide sufficient proof of causation to raise a question for the jury. The trial court granted defendants’ motion. The Court of Appeals reversed. Falcon v Memorial Hosp, 178 Mich App 17; 443 NW2d 431 (1989).
The Court of Appeals looked to this Court’s decisions in Rogers v Kee, 171 Mich 551, 561-562; 137 NW 260 (1912), and Harvey v Silber, 300 Mich 510, 520; 2 NW2d 483 (1942), and concluded that a plaintiff need only establish that there was some probability that the omitted treatment would have been successful.
In Rogers, this Court said that a patient "calling a physician, is entitled to approved methods of treatment from which experience of the profession indicates beneficial results are probable and to be anticipated; and, if not an entire recovery, a better ultimate condition than if left to chance. . . . We think such testimony presents an issue of fact for the jury—on probability, it is true. The issues of sickness and healing, life and death, are too uncertain to be otherwise forecast, but negligence which deprives a man of such probability is more than injuria sine damno.” Id., pp 561-562.
In Harvey, the administrator of the estate of Garfield Harvey, deceased, brought a malpractice action against the defendants for negligent diagnosis of the location of a bullet. Expert testimony was to the effect there was a fairly good probability that an operation would have saved the patient’s life. This Court said: "There is testimony in the record that there was a probability that an operation would have saved Harvey’s life. Therefore the negligent diagnosis could be said to have been the proximate cause of the death.” Id., p 520.
In this connection, it is noteworthy that the standard civil jury instructions do not define "probable”: "When I use the words 'proximate cause’ I mean first, that the negligent conduct must have been a cause of plaintiff’s injury, and second, that the plaintiff’s injury must have been a natural and probable result of the negligent conduct.” SJI2d 15.01.
It [the probable cause standard] puts a premium on each party’s search for the willing witness. Human nature being what it is, and the difference between scientific and legal tests for "probability” often creating confusion, for every expert witness who evaluates the lost chance at 49% there is another who estimates it at closer to 51%. [Thompson v Sun City Community Hosp, Inc, 141 Ariz 597, 607; 688 P2d 605 (1984).]
In Cooper v Sisters of Charity of Cincinnati, 27 Ohio St 2d 242, 253; 272 NE2d 97 (1971), the court concluded that testimony that survival was "[m]aybe . . . around fifty percent” does not provide a *450basis for finding probability. In a frequently quoted passage, the court explained:
Lesser standards of proof are understandably attractive in malpractice cases where physical well being, and life itself, are the subject of litigation. The strong intuitive sense of humanity tends to emotionally direct us toward a conclusion that in an action for wrongful death an injured person should be compensated for the loss of any chance for survival, regardless of its remoteness. However, we have trepidations that such a rule would be so loose that it would produce more injustice than justice. Even though there exists authority for a rule allowing recovery based upon proof of causation by evidence not meeting the standard of probability, we are not persuaded by their logic. [Id., pp 251-252.]
Similarly see Gooding v Univ Hosp Bldg, Inc, 445 So 2d 1015 (Fla, 1984) (a plaintiff must show that injury more likely than not resulted from the defendant’s conduct); Beisel v Lazenby, 444 So 2d 953 (Fla, 1984) (in medical malpractice actions it must be shown that the negligence more likely than not caused the damages); Hanselmann v McCardle, 275 SC 46; 267 SE2d 531 (1980) (a plaintiff must show that but for the defendant’s error, death would have been averted); Cornfeldt v Tongen, 295 NW2d 638 (Minn, 1980) (a plaintiff must show that it was more probable than not that death resulted from the doctor’s negligence); Rewis v United States, 503 F2d 1202 (CA 5, 1974) (a plaintiff must prove that if the doctor had done what proper medical practice required, it is more likely than not that the chüd would have been saved); Alfonso v Lund, 783 F2d 958 (CA 10, 1986) (the proof that the injury was caused by the negligence of the defendant must show probabilities); Morgenroth v Pacific Medical Center, Inc, 54 Cal App 3d 521; 126 Cal Rptr 681 (1976) (probability is the standard for proximate cause); Curry v Summer, 136 Ill App 3d 468; 483 NE2d 711 (1985) (a plaintiff must show that the decedent would have had a better than even chance of survival); Tappan v Florida Medical Center, Inc, 488 So 2d 630 (Fla App, 1986) (a plaintiff must prove that with proper diagnosis and treatment it was more likely than not that the decedent would have lived); Anthony v Hosp Service Dist No 1, 477 So 2d 1180 (La App, 1985) (expert testimony is required on whether the person more probably than not would have survived had proper diagnosis or treatment been given).
The more probable than not approach thus tends to over compensate particular plaintiffs. Professor McCormick stated:
Should the courts insist, in claims for loss of a single specific advantage, upon a showing that the chances were substantially better than even and upon giving all or nothing? To adopt this attitude seems to result in oscillation between overlavishness and niggardliness. [McCormick, Damages, § 31, p 119.]
Under the present [more likely than not] standard of probability applied in all negligence cases in Oklahoma, an expert must speak the "magic words,” i.e., that the defendant’s conduct more probably than not caused the injury, to ensure that a verdict will not be directed for the defendant. [McKellips v St Francis Hosp, Inc, 741 P2d 467, 474 (Okla, 1987).]
However, although we may often forget it, it is hard to quarrel with one of the basic teachings of decision theory: that absolute certainty about past events is no more realizable than absolute certainty about the future. [Kaplan, Decision theory and the factfínding process, 20 Stan L R 1065,1071 (1968).]
Courts have come to recognize that the difficulties of identifying, defining, and proving injury in certain types of medical malpractice cases justifies the application of a standard of causation that is more flexible than that used in conventional tort claims. [Evers v Dollinger, 95 NJ 399, 413; 471 A2d 405 (1984).]
In Bell v United States, 854 F2d 881, 890 (CA 6, 1988), the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit held that the district court erred in entering judgment for the defendant on the basis that the patient did not have a greater than fifty percent chance of surviving when the duty of care was breached. The court also concluded that the district court incorrectly found Bell’s chances of survival to be less than fifty percent.
The court said that this Court’s decisions "illustrate that the Michigan Supreme Court long ago rejected the notion that a plaintiff must prove with mathematical certainty that had a physician diagnosed and treated a medical condition within the time period that a doctor exercising a reasonable standard of care would have done so, the probability that the patient would have recovered was better than 50%.” Bell, supra, p 889. The court continued: "Rather, under Michigan law, a 'reasonable probability’ is proven if a finder of fact legally could conclude from the evidence presented that the patient had, in the words of the expert witness in Harvey, a 'fairly good’ chance of surviving the operation. Although we acknowledge the imprecision which nearly always is the necessary companion of any legal standard that rejects quantitative analysis, Michigan law leaves no doubt that it has rejected such analysis in favor of a qualitative one.” Id. The court concluded:
All Michigan requires is proof that the deceased had a "reasonable probability” of recovery if the medical condition had been discovered and treated within the appropriate time. [Id., p 883.]
The Court defined a "reasonable probability” as a "fairly good” chance.
Hamil v Bashline, 481 Pa 256; 392 A2d 1280 (1978); Scafidi v Seiler, 25 NJ Super 576; 543 A2d 95 (1988); Chester v United States, 403 F Supp 458 (WD Pa, 1975); Snead v United States, 595 F Supp 658 (D DC, 1984); Hastings v Baton Rouge General Hosp, 498 So 2d 713 (La, 1986); Thornton v CAMC, 305 SE2d 316 (W Va, 1983); Jones v Montefiore Hosp, 494 Pa 410; 431 A2d 920 (1981); Roberson v Counselman, 235 Kan 1006; 686 P2d 149 (1984); Northern Trust Co v Louis A Weiss Memorial Hosp, 143 Ill App 3d 479; 493 NE2d 6 (1986).
Kallenberg v Beth Israel Hosp, 45 AD2d 177; 357 NYS2d 508 (1974), aff’d 37 NY2d 719; 374 NYS2d 615; 337 NE2d 128 (1975) (the patient had a twenty to forty percent opportunity of survival with proper treatment); Richmond Co Hosp Authority v Dickerson, 182 Ga App 601; 356 SE2d 548 (1987) (the patient had a less than fifty percent opportunity of survival); Morales v United States, 642 F Supp 269 (D PR, 1986) (survival was a possibility). In Cloys v Turbin, 608 SW2d 697, 700 (Tex Civ App, 1980), the court said that a plaintiff must establish a "reasonably close causal connection between the defending party’s conduct and the resulting injury to the complaining party.”
One who undertakes, gratuitously or for consideration, to render services to another which he should recognize as necessary for the protection of the other’s person or things, is subject to liability to the other for physical harm resulting from his failure to exercise reasonable care to perform his undertaking, if (a) his failure to exercise such care increases the risk of such harm .... [2 Restatement Torts, 2d, § 323, p 135.]
Dr. Kelso, the physician in attendance at the birth, testified that he attempted cardiopulmonary resuscitation. He also testified that a nurse attempted to insert an intravenous line into Falcon after she began to convulse, but could not do so because Falcon’s veins had collapsed and were apparently blocked. He added that another physician, Dr. Burroughs, attempted a "cut down,” that is, he tried to cut directly into Falcon’s vein in order to administer sodium bicarbonate. The "cut down” was unsuccessful. Dr. Burroughs could not inject any medication into Falcon’s circulatory system because at that point her circulation had ceased.
An amniotic fluid embolism occurs when the amniotic fluid infuses into the mother’s circulatory system, most often through a rent in the uterus or through the mother’s pelvic veins. The amniotic fluid is not clear. It may contain undissolved matter such as fetal skin cells, lanugo, mucus, or meconium (excrement from the fetus’ intestinal tract). The debris-filled fluid is taken up into the mother’s circulatory system, pumped through her heart and into her lungs where the embolus lodges, causing injury, and often, death. Amniotic fluid embolism may be diagnosed in an autopsy by the presence of amniotic debris in the body’s lungs.
The plaintiff’s expert testified that the 37.5 percent survival rate is computed as follows: fifty percent of the women who suffer an amniotic fluid embolism will die within an hour. Of the remaining fifty percent, approximately half of those will develop a bleeding or coagulation problem called "dic.” Of the twenty-five percent who develop Die, half will survive. Therefore, the survival rate of women who suffer amniotic fluid embolism is 37.5 percent.
Dr. Kelso testified that the survival rate of amniotic fluid embolism is zero percent. He raised the survival figure to five percent to account for cases where an exact diagnosis cannot be found.
There is perhaps nothing in the entire field of law which has called forth more disagreement, or upon which the opinions are in such a welter of confusion. [Prosser & Keeton, Torts (5th ed), § 41, p 263.]
In Evers v Dollinger, n 10 supra, p 415, a physician was charged with medical malpractice for failing to diagnose breast cancer. The Supreme Court of New Jersey observed:
A conspicuous feature of Hamil [n 11 supra], and of the case before us, is that defendant was charged with having failed in a duty to protect against harm from another source; hence the fact-finder must consider not only what did occur but also what might have occurred .... [Emphasis in original.]
See also Malone, Ruminations on cause-in-fact, 9 Stan LR 60, 61 (1956); Hake v Manchester Twp, 98 NJ 302, 312-313; 486 A2d 836 (1985).
In this case the alternative forces of causation at play were unusually few. If Nena Falcon’s physician had connected the intravenous line it would have become clear within a short period of time whether she would have lived or died. The physician’s failure to act is the primary source of the uncertainty regarding causation.
In loss of opportunity cases where the negligence charged is a physician’s failure to diagnose malignancy, there are generally more variables in the causation calculus. Where a health care provider *456fatted to diagnose cancer, the delay allows a tumor to grow or the cancer to metastasize. Treatment programs and operations may ensue. In the end, the causal relation between the delay in diagnosis and the patient’s death may be clouded by intervening causal factors. See Jeanes v Milner, 428 F2d 598 (CA 8, 1970); O’Brien v Stover, 443 F2d 1013 (CA 8, 1971); Mays v United States, 608 F Supp 1476 (D Colo, 1985); Snead, n 11 supra; James v United States, 483 F Supp 581 (ND Cal, 1980); DeBurkarte v Louvar, 393 NW2d 131 (Iowa, 1986); Truan v Smith, 578 SW2d 73 (Tenn, 1979); Herskovits v Group Health Cooperative of Puget Sound, 99 Wash 2d 609; 664 P2d 474 (1983); Evers, n 10 supra; Jones v Montefiore Hosp, n 11 supra; Morrison v Stallworth, 73 NC App 196; 326 SE2d 387 (1985).
Courts have seen the need for flexibility in addressing causation where a defendant fails to rescue a seaman or to provide safety devices. See 4 Harper, James & Gray, Torts (2d ed), § 20.2, pp 89-113; Wolfstone & Wolfstone, Recovery of damages for the loss of a chance, 1982 Medical Trial Technique Q 121, 130-132; Malone, n 18 supra, pp 75-79.
The California Supreme Court observed:
[T]he evidentiary void in the instant action results primarily from defendants’ failure to provide a lifeguard to observe occurrences within the pool area. . . . The absence of such a lifeguard in the instant case thus not only stripped decedents of a significant degree of protection to which they were entitled, but also deprived the present plaintiffs of a means of definitively establishing the facts leading to the drownings. [Haft v Lone Palm Hotel, 3 Cal 3d 756, 771; 91 Cal Rptr 745; 478 P2d 465 (1970).]
In Gardner v Nat’l Bulk Carriers, Inc, 310 F2d 284, 287 (CA 4, 1962), a seaman was not reported missing until more than five hours after he was last seen. The defendant urged that causation had not been established because there was no evidence that the man was alive and could have been saved. The court said that the consequence of the master’s default "obliterated all possibility of evidence to prove whether a search, if undertaken, would have succeeded or failed.”
"What, then, the culpable actor has done by his initial negligent act is, first, to have set in motion a dangerous force which embraces the injured person within the scope of its probable mischief; and next, in conjunction with circumstances which he must be held to contemplate, to have made more difficult if not impossible the means of proving the possible damaging results of his own act or the similar results of the act of another. He has violated not only the victim’s substantive right to security, but he has also culpably impaired the latter’s remedial right of establishing liability. By confusing his act *457with environmental conditions, he has, in effect, destroyed the victim’s power of proof.
"The legal consequence of that is, I should say, that the onus is then shifted to the wrongdoer to exculpate himself . . . .” Cook v Lewis, [1951] Can Sup Ct 830, 832-33 [1952]; 1 Dom L Rep 1, 3-4 (1951). [Gardner, supra, p 287, n 4.]
Professor King similarly explained:
Destruction of a chance should also be compensated for reasons of fairness. But for the defendant’s tortious conduct, it would not have been necessary to grapple with the imponderables of chance. Fate would have run its course. A defendant’s tort not only destroys a "raffle ticket,” in so doing it destroys any chance of ever knowing how that ticket would have fared in the drawing. [King, Causation, valuation, and chance in personal injury torts involving preexisting conditions and future consequences, 90 Yale LJ 1353, 1378 (1981). See also Whitfield v Whittaker Memorial Hosp, 210 Va 176; 169 SE2d 563 (1969), Hake v Manchester, n 18 supra, pp 310-311, and Wolfstone & Wolfstone, supra, p 133.]
See n 4.
In Stewart v Rudner, 349 Mich 459, 473-474; 84 NW2d 816 (1957), *458this Court, addressing the question whether a doctor’s failure to perform a cesarean section on the plaintiff in any way caused the plaintiff to lose her baby, said:
They [the jury] would be justified in finding, on these facts, that if plaintiff had been sent to surgery, instead of back home, on the morning of September 4th (at the latest) that her baby would have been delivered alive. There is, of course, no absolute certainty thereof. The knife might have slipped, or the child might have died at any instant because of forces beyond our control, beyond, possibly, even our comprehension.
See n 6.
A parent was permitted to maintain an action against a hospital and physicians for alleged enhancement of injury to her son resulting from the transfer of her son to a county hospital for surgery in Thompson v Sun City Community Hosp, n 5 supra, p 608. The court held:
*460that because the protection of the chance interest was within the range of the duty breached by defendant and the harm which followed was the type from which the defendant was to have protected the plaintiff, the jury may be allowed to consider the increase in the chance of harm on the issue of causation. If the jury finds that defendant’s failure to exercise reasonable care increased the risk of the harm he undertook to prevent, it may from this fact find a "probability” that defendant’s negligence was the cause of the damage. [Emphasis added.]
In so holding, the court observed:
We must remember further, that we are dealing with the limited class of cases in which defendant undertook to protect plaintiff from a particular harm and negligently interrupted the chain of events, thus increasing the risk of that harm. Defendant’s negligent act or omission made it impossible to find with certainty what would have happened and thus forced the court to look at the proverbial crystal ball in order to decide what might have been. Such determinations, of course, have traditionally been the province of the jury rather than the judge. [Id. Emphasis added.]
See Prosser & Keeton, n 17 supra, §41, p 272; Wolfstone & Wolfstone, n 20 supra, pp 129-130.
Professor King explains:
[Cjonsider the case in which a doctor negligently fails to diagnose a patient’s cancerous condition until it has become inoperable. Assume further that even with a timely diagnosis the patient would have had only a 30% chance of recovering from the disease and surviving over the long term. There are two ways of handling such a case. Under the traditional approach, this loss of a not-better-than-even chance of recovering from the cancer would not be compensable because it did not appear more likely [than] not that the patient would have survived with proper care. Recoverable damages, if any, would depend on the extent to which it appeared that cancer killed the patient sooner than it would have with timely diagnosis and treatment, and on the extent to which the delay in diagnosis aggravated the patient’s condition, such as by causing additional pain. A more rational approach, however, would allow recovery for the loss of the chance of cure even though the chance was not better than even. The probability of long-term survival would be reflected in the amount of damages awarded for the loss of the chance. While the plaintiff here could not prove by a preponderance of the evidence that he was denied a cure by the defendant’s negligence, he could show by a preponderance that he was deprived of a 30% chance of a cure. [King, n 20 supra, pp 1363-1364.]
See by analogy, King, n 20 supra, pp 1378-1380, discussing cases recognizing loss of chance to win contests as a distinct injury.
See n 13.
Plaintiff’s expert witnesses "opined that within a reasonable degree of medical certainty the plaintiff’s chances of surviving ten years would have been at least fifty and as high as eighty percent if the lump had been removed in September, 1981.” Id.
The court said that "most courts recognize the action for lost chance of survival and medical malpractice.” DeBurkarte, n 19 supra, p 136. The court added:
In nine of the cases allowing recovery there was a not-better-than-even chance of survival and a lack of expert testimony the defendant’s negligence probably prevented recovery. [Id., pp 136-137. Emphasis in original.]
The court noted that in three of the cases (O’Brien, n 19 supra, James, n 19 supra, and Mays, text accompanying n 46 supra), the courts limited damages "to the patient’s lost chance of survival,” DeBurkarte, supra, p 137, and that in two cases, the court viewed “the underlying injury, and not the lost chance of survived, as compensable.” Id. The court was critical of the approach of those two courts because in permitting recovery for the underlying injury without requiring expert testimony that a physician’s negligence probably caused the underlying injury, the court had departed from traditional principles of causation.
Id. (lead opinion, p 619, concurring opinion, pp 634-635).
Hicks v United States, supra, p 632. See text accompanying n 22.
In Jeanes v Milner, n 19 supra, p 604, the plaintiff alleged that the defendants failed to promptly send slides containing tissue taken from her son’s throat to Barnes Hospital and to the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology for diagnosis. The plaintiff’s expert testified that early diagnosis and treatment of lymphosarcoma, the disease that ultimately took the decedent’s life, is essential. He also testified that during the delay in transmission of the slides, the decedent’s cancer progressed from stage one (when there is a thirty-five percent chance of survival) to stage two (when survival decreases to twenty-four percent). The court concluded that this was sufficient evidence from which to infer that the decedent’s "life would have been saved or at least prolonged and his pain lessened had he received earlier treatment.” (Emphasis added.)
In O’Brien, n 19 supra, p 1019, the plaintiff alleged that the decedent’s dentist had failed to diagnose cancer. The plaintiff’s expert testified that the patient’s cancer was probably present when the dentist first began to suspect that the patient had some systemic ailment, that a tissue biopsy would have revealed it, that the patient could have been treated, and that she probably would have lived longer and more comfortably. The expert also testified that the overall survival rate from the type cancer that had infected the patient was thirty percent and that the opportunity of survival is considerably improved with early diagnosis. The court said that the expert testimony of causation was sufficient to present a jury question under Iowa law. The court cited Jeanes and Hicks and approved as an element of damages the reduction of the patient’s "chances for survival, or at least living longer and more comfortably . . . .”
McBride v United States, 462 F2d 72 (CA 9, 1972).
Kallenberg v Beth Israel Hosp, n 12 supra.
Hamil v Bashline, n 11 supra.
In James v United States, n 19 supra, p 587, the plaintiff contended that the defendant’s failure to notify him of a tissue mass revealed in an x-ray deprived him of the opportunity of earlier radiation treatment that would have reduced the tumor’s size and lowered the risk of metastasis. The court said:
The Court therefore finds and concludes that plaintiffs have sustained their burden of proving that James would have benefited from early treatment, i.e., that discovery and disclosure in 1976 would have offered at least a chance that the tumor could be successfully treated and, even if not cured, its growth arrested or slowed. As a proximate result of defendant’s negligence, James was deprived of the opportunity to receive early treatment and the chance of realizing any resulting gain in his life expectancy and physical and mental comfort. No matter how small that chance may have been—and its magnitude cannot be ascertained—no one can say that the chance of prolonging one’s life or decreasing suffering is valueless. [Emphasis added.]
In March, 1981, Virginia Waffen was admitted to the Clinical Center at the National Institutes of Health and a chest x-ray was taken. The radiologist’s report concluded that there was a three by five centimeter area of soft tissue density in the patient’s lung and recommended a follow-up examination. The radiologist’s report was "misplaced” and never placed in Waffen’s medical file. The doctors who prepared and signed Waffen’s discharge summary stated that Waffen’s chest x-ray was "within normal limits” even though they had not seen the x-ray report.
A second chest x-ray was performed on October 28, 1981. This x-ray revealed a malignant "infiltrating carcinoma.” The lesion measured approximately five by five centimeters. At this time it was discovered that an "error” had been committed.
The court said that by the time the opinion was written, it was clear that Waffen’s cancer was terminal and that she had no hope of long-term survival. Waffen v United States Dep’t of Health & Human Services, supra, pp 913-914.
The court said:
What was significant about Hicks [supra], [Thomas v] Corso [265 Md 84; 288 A2d 379 (1972)], and Hetrick [v Weimer, 67 Md App 522; 508 A2d 522 (1986)] was their affirmation that a certain kind of harm (the loss of a "substantial possibility of survival”) could be actionable. . . . [T]he plaintiff may now recover damages for showing such causation of a new kind of harm: loss of a substantial possibility of survival. [Waffen, p 918. Emphasis in original.]
The court in Waffen went on to hold that the plaintiff in that case had failed to establish that she had a "substantial possibility” of survival.
Patients have maintained actions for loss of opportunity during their lifetimes. See Aasheim, supra, text preceding n 31 on pp 462-463; DeBurkarte, supra, text accompanying n 30 supra; Ehlinger, supra, text preceding n 39 on p 467; Waffen, n 39 supra.
Section 2921 goes on to provide that "[a]ctions on claims for injuries which result in death shall not be prosecuted after the death of the injured person except pursuant to” § 2922, which provides for the wrongful death action:
Whenever the death of a person or injuries resulting in death shall be caused by wrongful act, neglect, or fault of another, and the act, neglect, or fault is such as would, if death had not ensued, have entitled the party injured to maintain an action and recover damages, the person who or the corporation which would have been liable, if death had not ensued, shall be liable to an action for damages, notwithstanding the death of the person injured, and although the death was caused under circumstances that constitute a felony. [MCL 600.2922; MSA 27A.2922.]
*470See Hawkins v Regional Medical Laboratories, PC, 415 Mich 420, 436; 329 NW2d 729 (1982). See also Herskovits v Group Health Cooperative of Puget Sound, supra, p 634, where, in a concurring opinion signed by four of the six judges who comprised the majority, it was said that "[t]he decedent’s personal action for loss of this chance [a fourteen percent reduction in his chances of survival] will survive to his personal representatives as provided by [Wash Rev Code Ann] 4.20.046.” The cited statute provides that "[a]U causes of action by a person or persons . . . shall survive to the personal representatives of [those persons], whether such actions arise on contract or otherwise, and whether or not such actions would have survived at the common law or prior to the date of enactment of this section . . . .”
While in Nena Falcon’s case the time interval between the loss of an opportunity for a better result and the resulting physical harm, her death, was relatively short, in other cases the time interval between the loss or reduction of the opportunity for a better result and the occurrence of physical harm will be considerably longer, as where there is a failure to diagnose or a misdiagnosis. The resulting physical harm, pain resulting from the spread of a disease that might have been avoided, pain resulting from medical treatment that might have been avoided, pain and suffering resulting from anxiety that might have been avoided, may extend over a prolonged period of time until death, remission, or a cure. A patient who suffers such harm as a result of a failure to diagnose or a misdiagnosis has an actionable claim for damages without regard to whether death ensues. See n 41.
The accrual of a cause of action for loss of an opportunity of achieving a better result does not, thus, depend on whether death ensues as a result. The cause of action accrues when harm and damages result from the loss of a substantial opportunity for a better result. The plaintiff has the burden of establishing through expert testimony the difference between the course of the disease and treatment had there been a correct diagnosis, and the course of the disease and treatment as a result of failure to diagnose or misdiagnosis.
The patient, or, if death ensues, his personal representative, need not show that it was probable, measured as more than fifty percent, that the course of the disease and treatment would have been different. It is sufficient to show, more probably than not, that had there been a correct diagnosis, the patient would have had a substantial opportunity of avoiding the course of the disease and treatment that occurred.
When, by reason of the failure to implement the procedures, it became certain she would die.
The court cited O’Brien, n 19 supra, James, n 19 supra, and Mays, n 19 supra.
The court explained:
The per cent of chance lost was 25. Therefore, the damage related to net pecuniary loss caused by defendant is .25 X 173,200 or $43,300. [Mays v United States, supra, p 1483.]
Wolfstone & Wolfstone, n 20 supra, p 144, explain the computation as follows:
[TJestimony as to what the probabilities were of the decedent surviving had she received proper treatment has particular probative value, and is essential in order for the jury to evaluate the value of the chance of which the decedent was deprived, since the jury would then have to be in a position of saying that the decedent was deprived of an x percent chance of surviving, that her life was worth y dollars, and that as a result the value of the chance was x times y dollars.
The proper computation of damages would limit the damages recoverable to only that amount of reduced chance of recovery actually caused by the physician’s negligent conduct. The theory, where adopted, should not result in an "all or nothing” approach to causation. [19 Wagner & Hart, Making a long shot longer, The Brief 12, 37 (Spring, 1990).]

=== CASE 9737929 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:37:09.70272+00 ===

Riley, C.J.
(dissenting). I would hold that a wrongful death action1 may not survive a motion for summary disposition where it is uncontested that the plaintiff cannot show that defendant’s negligence caused the decedent’s death, and will produce evidence only that the decedent would have had an increased chance of survival if the defendant, as in this case, had not negligently failed to insert an intravenous line before or immediately after administering saddle block anaesthesia.2 Where plaintiff cannot show that defendants’ omission was probably a cause of the death of Nena Falcon, the degree of certitude which would justify the imposition of liability on defendants is lacking. The recognition of mere chance as a recoverable item of loss fundamentally contradicts the essential notion of causation. By definition, the lost chance theory would compensate *474plaintiff for a mere possibility that defendants’ omission caused the death of Nena Falcon.
i
This is a wrongful death action grounded in allegations of medical malpractice. The action arises from the death of Nena J. Falcon on March 22, 1973. Ms. Falcon, then nineteen years old, was delivered of a healthy child at defendant Memorial Hospital, under the care of defendant Dr. S. N. Kelso, Jr. At the request of the decedent, Dr. Kelso administered a saddle block anaesthetic prior to delivery. No intravenous line was inserted before or after the administration of the spinal anaesthetic. Immediately after the delivery of the child at 6:39 a.m., and before the placenta was delivered, Nena Falcon coughed and went into a convulsive state. Nurse Norma Denny attempted to obtain a blood pressure reading but there was none, indicating cardiac arrest. At this time the decedent had no respirations. According to Dr. Kelso, the patient died within a few minutes. Efforts to resuscitate her were unsuccessful. Attempts to start an intravenous line were unsuccessful. A "cut down” into a central vein was also attempted, but fluids could not be run into the decedent’s circulatory system because there was no circulation at this time. The autopsy revealed that the decedent had suffered an amniotic fluid embolism, an unpredictable and life threatening complication of pregnancy. There is no known way to prevent amniotic fluid embolism. While there are certain predisposing factors, it can occur in a person who is apparently healthy and normal.3 *475The primary cause is a rent in the amnion4 or chorion,5 together with pressure sufficient to force the amniotic fluid into the circulatory system.
Plaintiff does not allege that defendant’s negligence caused the embolism. Rather, plaintiff claims that the survival rate for women suffering this complication is 37.5 percent, but that due to defendant’s negligence, Nena Falcon was deprived of that chance.
Plaintiff’s claim is based primarily on the testimony of Dr. Ezzat Abouleish. Dr. Abouleish testified at the deposition that spinal anaesthesia should not be given without an intravenous line because spinal anaesthesia can lead to a decrease in blood pressure or respiratory depression. According to Dr. Abouleish, an intravenous line, had it been in place, would have provided Ms. Falcon’s only chance of survival. Dr. Abouleish could not say that the failure to use an intravenous line was the cause of Ms. Falcon’s death. He testified, however, that her chances of surviving the embolism would have been better if she had an intravenous line in place and fluids going into her bloodstream. If an intravenous line had been in place, Ms. Falcon could have been given drugs to stimulate her heart or dilate her bronchi.
Dr. Abouleish testified that the overall survival rate for women suffering amniotic fluid embolism is 37.5 percent. This number was calculated in the following manner: Of one hundred patients experiencing this complication, fifty will die within one hour and fifty will survive. Of the fifty survivors, twenty-five will develop a blood coagulation prob*476lem which will be fatal to half of those developing the problem. Thus, the statistical survival rate for amniotic fluid embolism is 37.5 percent. Dr. Abouleish testified that for a patient to have even that chance of survival, an intravenous line is essential.
Plaintiff also relies on the deposition testimony of Dr. Thomas DeKornfeld. Dr. DeKornfeld generally agreed with Dr. Abouleish’s accounting of the survival statistics for women suffering amniotic fluid embolism, although he would not place the survival rate precisely at 37.5 percent. Dr. De-Kornfeld testified that an intravenous line should be started immediately after the administration of a spinal anaesthetic, so that any complication arising from the spinal anaesthetic could be managed by injecting medication intravenously. While Dr. DeKornfeld opined that it was clearly inappropriate not. to insert an intravenous line in the decedent, he was "not certain” that the presence of an intravenous line would have made any difference. When questioned further, DeKornfeld stated that intravenous infusion very likely would have made little if any difference in this case, but he conceded that "[t]here may have been a chance . . . .” DeKornfeld reiterated that opinion in cross-examination: He did not believe the presence of intravenous infusion would have materially affected the outcome, but he could not say it was inconceivable that an intravenous line might have changed the ultimate outcome.
A trial was held on January 7, 8 and 9, 1985. The trial ended with a directed verdict in favor of defendants after the trial court ruled that plaintiff had failed to present any expert testimony regarding the applicable standard of care for the doctor or nurse-anesthesiologist. That ruling was based on the trial court’s determination that Drs. *477Abouleish and DeKornfeld were not qualified to testify to the relevant standards of care. The Court of Appeals reversed the order granting the directed verdict, holding that both Drs. Abouleish and DeKornfeld were qualified to testify regarding the standard of care in Monroe, Michigan, or in similar communities.
On remand, defendants moved for summary disposition pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(10).6 Defendants argued that, since plaintiff conceded that the decedent’s chance of survival was only 37.5 percent, under the best possible circumstances and in the absence of any negligence, plaintiff could not establish that any negligence by the defendants was the proximate cause of Nena Falcon’s death. The trial court granted summary disposition in favor of defendants, stating that plaintiff could only prove "that the wrongful acts or omissions of the defendants caused her to lose a chance at life (37.5 percent), but could not prove that the defendants’ acts or omissions caused her death.”
The Court of Appeals reversed. Falcon v Memorial Hosp, 178 Mich App 17; 443 NW2d 431 (1989).
ii
The decision of the Court of Appeals would require a plaintiff alleging medical malpractice to show only that a negligently omitted treatment or *478procedure "had the potential for improving the patient’s recovery or preventing the patient’s death.” 178 Mich App 26. The Court of Appeals held that "while a plaintiff must show some probability that the treatment would be successful, that probability need not be greater than fifty percent.” Id., pp 26-27. The analysis of the Court of Appeals turned on the meaning of the word "probability” in two cases decided by this Court.
In Rogers v Kee, 171 Mich 551; 137 NW 260 (1912), the plaintiff’s proofs showed that the defendant physician failed to diagnose a fractured neck and femur. The Court in Rogers noted that the defendant not only had failed to diagnose the plaintiff’s fractures, but had issued three successive diagnoses of conditions that the plaintiff did not have, and treated him for these conditions. Id., p 558. The Court stated that pain and suffering from a wrong treatment are elements of damage, and further noted that some of the advice given could actually have been injurious to the plaintiff’s condition. Id. On the basis of its conclusion that a jury could have found a better result probable but for defendant’s negligence, the Court held that the case was properly submitted to a jury:
[A] patient suffering from such an injury, on calling a physician, is entitled to approved methods of treatment from which experience of the profession indicates beneficial results are probable and to be anticipated; and, if not an entire recovery, a better ultimate condition than if left to chance. If so, can it not be legitimately inferred by a jury that plaintiff, a strong man, who, untreated and with his recovery left to chance, "shows as good results as would ordinarily obtain in a patient of his age under skillful treatment,” if properly and skillfully treated would, in all probability, *479have a better recovery and be in yet better condition? We think such testimony presents an issue of fact for the jury—on probability, it is true. The issues of sickness and healing, life and death, are too uncertain to be otherwise forecast, but negligence which deprives a man of such probability is more than injuria sine damno. [Id., pp 561-562.]
Although the Rogers Court cited a definition of injury to the plaintiff as "[a]ny want of the proper degree of skill or care which diminishes the chances of the patient’s recovery, prolongs his illness, increases his suffering, or, in short, makes his condition worse than it would have been if due skill and care had been used,” it based its conclusion on an assessment of testimony tending to show that with proper treatment, "a bony union was possible and a better fibrous union probable . . . .” Id., p 562 (emphasis added).
This Court again considered the problem of causation in a medical malpractice case in Harvey v Süber, 300 Mich 510; 2 NW2d 483 (1942). In Harvey, the negligence of the defendant doctors resulted in an inaccurate diagnosis of the course of the bullet that struck the decedent. Id., p 520. The Court inferred from the record that the doctor who initially treated the decedent thought he felt the bullet under the skin on the right side of the decedent’s abdomen. The x-rays revealed a bullet on the left side, but the chief of the x-ray department reversed the markings of left and right upon discovering that the treating doctor disagreed with his diagnosis finding a bullet on the left side. Id., p 513. The decedent died after eighteen hours. The autopsy revealed blood in the abdomen sufficient to cause death. It also revealed that the bullet which had entered at the right back had traveled forward from right to left, lodging in the upper left side of the abdominal cavity. Id., p 515. The *480bullet had traveled through the intestines causing numerous perforations. Id. There was testimony that only by surgery could the hemorrhaging have been stopped. The Court in Harvey found sufficient evidence to support a finding of proximate cause, finding proof of "probability” sufficient:
There is testimony in the record that there was a probability that an operation would have saved Harvey’s life. Therefore the negligent diagnosis could be said to have been the proximate cause of the death. [Id., p 520.]
The Court of Appeals carefully considered both Rogers and Harvey, and concluded that the test of "probability” employed in those cases was not an inquiry whether an event was more likely than not to happen. Id. The Court of Appeals noted that "the word 'probability’ . . . also refers to the relative chances of an event happening, whether that 'probability’ be low or high.” 178 Mich App 26. Thus, the Court concluded, "while a plaintiff must show some probability that the treatment would be successful, that probability need not be greater than fifty percent.” Id., pp 26-27.
That the Court of Appeals misconstrued the rule of Harvey and Rogers is made perfectly clear by the Harvey Court’s approval of an instruction which required the jury to find by a preponderance of the evidence that surgery would "with reasonable probability” have saved the decedent’s life:
"[Y]ou may not return a verdict for the plaintiff if he has shown only that surgical intervention might possibly have saved the life of Garfield Harvey, but, on the other hand, it is not incumbent on the plaintiff to show that to a certainty surgical intervention would have saved his life. It is sufficient if the plaintiff by a preponderance of *481the evidence has satisfied you that surgical intervention would with reasonable probability have saved his life . . . [300 Mich 521. Emphasis added.]
"Probability” thus means neither certainty nor mere possibility. The Court of Appeals conclusion that an omitted procedure need only have the potential for preventing the death necessarily reduces the degree of certitude which is inherent in the notion of causation from "probability” to mere possibility.7 The "lost chance of survival” theory urged by plaintiff thus represents not only a redefinition of the threshold of proof for causation, but a fundamental redefinition of the meaning of causation in tort law. To determine the wisdom of that course, we look to the law of other jurisdictions.
hi
The seminal case in the development of the lost chance of survival theory is Hicks v United States, 368 F2d 626 (CA 4, 1966). Hicks itself is not a lost chance of survival case, as there was testimony that if the defendant had not negligently failed to diagnose the decedent’s intestinal obstruction, she would have survived. In dicta, the court wrote:
When a defendant’s negligent action or inaction has effectively terminated a person’s chance of survival, it does not lie in the defendant’s mouth to raise conjectures as to the measure of the chances that he has put beyond the possibility of *482realization. If there was any substantial possibility of survival and the defendant has destroyed it, he is answerable. Rarely is it possible to demonstrate to an absolute certainty what would have happened in circumstances that the wrongdoer did not allow to come to pass. The law does not in the existing circumstances require the plaintiff to show to a certainty that the patient would have lived had she been hospitalized and operated on promptly.[8] [Id., p 632.]
The court in Hicks analogized to the "lost seaman” case of Gardner v Nat’l Bulk Carriers, Inc, 310 F2d 284 (CA 4, 1962), cert den 372 US 913 (1963), where the court recognized a duty on the part of a ship’s master to use every reasonable means to save the life of a man overboard. The court rejected the defendant’s contention that no proximate cause was shown, finding proximate cause implicit in the breach of the duty:
[T]he duty would be empty if it did not itself embrace the loss as a consequence of its breach. Once the evidence sustains the reasonable possibility of rescue, ample or narrow, according to the circumstances, total disregard of the duty, refusal to make even a try, as was the case here, imposes liability. [Id., p 287.]
In Hamil v Bashline, 481 Pa 256; 392 A2d 1280 (1978), the Pennsylvania Supreme Court relied on *483§ 323(a) of the Restatement of Torts, 2d,9 to similar effect in a medical malpractice case. The Hamil court concluded that where there is evidence that a defendant increased the risk of harm, "such evidence furnishes a basis for the fact-finder to go further and find that such increased risk was in turn a substantial factor in bringing about the resultant harm . . . .” Id., p 272. Thus the court accomplished an extraordinary transformation of traditional causation by allowing the jury to find causation in fact where the most that could be shown is that the defendant increased the risk of harm. As has been noted by courts criticizing the Hamil decision, § 323 simply establishes a duty where a person undertakes to render services to another to avoid increasing the risk of harm to the recipient. Curry v Summer, 136 Ill App 3d 468, 476; 483 NE2d 711 (1985). In order for liability to result from a violation of the duty described in § 323, the physical harm must "result[ ] from [the] failure to exercise reasonable care to perform [the] undertaking . . . .” Thus, the causation requirement is not obviated by § 323, as the court in Hamil effectively held. The court in Hamil need not have so drastically altered traditional concepts of causation, since there was evidence that the decedent would have had a seventy-five percent likelihood of survival absent defendant’s negligence.
Several courts have employed an inquiry similar to that of the Pennsylvania Supreme Court in *484Hamil. In Thornton v CAMC, 305 SE2d 316, 325 (W Va, 1983), the court held that a defendant would be liable where the plaintiff could show that the defendant’s acts or omissions increased the risk of harm and that such increased risk "was a substantial factor in bringing about the ultimate injury to the plaintiff . . . See also Aasheim v Humberger, 215 Mont 127, 146-147; 695 P2d 824 (1985); Sharp v Kaiser Foundation Health Plan of Colorado, 710 P2d 1153, 1156 (Colo App, 1985), aff’d 741 P2d 714 (Colo, 1987).10
While the court in Hamil openly recognized that the effect of the rule is "to relax the degree of certitude normally required of plaintiff’s evidence in order to make a case for the jury as to whether a defendant may be held liable for the plaintiff’s injuries,” id., p 269, others have avoided overt alteration of the meaning of causation by redefining the compensable injury not as the ultimate harm, but as the lost chance of avoiding that harm.
In Herskovits v Group Health Cooperative of Puget Sound, 99 Wash 2d 609; 664 P2d 474 (1983), the Washington Supreme Court faced a situation where the plaintiff, suffering from lung cancer, had less than a fifty percent chance of survival at all times, but the defendants’ negligence reduced the decedent’s chance of survival by thirty-six percent (from thirty-nine to twenty-five percent). In a concurring opinion, Judge Pearson noted that in medical malpractice cases, cause in fact "must be established beyond the balance of probabilities.” Id., p 622. Furthermore, plaintiff’s expert was unable to state that the defendants’ negligence *485probably or more likely than not caused the death of the decedent. However, if the injury were viewed as a reduction in the chance of survival, a different result could be reached; the plaintiff’s expert had testified that the failure to diagnose probably caused a substantial reduction in the decedent’s chance of survival.
In Waffen v United States Dep’t of Health & Human Services, 799 F2d 911, 917 (CA 4, 1986), the loss as a substantial chance of survival was recognized as a cognizable harm under Maryland law. The court thus avoided overt alteration of the rules of causation, holding that "plaintiff must submit proof that the injury complained of was 'more likely’ or 'more probably’ due to defendant’s action rather than to any other cause.” Id.
The lost chance theory is most fully explained in King, Causation, valuation, and chance in personal injury torts involving preexisting conditions and future consequences, 90 Yale L J 1353 (1981). The theory is premised on the reasoning that chance itself is an injury entitled to redress, and that chance should be measured by a mathematical percentage probability test:
Causation has for the most part been treated as an all-or-nothing proposition. Either a loss was caused by the defendant or it was not. Inexplicably, the all-or-nothing approach of the causation inquiry has been allowed to slip its analytical moorings, influencing the identification and valuation of losses in cases involving preexisting conditions and claims for future consequences. A plaintiff ordinarily should be required to prove by the applicable standard of proof that the defendant caused the loss in question. What caused a loss, however, should be a separate question from what the nature and extent of the loss are. This distinction seems to have eluded the courts, with the *486result that lost chances in many respects are compensated either as certainties or not at all.
To illustrate, consider the case in which a doctor negligently fails to diagnose a patient’s cancerous condition until it has become inoperable. Assume further that even with a timely diagnosis the patient would have had only a 30% chance of recovering from the disease and surviving over the long term. There are two ways of handling such a case. Under the traditional approach, this loss of a not-better-than-even chance of recovering from the cancer would not be compensable because it did not appear more likely [than] not that the patient would have survived with proper care. Recoverable damages, if any, would depend on the extent to which it appeared that cancer killed the patient sooner than it would have with timely diagnosis and treatment, and on the extent to which the delay in diagnosis aggravated the patient’s condition, such as by causing additional pain. A more rational approach, however, would allow recovery for the loss of the chance of cure even though the chance was not better than even. The probability of long-term survival would be reflected in the amount of damages awarded for the loss of the chance. While the plaintiff here could not prove by a preponderance of the evidence that he was denied a cure by the defendant’s negligence, he could show by a preponderance that he was deprived of a 30% chance of a cure. [Id., pp 1363-1364. Emphasis in original.]
A number of cases adopting the lost chance of survival theory also adopt Professor King’s statistical approach, holding that if a decedent had, for example, a thirty percent chance of survival, then compensation should be awarded for thirty percent of the value of the decedent’s life. See Boody v United States, 706 F Supp 1458, 1465 (D Kan, 1989); McKellips v St Francis Hosp, 741 P2d 467, 476 (Okla, 1987).
The number of jurisdictions adopting some ver-
*487sion of the lost chance of survival theory is fairly evenly matched by the number of states which continue to require that a defendant’s negligence probably caused the adverse result before a defendant is required to pay for the plaintiff’s damages.11 Many of these courts refer to the burden of proof for causation: a plaintiff must prove that the defendant’s negligence more likely than not caused the plaintiff’s injury. See, e.g., Cooper v Sisters of Charity of Cincinnati, 27 Ohio St 2d 242, 250-252; 272 NE2d 97 (1971); Weimer v Hetrick, 309 Md 536; 525 A2d 643 (1987).12 A number of courts, even while treating the matter as an issue of burden of proof, have recognized that the question goes to the heart of the meaning of causation. Thus, the New Hampshire Supreme Court wrote that "[c]ausation is a matter of probability, not possibility.” Pillsbury-Flood v Portsmouth Hosp, 128 NH 299, 305; 512 A2d 1126 (1986). The Florida Supreme Court in Gooding v Univ Hosp Bldg, Inc, 445 So 2d 1015, 1018 (Fla, 1984), cogently stated *488its reasons for declining to relax the causation requirement in medical malpractice cases:
Relaxing the causation requirement might correct a perceived unfairness to some plaintiffs who could prove the possibility that the medical malpractice caused an injury but could not prove the probability of causation, but at the same time could create an injustice. Health care providers could find themselves defending cases simply because a patient fails to improve or where serious disease processes are not arrested because another course of action could possibly bring a better result. No other professional malpractice defendant carries this burden of liability without the requirement that plaintiffs prove the alleged negligence probably rather than possibly caused the injury. We cannot approve the substitution of such an obvious inequity for a perceived one. [Id., pp 1019-1020. Citation omitted.]
IV
The lost chance of survival theory does more than merely lower the threshold of proof of causation; it fundamentally alters the meaning of causation.
The most fundamental premise upon which liability for a negligent act may be based is cause in fact. Glinski v Szylling, 358 Mich 182, 196-197; 99 NW2d 637 (1959). "An act or omission is not regarded as a cause of an event if the particular event would have occurred without it.” Prosser & Keeton, Torts (5th ed), § 41, p 265. If the defendant’s acts did not actually cause the plaintiff’s injury, then there is no rational justification for requiring the defendant to bear the cost of the plaintiff’s damages. Thus, it is the plaintiff’s burden to show a causal connection between negligence and injury. Glinski, supra, p 201. "A case cannot go to a jury supported merely by sheer speculation that something might have been a *489cause, or, going one step further, that there was a possibility that something was the cause.” Id., pp 201-202.
The recognition of a lost chance as a cognizable injury is necessarily based on the reasoning that but for the defendant’s negligence, the plaintiff might possibly have avoided an adverse result. Thus, recognition of lost chance as a recoverable interest contradicts the very notion of cause in fact. Professor King aptly characterizes a lost chance as a "raffle ticket” destroyed by the defendant’s negligence.13 King, supra, p 1378. King advocates compensation for "statistically demonstrable losses,” id., p 1377, so that a person deprived of a forty percent chance of survival should be compensated for forty percent of the compensable value of his life. Id., p 1382. Thus, tort law is transformed from a compensatory system to a payout scheme on the basis of a statistical chance that the defendant caused the plaintiff’s death. It is no answer that full compensation based on less than a certainty that a patient would have survived is overcompensation. Professor King criticizes the probability standard of causation because, in his Anew, it treats the better-than-even chance as a certainty, "as though it had materialized or were certain to do so.” Id., p 1387. Clearly, causation can never be proven to a certainty; the law settles for less in determining that a defendant should be held liable *490for damages to a plaintiff.14 Thus, Professor McCormick describes the preponderance of the evidence standard of proof in terms of "probability”:
The most acceptable meaning to be given to the expression, proof by a preponderance, seems to be proof which leads the jury to find that the existence of the contested fact is more probable than its nonexistence. Thus the preponderance of evidence becomes the trier’s belief in the preponderance of probability. [McCormick, Evidence (3d ed), § 339, p 957.]
McCormick notes that some courts are "shocked at the suggestion that a verdict, a truth-finding, should be based on nothing stronger than an estimate of probabilities.” Id., p 958. This statement reveals the very foundation of the tort system. Imperfect as it may be, our legal system attempts to ascertain facts to arrive at the truth. To protect the integrity of that goal, there must be some degree of certainty regarding causation before a jury may determine as fact that a medical defendant did cause the plaintiff’s injury and should therefore compensate the plaintiff in damages. To dispense with this requirement is to abandon the truth-seeking function of the law. Professor King is willing to do so in his attempt to compensate for the precise magnitude of any lost chance. Professor King’s criticism of the more likely than not standard for causation, like the lost chance theory itself, is based on the erroneous premise that it is the purpose of tort law to compensate for lost chances. But tort law should not operate by the *491same principles that govern lotteries and insurance policies. If the acts of the defendants did not actually cause plaintiff’s injury, then there is no rational justification for requiring defendants to bear the cost of plaintiff’s damages.
Even where there is causation in fact, a weighing of social interests requires a limit on how far the consequences of negligence will extend.
As a practical matter, legal responsibility must be limited to those causes which are so closely connected with the result and of such significance that the law is justified in imposing liability. Some boundary must be set to liability for the consequences of any act, upon the basis of some social idea of justice or policy. [Prosser & Keeton, Torts, 5th ed, § 41, p 264.]
Thus, "[b]y adjusting the causation requirement, the court is able to strike a balance between deterring harmful behavior and encouraging useful activity.” Abel v Eli Lilly & Co, 418 Mich 311, 324, n 8; 343 NW2d 164 (1984), cert den 469 US 833 (1984). If liability is to be imposed in proportion to any chance at survival, then the medical profession will be subjected to a burden which is not imposed on any other group of defendants. Cooper, supra. I submit that nothing is to be gained by extracting payment from a defendant who cannot be shown to have caused the adverse result. Such a rule will not serve the deterrence function of tort law. It more likely will encourage the practice of costly defensive medicine in an attempt to avoid practically certain liability in the event of an unfavorable outcome.
The utility of the physician’s conduct militates against a relaxation of the causation requirement in medical malpractice cases. "The physician serves a vital function in our society, a function *492which requires the assumption of a duty to the patient. Yet, his profession affords him only an inexact and often experimental science by which to discharge his duty.” Herskovits, supra, p 638 (Brachtenbach, J., dissenting). See also Malone, Ruminations on cause-in-fact, 9 Stan L R 60, 86-87 (1956). This is not similar to the case in which two shooters are held liable because it cannot be determined whose bullet caused the victim’s death, Summers v Tice, 33 Cal 2d 80; 199 P2d 1 (1948). Under those circumstances, the utility of the actors’ conduct is so low that it is not troubling to permit recovery against both on the theory of concert of action, even where causation can be attributed to neither by a preponderance of the evidence.15 See Prosser & Keeton, Torts, § 41, p 271. In Abel v Eli Lilly, supra, p 327, this Court discussed Summers v Tice and the rationale for its rule, which is embodied in 2 Restatement Torts, 2d, § 433B(3), comment f, p 446:
[T]he reason for the exception to traditional rules is to prevent the injustice of allowing proved ■wrongdoers to escape liability for an injury inflicted upon an innocent plaintiff "merely because the nature of their conduct and the resulting harm has made it difficult or impossible to prove which of them has caused the harm.”
The Court in Abel relied on this rationale to fashion a "DES-unique” theory of alternative liability, where it could be shown that all of the defendants acted tortiously, and that the plaintiff was harmed by the conduct of one of the defendants. *493Id., p 331. Assuming as we must that defendants Kelso and Memorial Hospital acted tortiously, there remains a crucial distinction between Abel and this case. In Abel, it was known that one of the defendants caused each plaintiff’s injury. In this case, the question is not who caused Nena Falcon’s death; the question, for which we have no answer, is whether any human act or omission caused her death. I do not mean to minimize the tragedy of such events, but only to question the assumption that a human cause may be located.
v
In this case, there is deposition testimony from which it could be inferred that the decedent was deprived of a 37.5 percent chance of survival by the failure of Dr. Kelso to insert an intravenous line before or immediately after the administration of a saddle block anaesthetic. Plaintiff does not assert that evidence showing any greater likelihood of survival will be produced at trial; it is plaintiff’s theory that the lost chance of survival should itself be compensated. Where the plaintiff can show no more than a possibility that the defendants’ conduct was a cause of the harm, I would conclude that the plaintiff has not produced adequate evidence to create a factual issue regarding causation. Rogers, Harvey, supra. Inherent in the concept of causation is a degree of certitude which is absolutely lacking in this case. Our case law wisely requires evidence from which it may be inferred that the defendant probably caused the ultimate harm before the jury may be allowed to infer that the defendant did cause such harm and should compensate the plaintiff in damages.
Also inherent in the concept of causation is the notion of foreseeability. The scope of liability *494should ordinarily extend to, but not beyond, the scope of the "foreseeable risks”—that is, the risks by reason of which the actor’s conduct is held negligent. Prosser & Keeton, §42, p 273. In this case, there is absolutely no evidence that the purpose of an intravenous line would have been to prevent an amniotic fluid embolism. Similarly, there is a total absence of evidence that the purpose of an intravenous line was to manage or treat this unpredictable complication of labor. Instead, all of plaintiff’s evidence points to the conclusion that the reason for inserting an intravenous line would have been to manage the potential complications of the saddle block anaesthetic. Under these circumstances, even assuming that compensation should be granted where defendant has caused the loss of a mere chance, plaintiff lacks evidence on which a showing of causation may be predicated. In other words, plaintiff cannot even prove that defendant caused the loss of a 37.5 percent chance of survival.
CONCLUSION
I disagree with the adoption of the lost chance of survival theory. The recovery of damages for the loss of a mere chance eviscerates the principles that underlie our tort law. By identifying the ultimate harm underlying a wrongful death action as the loss of a chance at survival, the lead opinion abandons the most fundamental negligence element of cause in fact. By definition, the recovery sanctioned today is based on the mere possibility that the acts of the defendants caused the death of Nena Falcon. I believe it is unwise to impose liability on members of the medical profession in such difficult circumstances as those now before this Court. Rather than deterring undesira*495ble conduct, the rule imposed only penalizes the medical professional for inevitable unfavorable results. The lost chance of survival theory presumes to know the unknowable. There is little satisfaction or comfort in the conclusion that we simply cannot know why Nena Falcon died. The desire to compensate for the chance that the decedent might have survived, while understandable, is not justifiable.
Brickley and Griffin, JJ., concurred with Riley, C.J.
MCL 600.2922; MSA 27A.2922.
The procedural posture of this case requires us to presume that defendants breached the applicable standard of care. Counsel for defendant Memorial Hospital conceded at oral argument that there was evidence from which a jury could find that it was a breach of the standard of care not to use an intravenous line.
While there was evidence that plaintiff was obese, a smoker, and suffering from a mild case of pneumonia at the time of the delivery, there is no record evidence that these factors put her at increased risk for amniotic fluid embolism.
The amnion is "the innermost of the embryonic or fetal membranes . . . the sac in which the embryo is suspended.” The Random House College Dictionary, rev ed.
The chorion is "the outermost of the extraembryonic membranes . . . .” The Random House College Dictionary, rev ed.
Summary disposition is appropriate under MCR 2.116(0(10) when "[ejxcept as to the amount of damages, there is no genuine issue as to any material fact, and the moving party is entitled to judgment or partial judgment as a matter of law.” For purposes of reviewing the ruling under this subrule, we accept as true the deposition testimony of Drs. Abouleish and DeKornfeld that the failure to insert an intravenous catheter before or immediately after the administration of saddle block anaesthesia was a breach of the standard of care applicable to defendants at the time of the incident. We also take as true the allegations that the decedent would have had a 37.5 percent chance of survival if an intravenous line had been inserted, but because this was not done her chance of survival was eliminated.
In Bell v United States, 854 F2d 881 (CA 6, 1988), the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit rejected a "bright line” requirement that the plaintiff prove the defendant’s negligent failure to diagnose an aneurysm deprived him of a fifty-one percent chance of survival; the court correctly stated the Michigan rule as requiring proof that the deceased had a "reasonable probability” of recovery but for the defendant’s negligence. Id., p 883.
Interestingly the court in Hicks cited the Michigan case of Harvey, supra, for its statement that the law does not require proof to a certainty that the death of the decedent would have been avoided if not for the defendant’s negligence. In a footnote, the Hicks court correctly interpreted the holding in Harvey to be that because there was evidence that there was a probability that surgery would have saved the decedent’s life, the negligent diagnosis was the proximate cause of the decedent’s death. Hicks, supra, p 632, n 2.
One who undertakes, gratuitously or for consideration, to render services to another which he should recognize as necessary for the protection of the other’s person or things, is subject to liability to the other for physical harm resulting from his failure to exercise reasonable care to perform his undertaking, if
(a) his failure to exercise such care increases the risk of such harm .... [2 Restatement Torts, 2d, § 323, p 135.]
It is notable that a number of cases which have adopted the § 323 increased risk analysis have also limited the damages recoverable to those which the duty imposed was intended to prevent. Thompson v Sun City Community Hosp, 141 Ariz 597, 608; 688 P2d 605 (1984); McKellips v St Francis Hosp, 741 P2d 467 (Okla, 1987).
Cases retaining the more likely than not standard for causation in medical malpractice cases include Alfonso v Lund, 783 F2d 958 (CA 10, 1986) (applying New Mexico law); Connellan v Coffey, 122 Conn 136; 187 A 901 (1936); LaBieniec v Baker, 11 Conn App 199; 526 A2d 1341 (1987); Gooding v Univ Hosp Bldg, Inc, 445 So 2d 1015, 1018 (Fla, 1984); Walden v Jones, 439 SW2d 571 (Ky, 1978); Anthony v Hosp Service Dist No 1, 477 So 2d 1180 (La App, 1985); Cornfeldt v Tongen, 295 NW2d 638 (Minn, 1980); Ladner v Campbell, 515 So 2d 882 (Miss, 1987); Pillsbury-Flood v Portsmouth Hosp, 128 NH 299; 512 A2d 1126 (1986); Cooper v Sisters of Charity of Cincinnati, 27 Ohio St 2d 242; 272 NE2d 97 (1971). There are several jurisdictions in which conflicting decisions exist, see 54 ALR4th 10, § 7, p 42.
As noted, ante, pp 485-486, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit interpreted Maryland law to allow recovery for the loss of a chance of survival. Waffen, supra. The Maryland Court of Appeals in Weimer approved the traditional standard of proof for causation, but resolved the case solely by reference to Maryland’s wrongful death statute, which allowed an action against a person "whose wrongful act caused the death of another . . . .” Id., p 554. In Cooper v Hartman, 311 Md 259, 261; 533 A2d 1294 (1987), the Maryland Supreme Court expressly declined to decide whether to adopt the "lost chance” doctrine.
This Court expressed its reluctance to compensate for mere chance when it held in Larson v Johns-Manville Sales Corp, 427 Mich 301, 305; 399 NW2d 1 (1986), that a plaintiff who contracts asbestosis but does not bring suit is not barred from later bringing suit when he knows or should know he has developed cancer as a result of the asbestosis. The Court reasoned:
Rather than encouraging every plaintiff who develops asbestosis to recover an amount of money as compensation for the chance of getting cancer, we prefer to allow those who actually do develop cancer to obtain a full recovery. [Id., p 319.]
McCormick notes that standards of proof ultimately are concerned with the state of the jury’s mind rather than the evidence itself. McCormick, Evidence (3d ed), § 339, p 956. Thus, the preponderance of the evidence standard properly refers not to the weight of evidence, but to the degree of certainty which it might inspire in the minds of jurors. Id.
Nor can this case be compared with a situation in which a captain of a ship is held liable for failure to rescue a man overboard, where only a chance of survival could be shown had rescue been attempted. There is little imaginable utility in a decision by the ship’s captain to decline a rescue attempt. Gardner v Nat’l Bulk Carriers, supra.

=== CASE 2212466 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:20.214425+00 ===

222 Cal.App.2d 68 (1963)
J. R. JOHANSON, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SANTA CRUZ, Defendant and Appellant.
Civ. No. 20831.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. Three.
Nov. 5, 1963.
Rodney R. Atchison, City Attorney, for Defendant and Appellant.
Lewis J. Yapp for Plaintiff and Respondent.
DEVINE, J.
The City Council of the City of Santa Cruz appeals from a judgment in a mandate proceeding commanding the council to take all steps required to rescind a vote of the council refusing to reclassify respondent's property for zoning purposes and to take all steps required to make effective, by ordinance, the reclassification requested by respondent.
Johanson, respondent, applied to the city planning commission to have 22 parcels of land rezoned from R-2, two-family dwelling district, to R-4, general apartment district. The planning commission recommended, by resolution, that the city council deny the application. The city council duly noticed a meeting date for hearing. At the meeting, on May 22, 1962, two of the seven members of the council were absent and one was disqualified. The planning commission's recommendation *70 was read and considered and voted upon. The votes were one "aye," three "no." Thereupon, a councilman moved that the city attorney prepare an ordinance to change the zone; the motion was seconded and carried unanimously.
At the next regular meeting of the city council, the ordinance which had been prepared by the city attorney was presented for publication. Motion for adoption was made and seconded, but was defeated three to one. At this meeting, the two councilmen who had been absent from the earlier meeting voted "no," joining the councilman who, at the first vote of the earlier meeting, had voted unfavorably to reclassification. Two who had been favorable to respondent at the earlier meeting were absent.
[1a] Respondent contends that the action of the council on May 22, 1962, was a complete expression of the legislative will in favor of the reclassification and that nothing more than ministerial action remained. Appellant contends that the only action done at the meeting was the defeat of the planning commission's recommendation and the direction to the city attorney to prepare an ordinance. The ordinance, however, says appellant, was never adopted.
[2a] The pertinent provisions of the charter of the City of Santa Cruz (Stats. 1948, ch. 49, pp. 316, 317) are: Section 608: "No ordinance shall be finally adopted by the Council on the day of its introduction, nor within five days thereafter, nor at any time other than a regular meeting, nor until its publication at least once in the official newspaper of the City at least three days before its adoption. ..." Section 613: "The City Clerk shall cause each ordinance to be published at least once in the official newspaper at least three days before its adoption."
Section 9220.3, subdivision (d), of the Santa Cruz Municipal Code provides: "Should the City Council disagree with the recommendations of the City Planning Commission, the Council may at its election adopt by ordinance the reclassification sought by the application in question, deny the petition for reclassification or refer the matter of reclassification back to the City Planning Commission for reconsideration."
[1b] Respondent contends that under Municipal Code section 9220.3, subdivision (d), the council had but three alternatives, namely, to adopt the reclassification by ordinance, to deny the petition for reclassification, or to refer the matter back to the planning commission. Since it is plain that it did not do the second or third acts, respondent argues, it *71 must have done the first, by its direction to the city attorney. Appellant replies that the city council did not, by the very terms of its resolution on May 22, 1962, enact an ordinance, but merely directed the city attorney to draft one; and that the council could not have enacted an ordinance, because this would violate the charter provisions (1) that an ordinance shall not be finally adopted on the day of its introduction, and (2) that there shall be newspaper publication for at least three days before adoption. To this, respondent replies that there is no conflict with the charter because the rezoning ordinance was introduced at the May 22, 1962, meeting and approved, but was not actually passed then, or within five days thereafter; but the entire consideration on the merits was had at the May 22 meeting, and the only purposes of the June 12 meeting were (1) to consider whether the ordinance as prepared by the city attorney contained language to effectuate the vote of May 22, and (2) if it did, to instruct the city manager to publish it. These duties, says respondent, were ministerial.
We cannot agree with respondent. The language of the resolution of May 22 shows what the council did--it merely directed the city attorney to prepare an ordinance. It may be that the councilmen thought, at that time, that they would vote for the ordinance later, but they were not obliged to do so. On the contrary, they could not, under the charter, cast a final vote at that time. [2b] The purpose of the interval demanded by the charter and of the publication obviously is to allow representations to be made by the citizenry, and deliberation to be made by the councilmen. What was reserved to the councilmen was not merely ministerial function, but essentially legislative prerogative.
[3] It is argued by respondent that because no demurrer or answer was filed, and no opposition was offered in the trial court by the then city attorney, and because the limitations of the city charter, now urged, were not called to the attention of the trial judge, the charter should not be judicially noticed on appeal.
It is well established that this court may take judicial notice of the charter as a public statute. (Clark v. City of Pasadena, 102 Cal.App.2d 198, 200 [227 P.2d 306].) Respondent argues that we should not do so, because counsel who desire a court to take judicial notice should make a request therefor, and this was not done in the trial court. Respondent cites Popcorn Equipment Co. v. Page, 92 Cal.App.2d 448, 454 *72 [207 P.2d 647], to support the proposition that one who desires judicial notice of a fact to be taken must bring the fact to the knowledge of the court.
Here, however, what is proposed for judicial notice is not a fact, but a law of this state. Although a point of law ordinarily may be waived by failure to make it in the trial court, in this case we are confronted with a matter of the trial court's jurisdiction, a matter which can be raised for the first time on appeal. (Costa v. Banta, 98 Cal.App.2d 181 [219 P.2d 478].) It is a matter of jurisdiction because the courts have no power to compel a legislative body to act in a particular way. (Tandy v. City of Oakland, 208 Cal.App.2d 609 [25 Cal.Rptr. 429].)
[4] We take notice of the provisions of the charter of the City of Santa Cruz and we find that to compel the council to enact the rezoning ordinance would be to force the council in a legislative matter.
Judgment reversed.
Draper, P. J., and Salsman, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9737930 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:37:16.124224+00 ===

ON PETITIONS TO TRANSFER
SULLIVAN, Justice.
We address several issues concerning the authority of a court officer to enter a final appealable order and the way in which reviewing courts should handle challenges to such an officer's authority on appeal. In doing so, we comment on the failure of trial courts validly to appoint judges pro tempore and attempt to resolve several divisions that have emerged in the Court of Appeals.
L.
The Indiana Constitution requires that judicial acts be performed only by judges. Ind. Const. art. 7, § 1; State ex rel. Smith v. Starke Cir. Ct. (1981), 275 Ind. 483, 496, 417 N.E.2d 1115, 1122. See also Shoultz v. McPheeters (1881), 79 Ind. 373, 375; State ex rel. Hovey v. Noble (1889), 118 Ind. 350, 352, 21 N.E. 244, 245. Thus, only a duly elected or appointed judge of the court or a *30duly appointed judge pro tempore or special judge may enter an appealable final judgment, including a criminal sentence. When a court official who is not a duly elected or appointed judge of the court purports to make a final order or judgment, that decision is a nullity. Rivera v. State (1992), Ind.App., 601 N.E.2d 445, 446. See also State ex rel. Smith, 275 Ind. at 496, 417 N.E.2d at 1122; Shoultz, 79 Ind. at 375.
In each of these cases, one of the issues is whether the trial court order or judgment on appeal is invalid by virtue of having been entered by a court officer who allegedly was not duly appointed.1
A.
In the case of Briscoe v. State, appellant Wallace D. Briscoe was tried and convicted of Burglary before, and sentenced by, Master Commissioner2 Andrew J. Fogle. The record shows that Fogle was referred to throughout as a "Special Judge" but in fact had never been appointed as a special judge in accordance with Indiana Rule of Criminal Procedure 13.3 However, Fogle was appointed as judge pro tempore by the court's regular judge, the Hon. Webster L. Brewer, both on the date of trial, September 17, 1992, and on the date of sentencing, October 14, 1992. The record shows that Briscoe made no objection to being tried or sentenced by Fogle. Briscoe appeals his conviction and sentence on grounds that Fogle was an improperly appointed judge and therefore lacked authority and jurisdiction over him. The Court of Appeals rejected Briscoe's argument and affirmed the conviction and sentence. Briscoe v. State (1994), Ind.App., 639 N.E.2d 1058 (mem.). Briscoe petitions for transfer.
B.
In the cases of Floyd v. State, Hatcher v. State, Manley v. State, and Marlett v. State, appellants all seek post-conviction relief on grounds that either their convictions or sentences were entered by court officers who allegedly were not duly appointed.
Master Commissioner Jay B. Haggerty conducted the guilty plea hearing on appellant Anthony Floyd's plea agreement admitting guilt to Conspiracy to Deal in Cocaine and, on September 15, 1989, sentenced Floyd. The State acknowledges that a Master Commissioner has no authority to enter a final appealable order unless sitting as a judge pro tempore or special judge. The State makes no claim that any such appointment was made. Floyd raised no objection to the authority of Haggerty until he filed his petition for post-conviction relief. The trial court denied the petition, but the Court of Appeals reversed, holding that no appealable judgment had been entered. Floyd v. State (1994), Ind.App., 635 N.E.2d 230 (mem.). The State petitions for transfer.
*31Master Commissioner Allen Smith, Jr. conducted the guilty plea hearing on appellant Wilbert Hatcher's plea agreement admitting guilt to Robbery and, on January 22, 1985, sentenced Hatcher. The parties dispute whether Smith was a duly appointed judge pro tempore or acting only as a Master Commissioner. Hatcher raised no objection to the authority of Smith until this case, an amended second petition for post-conviction relief. The trial court denied his petition, and the Court of Appeals affirmed that denial. Hatcher v. State (1994), Ind.App., 637 N.E.2d 1388 (mem.). Hatcher petitions for transfer.
Commissioner T.C. Stenhouse conducted the guilty plea hearing on appellant Corinthian Manley's plea agreement admitting guilt to Theft on September 26, 1968, and then sentenced Manley. The record does not reveal whether Stenhouse was appointed special judge or judge pro tempore Manley raised no objection to the authority of Sten-house until filing a petition for post-conviction relief. The trial court denied his petition but the Court of Appeals reversed, holding that no appealable judgment had been entered. Manley v. State (1994), Ind.App., 638 N.E.2d 888 (mem.). The State petitions for transfer.
Judge pro tempore Jay B. Haggerty conducted a bench trial of appellant Donald Marlett and found him guilty of Battery and also found him to be an Habitual Offender. On October 19, 1989, about one month after trial, Haggerty sentenced Marlett. While Marlett acknowledges that Haggerty was duly appointed to serve as a judge pro tempore at the time of trial, Marlett contends Haggerty lacked authority thereafter to impose sentence. Marlett raised no objection to the authority of Haggerty until filing his petition for post-conviction relief, The trial court denied the petition for post-conviction relief and the Court of Appeals affirmed that denial. The Court of Appeals rejected Marlett's argument and affirmed the conviction and sentence. Marlett v. State (1994), Ind.App., 639 N.E.2d 1056 (mem.). Marlett petitions for transfer.
C.
In the cases of Dearman v. State and Roby v. State, appellants acknowledge that a validly appointed judge pro tempore presided at trial but contend that because the judge pro tempore appointment expired prior to the date of sentencing, the latter had no authority to enter sentence because he was not a judge on the date sentencing occurred.
In the case of Dearman v. State, appellant John W. Dearman was tried and sentenced by Master Commissioner Fogle. The record shows that Fogle was referred to throughout as a "Special Judge" but in fact had never been appointed as a special judge in accordance with Rule of Criminal Procedure 13. Fogle was appointed as judge pro tempore by the court's regular judge, the Hon. Webster L. Brewer, on the dates of trial, January 30, 1992, to February 1, 1992, but not on the date of sentencing, April 15, 1992. Dearman appealed, arguing that Fogle had no authority to enter sentence because he was not a judge on the date sentencing occurred. The Court of Appeals rejected Dearman's argument and affirmed the conviction and sentence. Dearman v. State (1994), Ind.App., 632 N.E.2d 1156. Dearman petitions for transfer.
Judge pro tempore Judge James E. Bielefeld presided over the jury trial of defendant Steven Roby, who was charged with Murder. Bielefeld was appointed as judge pro tempore by the court's regular judge, the Hon. James E. Letsinger, on the dates of trial, July 31, 1984, and August 1, 1984, but not on the date of sentencing, August 14, 1984. Roby appeals, arguing that Bielefeld had no jurisdiction to enter sentence because he was not a judge on the date sentencing occurred. The Court of Appeals rejected Roby's argument and affirmed the conviction and sentence. Roby v. State (1994), Ind.App., 635 N.E.2d 1163 (mem.) (2-1 decision, Sullivan, J., dissenting). Roby petitions for transfer.
IL
Appellant Briscoe contends that the court officer who conducted the trial and sentencing was an improperly appointed judge and *32therefore lacked authority and jurisdiction over him. In other cases, e.g., Boushehry v. State (1993), Ind.App., 622 N.E.2d 212, aff'd on rehearing, (1993), 626 N.E.2d 497, trans. denied, the Court of Appeals has raised sua sponte the issue of the authority of a court officer to enter a final appealable order.
The proper inquiry for a reviewing court when faced with a challenge to the authority and jurisdiction of a court officer to enter a final appealable order is first to ascertain whether the challenge was properly made in the trial court so as to preserve the issue for appeal. In Survance v. State (1984), Ind., 465 N.E.2d 1076, defendant was convicted of Conspiracy to Commit Arson. On appeal, defendant argued that no proper appointment of the judge presiding at trial as judge pro tempore was made prior to trial. We stated that an improperly appointed judge pro tempore could present a problem compelling reversal but that such error was not "fundamental." Id. at 1081. We went on to observe:
Any objections to the authority of an attorney appointed to try a cause must be made at the time when he assumes to act or they will be deemed waived on appeal. Gordy v. State, 262 Ind. at 283, 315 N.E.2d at 367, and cases cited therein.
In Gordy we were presented with a situation similar to the case at bar. Quoting from the Court of Appeals we held:
" "The assignment of errors presenting this question is grounded on the proposition that the trial court had no jurisdiction to render the judgment from which this appeal is taken. The position of appellant on this proposition cannot be maintained. It is not contended that the Superior Court of Marion county did not have jurisdiction of the class of cases to which this one belongs; and its jurisdiction of the person of appellant is not questioned. It is therefore apparent that the court had jurisdiction of the subject-matter of the action and of the person of appellant, and had power to proceed to judgment. The defect pointed out was not affecting the jurisdiction of the court, but the right and authority of its presiding judge to act as such. The judge who presided at the trial of this case was acting under color of authority, and he was a judge de facto if not a judge de jure.
'It has been held repeatedly by this court and the Supreme Court that when a judge has been called or an attorney appointed to try a cause, and no objection is made at the time, or to his sitting in the cause when he assumes to act, all objections thereto will be deemed waived on appeal. We see no reason why the rule announced and applied to special judges should not apply with equal force to a judge pro tempore.'
[[Image here]]
Gordy v. State, 262 Ind. at 282-83, 315 N.E.2d at 867 (quoting Jordan v. Indianapolis Coal Co. (1913), 52 Ind.App. 542, 544-45, 100 N.E. 880, 881).
Survance, 465 N.E.2d 1076, 1082. Accord, Skipper v. State (1988), Ind., 525 N.E.2d 334, 335. See also Gordy v. State (1974), 262 Ind. 275, 283, 315 N.E.2d 362, 367 (collecting cases).
As these precedents demonstrate, it has been the long-standing policy of this court to view the authority of the officer appointed to try a case not as affecting the jurisdiction of the court. Therefore, the failure of a party to object at trial to the authority of a court officer to enter a final appeal-able order waives the issue for appeal. We conclude that it is improper for a reviewing court to dismiss an appeal on these grounds where no showing has been made that the issue was properly preserved. Instead, the reviewing court should deny relief on grounds of waiver. Because the following recent decisions of the Court of Appeals hold that the proper procedure in such situations is to dismiss the appeal without regard for whether the issue has been properly preserved, the decisions are disapproved: Cartwright v. State (1993), Ind.App., 621 N.E.2d 1164; Kirby v. State (1993), Ind.App., 619 N.E.2d 967; Hill v. State (1993), Ind.App., 611 N.E.2d 133 (2-1 decision, Buchanan, J., dissenting); Scruggs v. State (1993), 609 N.E.2d 1148, 1150 (2-1 decision, Buchanan, J., dissenting), after remand, (1994), Ind.App., 637 N.E.2d 175; Green v. State (1989), *33Ind.App., 540 N.E.2d 130, reh'g denied, (1989), 544 N.E.2d 172, trans. denied. We cite Senior Judge Buchanan's dissents in the Seruggs and Hill cases as correct statements of the law and precedent in this regard. We commend the Court of Appeals for properly applying these principles in Briscoe v. State and, accordingly, deny transfer in Briscoe.
TIL
Floyd v. State, Hatcher v. State, Manley v. State, and Marlett v. State are all collateral attacks on convictions and sentences in post-conviction proceedings. In these cases, each petitioner for post-conviction relief argues that the underlying conviction or sentence should be vacated because the court officer entering the conviction or sentence was not a validly appointed judge pro tempore.
We believe the law is settled in this regard, as well, As a general proposition, issues available to but not asserted by a defendant on direct appeal are waived for purposes of subsequent petitions for post-conviction relief because they were available to be presented as a part of the petitioner's direct appeal. Smith v. State (1993), Ind., 613 N.E.2d 412, 413, reh'g denied, cert. denied, - U.S. -, 114 S.Ct. 1634, 128 L.Ed.2d 357 (1994). More specifically, we said in Gordy-and reiterated in Survance-that the authority of one who acts as a judge de facto under color of authority cannot be collaterally attacked. Survance, 465 N.E.2d at 1081; Gordy, 262 Ind. at 283, 315 N.E.2d at 367. See also State ex rel. Crowmer v. Superior Ct. of Marion County (1957), 237 Ind. 633, 640, 146 N.E.2d 88, 92, reh'g denied. And in Bivins v. State (1985), Ind., 485 N.E.2d 89, 92, we held that a petitioner for post-conviction relief had waived his right to challenge the improper selection of a special judge because at trial the defendant had not objected to an irregularity in the appointment of the judge and had thereby accepted the appointment, submitted to the jurisdiction, and waived the irregularity. While Bivins involved the authority of a special judge, we see no reason why this rule should not apply with equal force to a judge pro tempore. Cf. Survance, 465 N.E.2d at 1082. The Court of Appeals has so held in the recent cases of Douglas v. State (1994), Ind.App., 643 N.E.2d 7 and Harris v. State (1993), Ind.App., 616 N.E.2d 25, trans. denied.
On the basis of these precedents, the failure of a defendant to object at the original trial to the jurisdiction of a court officer to enter a final appealable order operates as waiver of the issue both on appeal, see Part II of this opinion, supra, and on collateral attack in a proceeding for post-conviction relief. We conclude, therefore, that it is improper for a reviewing court to dismiss a petition for post-conviction relief or to vacate an underlying conviction or sentence on these grounds. Instead, the reviewing court should deny relief on grounds of waiver. Because the opinions of the Court of Appeals in Floyd v. State and Manley v. State hold that the proper procedure in such situations is to dismiss the petition for post-conviction relief or to vacate the underlying conviction or sentence, we grant transfer, vacate those opinions of the Court of Appeals, and affirm the decisions of the respective post-conviction trial courts. We commend the Court of Appeals for properly applying these principles in Hatcher v. State and Marlett v. State and, accordingly, deny transfer in both Hatcher and Marlett.
IV.
In Dearman v. State and Roby v. State, appellants argue that the officers entering the judgment of sentence in their cases had no authority to enter sentence because they were not judges on the dates sentencing occurred. The question of jurisdiction on these particular facts is one that has divided the Court of Appeals. Several panels of that court have held that a judge pro tempore has no authority to act except on days and times for which a valid appointment is in effect. See McMichel v. State (1994), Ind.App., 641 N.E.2d 1047; Cassidy v. State (1993), Ind.App., 626 N.E.2d 500, trans. denied; Boushehry, 622 N.E.2d 212. Accord, Koo v. State (1994), Ind.App., 640 N.E.2d 95. Other panels have held that, once a judge pro tempore begins hearing evidence in a case, he or she has jurisdiction to hear the case to completion (including entering sentence), even if *34the term of the appointment has expired. See Woods v. State (1994), Ind.App., 640 N.E.2d 1089, 1090 (2-1 decision, Barteau, J., dissenting); Billingsley v. State (1994), Ind.App., 638 N.E.2d 1340, 1343; Dearman, 632 N.E.2d at 1159; Horris, 616 N.E.2d at 33; Hupp v. Hill (1991), Ind.App., 576 N.E.2d 1320, 1324.
As discussed in Part II of this opinion, the court has jurisdiction to conduct sentencing. The issue is, rather, whether the presiding court officer has the authority to sentence. Assuming that an objection to the authority of a court officer to enter a final appealable order has been properly preserved, may such an officer, after conducting a trial pursuant to a valid appointment as judge pro tempore, enter a sentence in the case after the term of his or her appointment has expired? We believe that precedent and sound policy require that this question be answered in the affirmative.
The leading case on this subject is State ex rel. Hodshire v. Bingham (1941), 218 Ind. 490, 33 N.E.2d 771, an original action in a civil suit that sought to compel the regular judge of the Vermillion Cireuit Court to grant a change of venue from the county. The regular judge had appointed a judge pro tempore to preside and hold court from November 13th, 1989 to November 18th, 1989, on account of the absence of the regular judge from the county. Between those dates the judge pro tempore presided at the trial of a civil case which resulted in a verdict for the defendant. After the expiration of the period for which he was appointed, the judge pro tempore entertained and granted a motion for a new trial, which the regular judge subsequently struck from the record. The plaintiff thereupon filed a motion in proper form for a change of venue from the county, which the regular judge overruled. If the judge pro tempore had authority to hear and grant the motion for a new trial after the expiration of the period for which he was appointed, the action would have been pending in the Vermillion Circuit Court and the plaintiff entitled to a change of venue from the county.
Quoting from our earlier opinion in Staser v. Hogan (1889), 120 Ind. 207, 223, 21 N.E. 911, 916, reh'g denied, (1889), 120 Ind. 207, 22 N.E. 990, we said:
"It must be manifest to every one that the regular judge could not intelligently hear and dispose of the motion for a new trial in this cause. * * *
"We think that, where parties voluntarily consent to try their cause before a special judge [judge pro tempore], they should be held as consenting to his making a final disposition of the same; for in the very nature of things no one else can intelligently dispose of it."
State ex rel. Hodshire, 218 Ind. at 492, 33 N.E.2d at 771-72 (emphasis omitted) (bracketed material in the original). On the authority of State ex rel. Hodshire, we subsequently promulgated Trial Rule 63(A), which provides in relevant part:
The judge who presides at the trial of a cause or a hearing at which evidence is received shall, if available, hear motions and make all decisions and rulings required to be madé by the court relating to the evidence and the conduct of the trial or hearing after the trial or hearing is concluded.
State ex rel. Hodshire and Trial Rule 63(A) not only reflect the rule that a judge pro tempore has authority to make decisions after the conclusion of trial but also the policy that that judge is the best person to do so because of his or her familiarity with the case. In addition to the recent Woods, Billingsley, Roby, Dearman, Harris, and Hupp decisions of the Court of Appeals that adopt this analysis are the somewhat older decisions of this court in State v. Smith (1973), 260 Ind. 555, 297 N.E.2d 809, and the Court of Appeals in Needham v. Needham (1980), Ind.App., 408 N.E.2d 562. We continue to believe that these cases properly state the law of the authority of a judge pro tempore to continue to rule on matters following expiration of his or her appointment and so disapprove those recent decisions of the Court of Appeals to the contrary: McMichel, 641 N.E.2d 1047, Cassidy, 626 N.E.2d 500, and Boushehry, 622 N.E.2d 212. We commend the Court of Appeals for properly applying these principles in Dearman v. State and *35Roby v. State and, accordingly, deny transfer in both Dearman and Roby.
V
We take this opportunity to address the proper procedure to be employed by the reviewing court when a challenge to the authority of a court officer to enter a final appealable order has been properly preserved for appeal.
A.
If an appellant has properly preserved an objection to the authority of a court officer to enter a final appealable order and the record does not disclose whether or not a valid appointment was made, we believe that the reviewing court is faced with the situation described by Indiana Appellate Rule 7.2(C); "Incompleteness or inadequacy of the record shall not constitute a ground for dismissal or preclude review on the merits." That rule provides the proper procedure that must be followed when an incomplete record is submitted on appeal. Rather than dismiss the appeal, the proper appointment papers should be certified in accordance with Appellate Rule 7.2(C). See Hill, 611 N.E.2d at 133 (Buchanan, J., dissenting) and Scruggs, 609 N.E.2d at 1151 (Buchanan, J., dissenting).
B
When an appellant has properly preserved an objection to the authority of a court officer to enter a final appealable order and the record (either ab initio or following certification and transmittal of a supplemental record under Appellate Rule 7.2(C)) discloses that there was no validly appointed judge, and so no final judgment has been entered, the Court of Appeals has been divided on the proper procedure to follow. In some instances, the Court of Appeals has merely suspended consideration of an appeal pending the regular judge's entry of a final judgment. See Woodfork v. State (1992), Ind.App., 594 N.E.2d 468, 470 n. 3 (collecting cases). In other cases, the Court of Appeals has dismissed the appeal as premature. See Schwindt v. State (1992), Ind.App., 596 N.E.2d 936, 938; Landers v. State (1991), 577 N.E.2d 990, 991. We believe the approach advocated by Judge Sullivan in Schwindt and Landers and by Judge Buchanan in Rivera, 601 N.E.2d at 446, is the correct one, and that such appeals should be dismissed as premature.
At the risk of redundancy, we note that this last situation is distinct from those de-seribed in Parts II through V-A of this opinion. Dismissal of the appeal is only proper after the reviewing court has ascertained () that the challenge to the authority of a court officer to enter a final appealable order has been properly preserved for the instant appeal, and (i) that the court officer did not have such authority.
VL
It is readily apparent to this court that legitimate and serious concerns on the part of many members of the Court of Appeals led to the decisions in Boushehry and the other decisions we disapprove today. After all, the Court of Appeals is well aware of the controlling precedents of this court and has no desire to proceed in conflict with them. We are convinced that many members of the Court of Appeals, including several who have distinguished records of service on the trial bench, had become deeply concerned that certain trial courts were not following proper procedures in appointing judges pro tempore. By dismissing these cases, the Court of Appeals sent a message to the regular judges and officers of the courts involved that proper procedure in appointing judges pro tempore (and, for that matter, special judges) is a matter of the utmost importance and that sloppy practice in this regard will not be tolerated.4
While we hold today that the approach taken by the Boushehry and related lines of decisions is incorrect, we are in total accord with what we perceive to be the basic *36principle the Court of Appeals was seeking to advance in these opinions-that only a duly elected or appointed judge of the court or a duly appointed judge pro tempore or special judge has authority to enter an appealable final judgment. As we tried to make clear in Survance, we strongly disapprove of anything but strict compliance with the rules for appointment of both judges pro tempore and special judges, and we will not hesitate to dismiss appeals or even find reversible error where an appellant, after properly preserving the error, demonstrates that a purported final appealable order was entered by a court officer other than a duly elected or appointed judge. We conclude, however, that adherence to our precedents and sound appellate practice require the approach set forth in this opinion. |__
We express our appreciation to the Court of Appeals for its vigilance in policing improper practices by trial courts in appointing judges pro tempore and special judges. To the extent that such problems continue, we invite the Court of Appeals to call the trial courts involved to our attention or to the attention of the Commission on Judicial Qualifications.
SHEPARD, C.J., and GIVAN, J., concur.
DICKSON, J., concurs and dissents with separate opinion.
DeBRULER, J., dissents with separate opinion.
. While a number of these cases raise issues concerning special judge appointments under Indiana Criminal Rule 13, see note 2, infra, each ultimately involves the validity of appointment of a judge pro tempore under Indiana Trial Rule 63(E). When the duly elected or appointed judge of a trial court is disabled or otherwise unavailable on a particular day, Trial Rule 63(E) permits the absent judge to appoint a judge pro tempore in his or her place:
Judge Pro Tempore When Judge is Unable to Attend. A judge who is unable to attend and preside at his court for any cause may appoint in writing a judge pro tempore to conduct the business of this court during his absence. The written appointment shall be entered in the records of the court. When duly sworn, or without being sworn if he is a judge of a court of this state, the judge pro tempore shall have the same authority during the period of his appointment as the judge he replaces.
. A "master commissioner" has the same powers and duties as are prescribed for a magistrate under Ind.Code §§ 33-4-7-4 through 33-4-7-8. Ind.Code § 33-5-35.1-8(f); Richardson v. State (1992), Ind.App., 602 N.E.2d 178, 179.
. Prior to January 1, 1994, Indiana Rule of Criminal Procedure 13 provided the exclusive manner for selecting special judges, alternately striking from a panel of three names. Effective January 1, 1994, Indiana Trial Rule 79 or 79.1 governs the selection of special judges in criminal actions and proceedings to enforce a statute defining an infraction. As mentioned in note 1, supra, these cases ultimately turn on issues related to the appointment of judges pro tempore, not special judges. However, many of the principles enunciated in this opinion would be applicable when the trial court officer purporting to enter a final appealable order or judgment is sitting as a special judge.
. Indeed, our first reaction to these cases was to allow them to stand, and so we denied transfer in Cassidy, Boushehry, and Capps v. State (1993), Ind.App., 625 N.E.2d 507 (mem.), trans. denied. It was only after a conflicting line of cases emerged in Dearman and Roby that we found it necessary to issue this opinion.

=== CASE 2212712 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:23.139184+00 ===

226 N.W.2d 795 (1975)
In re the MARRIAGE OF Hazel A. REED and John C. Reed.
Upon the Petition of Hazel A. REED, Appellant, and concerning John C. REED, Appellee.
No. 2-56587.
Supreme Court of Iowa.
March 19, 1975.
*796 Robert D. Hall, Des Moines, for appellant.
J. R. McManus, Des Moines, for appellee.
Heard by MOORE, C. J., and MASON, LeGRAND, REES and REYNOLDSON, JJ.
REYNOLDSON, Justice.
Petitioner brought this action for dissolution of an alleged common law marriage. Trial court found there was no marriage but adjudicated certain disputed property rights in respondent's favor. We affirm in part and reverse in part.
Our disposition of this question requires no extensive recital of facts. The testimony of both parties clearly establishes the alleged marriage arose, if at all, in California. Respondent pled and proved California does not recognize common law marriages alleged to have been contracted within its borders. Calif. Civil Code § 4100.
I. Under the traditional conflict of laws rule long followed in Iowa, the validity of a marriage is determined by the law of the state in which it was contracted. Boehm v. Rohlfs, 224 Iowa 226, 230, 276 N.W. 105, 108 (1937); Dudley v. Dudley, 151 Iowa 142, 145, 130 N.W. 785, 786 (1911). The rule is applicable to either validate or invalidate marriages. 52 Am.Jur.2d, Marriage § 80, pp. 930-931 and citations. If applied to the case sub judice, this rule would require a finding no valid marriage existed between these parties.
We are not unmindful, however, of the current turmoil in the conflict of laws area due in large part to the emergence of the "significant contacts" approach persuasively advocated by authors of Restatement (Second) of Conflicts. This court has, in another context, found the "significant contacts" approach more acceptable than traditional methods of conflict of laws analysis. Fuerste v. Bemis, 156 N.W.2d 831, 833 (Iowa 1968); see also Lindstrom v. Aetna Life Insurance Company, 203 N.W.2d 623, 628 (Iowa 1973). Were we to depart from the traditional rule here and adopt the "significant contacts" approach of Restatement (Second) of Conflicts § 283 (Validity of Marriage) petitioner would gain nothing.
California, as the state in which the alleged marriage arose, has an obvious interest in having its statutorily prescribed formalities observed by those claiming a California marriage. There is no public policy favoring common law marriages in Iowa. In re Estate of Fisher, 176 N.W.2d 801, 804 (Iowa 1970). Petitioner's own evidence indicates the parties actually cohabited in California for a longer period of time than in Iowa. Respondent, although an Iowa resident, seldom returned from his duties as a Merchant Marine.
Under either conflict rule California's law is applicable and necessitates a finding the parties were not married.
II. Petitioner raises two additional assignments for our consideration. It is first asserted trial court violated Rule of Civil Procedure 85(e) by shortening the time allowed for motions and pleadings without the necessary entry of an order. Assuming arguendo this rule was violated reversible error was not committed unless prejudice is shown. Lame v. Kramer, 259 Iowa 675, 681, 145 N.W.2d 597, 601 (1966). Although petitioner claims to have been denied sufficient time in which to move or plead certain contentions, the transcript shows petitioner dictated these matters into the record. Petitioner neither points to defects in her pleadings nor does she claim any other prejudice on appeal. Thus no reversible error is shown.
III. Petitioner's final assignment concerns the validity of trial court's order settling disputed property rights in respondent's favor. Although respondent requested *797 this relief in a portion of his answer incorrectly labeled a "cross-petition," trial court in overruling petitioner's motions initially assumed the type of relief prayed for was within the general powers to adjudicate property rights incident to a marriage dissolution conferred by § 598.21, The Code. But the power granted by that section arises only if a dissolution is granteda contingency not met in this case. Thorn v. Kelley, 257 Iowa 719, 725, 134 N.W.2d 545, 548 (1965); Johnson v. Levis, 240 Iowa 806, 807-808, 38 N.W.2d 115, 116 (1949); Oliver v. Oliver, 216 Iowa 57, 58, 248 N.W. 233, 234 (1933). Petitioner, presumably misled by the misnomer "cross-petition," failed to precisely raise this issue but such neglect cannot confer adjudicative power on a court which has been denied that power by the legislature.
IV. Respondent's brief was due before March 4, 1974. No order to enlarge time for filing was obtained. See Rule 345.1, R.C.P. On January 13, 1975, the date of submission of this case, respondent's brief and argument was filed. On the same date, petitioner filed a motion to strike it, which motion was submitted with the appeal and is now sustained. Of course, respondent, having failed to file a brief and argument within the time provided by the rule or order enlarging the period, was denied oral argument.
We affirm trial court's finding no marriage existed and reverse that portion of the decree relating to the parties' property rights. Costs are taxed to the respondent.
Affirmed in part, reversed in part.

=== CASE 9737961 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:38:33.815322+00 ===

Wilkie, C. J.
Does a county court have the power to order an operation to be performed to remove a kidney of an incompetent ward, under guardianship of the person, and transfer it to a sister where the dire need of the transfer is established but where no consent has been given by the incompetent or his guardian ad litem, nor has any benefit to the ward been shown?
That is the issue presented on appeal here. The trial court held that it did not have that power and we agree. The appellant, Janice Pescinski Lausier, on her own petition, was appointed guardian of the person of her brother, the respondent, Richard Pescinski. In 1958, Richard was declared incompetent and was committed to Winnebago State Hospital. He has been a committed *6mental patient since that date, classified as a schizophrenic, chronic, catatonic type.
On January 31, 1974, Janice Pescinski Lausier petitioned for permission to Dr. H. M. Kauffman to conduct tests to determine whether Richard Pescinski was a suitable donor for a kidney transplant for the benefit of his sister, Elaine Jeske. Elaine had both kidneys surgically removed in 1970, because she was suffering from kidney failure diagnosed as chronic glomerulone-phritis. In order to sustain her life, she was put on a dialysis machine, which functions as an artificial kidney. Because of the deterioration of Elaine, the petition contended that a kidney transplant was needed. Subsequent tests were completed establishing that Richard was a suitable donor, and a hearing was then held on the subject of whether permission should be granted to perform the transplant. The guardian ad litem would not give consent to the transplant and the county court held that it did not have the power to give consent for the operation.
At the time of the hearing Elaine was thirty-eight and her brother Richard was thirty-nine. Evidence was produced at the hearing that the other members of the Pescinski family had been ruled out as possible donors on the basis of either age or health. The father, aged seventy, and the mother, aged sixty-seven, were eliminated as possible donors by Dr. Kauffman because, as a matter of principle, he would not perform the operation on a donor over sixty. A similar rationale was applied by Dr. Kauffman as to all of the six minor children of Elaine, the doctor concluding that he “would not personally use their kidneys” as a matter of his “own moral conviction.” Mrs. Jeske’s sister, Mrs. Lausier, was excluded as a donor because she has diabetes. Another brother, Ralph Pescinski, testified that he was forty-three years old, had been married twenty years *7and had ten children, nine of whom remained at home. He is a dairy farmer and did not care to be a donor because there would be nobody to take over his farm and he felt he had a duty to his family to refuse. He further testified that he had a stomach disorder which required a special diet and had a rupture on his left side. He had been to see Dr. Capati at the Neillsville Clinic, who told him he should not get involved and that his family should come first.
The testimony showed that Richard was suffering from schizophrenia — catatonic type, and that while he was in contact with his environment there was marked indifference in his behavior. Dr. Hoffman, the medical director at the Good Samaritan Home, West Bend, Wisconsin, testified that in layman’s terms Richard’s mental disease was a flight from reality. He estimated Richard’s mental capacity to be age twelve. No evidence in the record indicates that Richard consented to the transplant. Absent that consent, there is no question that the trial court’s conclusion that it had no power to approve the operation must be sustained.
“A guardian of the person has the care of the ward’s person and must look to the latter’s health, education, and support.” 1 The guardian must act, if at all, “loyally in the best interests of his ward.” 2 There is absolutely no evidence here that any interests of the ward will be served by the transplant.
As far as the court’s own power to authorize the operation, we are satisfied that the law in Wisconsin is clearly to the contrary. There is no statutory authority given the county court to authorize a kidney transplant or any other surgical procedure on a living person. We decline to adopt the concept of “substituted judgment” which was specifically approved by the Kentucky Court *8of Appeals in Strunk v. Strunk.3 In that case, the Kentucky court held a court of equity had the power to permit the removal of a kidney from an incompetent ward of the state upon the petition of his committee who was also his mother. Apparently a committee in Kentucky is like a guardian in this state. The Kentucky Court of Appeals authorized the operation based on the application of the doctrine of substituted judgment. However, the court also held that neither the committee nor the county court had the power to authorize the operation, in the absence of a showing that the life of the ward was in jeopardy — only the Court of Appeals had the power. In the instant case the county court had no power to authorize the procedure, and the question is whether this supreme court can by using the doctrine of substituted judgment.
As the dissenting opinion in Strunk v. Strunk points out, “substituted judgment” is nothing more than an application of the maxim that equity will speak for one who cannot speak for himself. Historically, the substituted judgment doctrine was used to allow gifts of the property of an incompetent. If applied literally, it would allow a trial court, or this court, to change the designation on a life insurance policy or make an election for an incompetent widow, without the requirement of a statute authorizing these acts and contrary to prior decisions of this court.4
We conclude that the doctrine should not be adopted in this state.
We, therefore, must affirm the lower court’s decision that it was without power to approve the operation, and we further decide that there is no such power in this court. An incompetent particularly should have his own interests protected. Certainly no advantage should be taken of him. In the absence of real consent on his part, *9and in a situation where no benefit to him has been established, we fail to find any authority for the county court, or this court, to approve this operation.
By the Court. — Order affirmed. No costs on this appeal.
39 Am. Jur. 2d, Guardian and Ward, p. 60, sec. 68.
Guardianship of Nelson (1963), 21 Wis. 2d 24, 32, 123 N. W. 2d 505. Cf. sec. 880.19 (6) (b), Stats.
(Ky. 1969), 445 S. W. 2d 145.
Kay v. Erickson (1932), 209 Wis. 147, 244 N. W. 625; Van Steenwyck v. Washburn (1884), 59 Wis. 483, 17 N. W. 289.

=== CASE 9737962 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:38:33.819918+00 ===

Day, J.
(dissenting). I would reverse the decision in this case. The majority of the court holds that in the absence of a showing of “benefit” to the incompetent in this case or proof of consent on his part, the trial court and this court lack authority to authorize a kidney transplant operation to be performed on him to save the life of his sister. I disagree.
I think the court as a court of equity does have authority to permit the kidney transplant operation requested in the petition of the guardian of Richard Pescinski. I agree with the reasoning of the Court of Appeals of the state of Kentucky wherein that court said:
“The specific question involved upon this appeal is: Does a court of equity have the power to permit a kidney to be removed from an incompetent ward of the state upon petition of his committee, who is also his mother, for the purpose of being transplanted into the body of his brother, who is dying of a fatal kidney disease? We are of the opinion it does.” Strunk v. Strunk (Ky. 1969), 445 S. W. 2d 145, 35 A. L. R. 3d 683.
That case involved the authorization of a transplant from a twenty-seven-year-old incompetent to his twenty-eight-year-old brother. The court in that case did find, based on the testimony of a psychiatrist, that while the incompetent had the mental age of six, it would be of benefit to him to keep his brother alive so that his brother could visit him on occasion; I would regard this as pretty thin soup on which to base a decision as to whether or not the donee is to be permitted to live. In the case before us, if the incompetent brother should happily recover from his mental illness, he would undoubtedly *10be happy to learn that the transplant of one of his kidneys to his sister saved her life. This at least would be a normal response and hence the transplant is not without benefit to him.
The guardian ad litem for the incompetent in this case has interposed strong objection to the transplant from Richard Peseinski to his sister, who at the time of the determination, was a thirty-nine-year-old mother of six minor children and who, as we were informed on February 24th at the time of oral arguments, in attempting to live on a bi-weekly “washing” of her blood through a kidney dialysis machine has now deteriorated to the point of confinement in a wheelchair. We were advised that without a kidney transplant death for her is quite imminent. The brother, on the other hand, the incompetent, is in good health. The medical testimony is that the removal of one of his kidneys would be of minimal risk to him and that he would function normally on one kidney for the rest of his natural life, as do thousands of others in similar circumstances. The guardian ad litem argues strenuously that for us to permit this transplant is to bring back memories of the Dachau concentration camp in Nazi Germany and medical experiments on unwilling subjects, many of whom died or were horribly maimed. I fail to see the analogy— this is not an experiment conducted by mad doctors but a well-known and accepted surgical procedure necessitated in this case to save the life of the incompetent’s sister. Such a transplant would be authorized, not by a group of doctors operating behind a barbed-wire stockade but only after a full hearing in an American court of law. To avoid the concerns expressed by the guardian ad litem, there are certain definite standards which could and should be imposed. First of all, a strong showing should be made that without the kidney transplant the proposed donee or recipient stands to suffer death. This is certainly the evidence here. Secondly, that reasonable *11steps have been taken to try and acquire a kidney from other sources and the record is clear that such attempt was made here. Because of the fact that the donee has had six children, she has built up certain chemical resistance to the receipt of foreign tissue into her body which can be overcome only by a transplant from one close to her by blood such as a brother or sister. The testimony showed the impracticality of acquiring a kidney from either her other brother or her sister. No suitable kidney from a cadaver has been found since her kidneys were removed in 1970. The next showing that should be made is that the incompetent proposed donor is closely related by blood to the proposed donee, such -as a brother or sister, which of course is the case here. Showing should be made that the donor, if competent, would most probably consent because of the normal ties of family. Here, the trial court specifically found “. . . the conclusion would appear to be inescapable that the ward [the incompetent proposed donor] would so consent and that such authorization should be granted.” 1 Another showing should be that the proposed incompetent donor is in good health and that was shown here. And lastly, that the operation is one of minimal risk to the donor and that the donor could function normally on one kidney following such operation. The medical testimony is all to the effect that the donor would undergo minimal risk and would be able to function normally on one kidney. In fact, the testimony is that a person can function on as little as one tenth of one normal kidney.
With these guidelines the fear expressed that institutions for the mentally ill will merely become storehouses for spare parts for people on the outside is completely *12unjustified. I agree with the trial court that if the brother here were competent in all probability he would be willing to consent to the transplant to save his sister’s life. For him it would be a short period of discomfort which would not affect his ability either to enjoy life or his longevity.
The majority opinion says there is no showing of consent by the incompetent. Dr. William C. P. Hoffman, medical director of the Good Samaritan Home where the incompetent is a patient, testified that one with the mental condition of the incompetent has no lucid intervals and that his reasoning is completely impaired in making decisions. The doctor testified the incompetent would not be aware of what the proceedings involved and testified the incompetent is “insane seven days a week.” From such a record it is difficult to see how one could ever get a meaningful “consent” from the incompetent in this case.
The majority opinion would forever condemn the incompetent to be always a receiver, a taker, but never a giver. For in holding that only those things which financially or physically benefit the incompetent may be done by the court, he is forever excluded from doing the decent thing, the charitable thing. The British courts have not so held. Two British cases cited in Strunk permitted the estate of an incompetent to provide a pension for a faithful servant in one instance and in another to help an indigent brother — this by the device known as “substituted judgment” where the court in effect does for the incompetent what it is sure he would do himself if he had the power to act. This approach gives the incompetent the benefit of the doubt, endows him with the finest qualities of his humanity, assumes the goodness of his nature instead of assuming the opposite.
The equities in this case favor taking the action which may save this mother’s life.
The trial court concluded, however, that such an authorization would be analogous to giving away an incompetent’s property and since there was no “benefit” to him the court had no authority to act.

=== CASE 9737963 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:38:39.632461+00 ===

Givan, J.
This is an action in quo warranto brought by the appellants to oust the appellee from the office of Mayor of the City of Covington, Indiana. This appeal is brought directly to this Court under the authority of Burns’ Ind. Stat. 4-214.
The facts of this case are uncontested and are as follows:
*413The appellee, Donald J. Marr, was elected Mayor of the City of Covington, Fountain County, Indiana, in the General Election of November 5, 1963. He subsequently qualified and assumed the duties of said office on January 1, 1964. In the General Municipal Election of November 7, 1967, Appellee Marr was a candidate for re-election and appellant, Donald Youngblood, was the opposing candidate. As a result of the election conducted on November 7, 1967, the appellant and the appellee received an equal number of votes, each receiving 724 votes.
The Canvassing Board of Fountain County thereafter certified to the Clerk of the Fountain Circuit Court that no person had been elected to fill the office of Mayor of Covington by reason of the tie vote, which fact was certified by the Clerk to the Common Council of Covington. The Common Council upon receiving this certification decided at their regular meeting on November 20, 1967, to hold a special meeting on December 2, 1967, for the purpose of taking such action as might be required by law concerning the office of Mayor of Covington. Notice of this special meeting was published in the local newspaper on November 29,1967.
On December 2, 1967, at its special meeting the Council appointed the appellee, Donald J. Marr, to the office of Mayor for the four year term commencing January 1, 1968. A certificate of election was issued to Appellee Marr, who qualified and who continued in the office of Mayor of the City of Covington as the elected incumbent on January 1, 1968, and has continued in that office since that date.
In the meantime a majority of the newly elected Council held a meeting without notice in the morning of January 1, 1968, to determine what action they should take with regard to the office of Mayor. At the meeting Councilman Romine was elected Mayor pro tern pending publication of notice for a meeting of the Council to be conducted on January 11, 1968, for the purpose of selecting a Mayor.
*414On January 11, the new council met and allegedly appointed Appellant Youngblood to the office of Mayor. Appellants subsequently filed their quo warranto action to determine who had legal title to the office of Mayor. The Appellee Marr filed answer in general denial with five additional paragraphs of answer and a cross-complaint for injunction seeking to quiet title to the office of Mayor and to enjoin Appellant Young-blood from exercising the duties of the office of Mayor.
Upon trial by court in the Fountain Circuit Court a decision was rendered by The Honorable Howard A. Sommer, Special Judge, whereby the appellants took nothing, the court declared no vacancy existing in the office of Mayor and the appellee was declared to be the duly qualified Mayor of Covington.
Upon the foregoing facts, the appellants have prosecuted this appeal citing as error that the decision of the trial court is contrary to law.
The parties agree that the determination of this case turns upon the application of the following statutes and constitutional provisions which were in effect at the time of the election in question.
Burns’ Indiana Statutes Annotated, § 29-5213 (1969 Repl.) reads as follows:
“If two [2] or more persons shall have the highest and equal number of votes for a single office to be filled by the voters of such county, or city, such county board shall declare that no person is elected to fill such office, and shall certify the same in the statement above provided, and, when filed, the clerk shall certify the fact to the tribunal whose duty it is to fill vacancies in such office or to issue writ of election to fill the same, as the case may require. [Acts 1945, ch. 208, § 296, p. 680; 1947, ch. 120, § 33, p. 364.]”
Burns’ Indiana Statutes Annotated, § 48-1246 (1963 Repl.) reads as follows:
“In the event of a vacancy occurring in an elective office of any .city except the office of mayor or councilman and city judge, by reason of death, resignation or other causes *415or in case of disability of any such officer to perform the duties of his office, it shall be the duty of the mayor or acting mayor to fill such vacancy by appointment for the unexpired term subject to the approval of the common council. In case of a vacancy in the office of mayor, in cities other than the first class, the city comptroller in all cities having such office shall act as mayor: Provided, That such officer while acting as mayor shall not perform any duties as comptroller but shall appoint a suitable person to act as comptroller during such time. In .cities of the first class, in case of a vacancy in the office of mayor, the vacancy shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term by the city council from its own elected members. The city clerk shall call an election which shall be held within ten [10] days of said vacancy. Until the vacancy is filled the president of the city council shall act as the interim mayor. The city clerk shall preside at the election and shall vote but only in the event of a tie vote among the members of the city council.
“The votes of a majority of the members of the city council shall be required for election except that one-half of such votes, plus the vote of the city clerk, shall be required in the event of a tie vote among the members of the city council. In the event of the death, resignation or removal of any city judge, such appointment shall be made by the governor of the state. In the event of the death, resignation or disability of the city comptroller and in cities not having a city comptroller the common council shall designate one [1] of its members to act as mayor pro tempore until a special meeting of the council to be held not less than ten [10] days nor more than fifteen [15] days thereafter, at which special meeting the council shall elect a suitable person to fill out the unexpired term of the mayor. Notice of such special meeting shall be given by the city clerk by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation printed in such city. In case of a vacancy in the office of councilman from death, resignation or other .cause, the common council shall fill such vacancy at a special meeting to be held at a time not less than two [2] nor more than fifteen [15] days after such vacancy is discovered by such council of which special meeting notice shall be given by the clerk as "herein required when the council is to fill a vacancy in the office of mayor. All persons so filling vacancies in elective city offices shall hold only during the unexpired term of any such officer and shall during such incumbency be entitled to the salary thereto attached. However, in any city where there shall be a tie vote for any office, such office *416shall be deemed to be vacant and shall be filled as in this act provided: Provided, however, In all cities of the second, third, fourth and fifth class where there shall be a tie vote in the common council to fill any vacancy, the mayor of such city shall cast the deciding vote. [Acts 1905, ch. 129, § 45, p. 219; 1909, ch. 188, § 2, p. 454; 1955, ch. 344, § 1, p. 1104; 1963, ch. 153, §1, p. 178.]”
Burns’ Indiana Statutes Annotated, § 29-4315 (1969 Repl.) reads as follows:
“The several city officials to be elected under the provisions of this act [§§ 29-4312 — 29-4317] shall take office at twelve o’clock noon on the first day of January, 1948, and thereafter such city officers shall take office at twelve o’clock noon on the first day of January next following their election. Such officers shall serve for four [4] years and until their successors are elected and qualified. [Acts 1945, ch. 229, §4, p. 1071.]”
The foregoing statutes must be interpreted in the light of the following sections of the Indiana Constitution:
Article 6, § 9, reads as follows:
“Vacancies in county, township, and town offices, shall be filled in such manner as may be prescribed by law.”
Article 15, § 3, reads as follows:
“Whenever it is provided in this Constitution, or in any law which may be hereafter passed, that any officer, other than a member of the General Assembly, shall hold his office for any given term, the same shall be construed to mean, that such officer shall hold his office for such term, and until his successor shall have been elected and qualified.”
The question is whether or not the situation created by a tie vote did under Burns’ § 48-1246 create a vacancy in the office of Mayor of Covington or whether the provisions of Article 15, § 3 of the Indiana Constitution as above set out, require that the incumbent mayor, who is the appellee in this case, continue to hold his office until a successor is elected and qualified.
It is true that Article 6, § 9 of the Indiana Constitution as above quoted, provides that vacancies shall be filled in such *417manner as may be prescribed by law. However, we must determine whether or not a vacancy actually occurred in the office of Mayor of Covington as a result of the tie election.
Under the foregoing statute, Burns’ § 29-4315, and under Article 15, § 3 of the Indiana Constitution, an incumbent mayor would hold office until his successor is elected and qualified.
In support of their position that the court decision was contrary to law the appellants state that it is well settled that the legislature has the power to provide that a tie vote for a public office may be resolved by means other than by a new election. In support of this proposition they cite several cases, the first of which is Johnston et al. v. State ex rel. Sefton (1891), 128 Ind. 16, 27 N. E. 422. In that case the applicable statute provided for the tie election to be broken by the casting of lots. The question was raised as to whether or not the casting of lots for an office was in conflict with Article 2, § 13 of the Constitution, which provides that all elections by the people shall be by ballot. The court held that a statute requiring the casting of lots was not in conflict with this particular provision of the Constitution. There was no question raised or discussed in the case concerning the holdover provision of our Constitution. This case merely stands for the proposition that the legislature may provide for the determination of an election which ends in a tie vote. It is not authority for the proposition that the legislature may create a “vacancy” where the Constitution expressly provides that no “vacancy” exists.
Appellants next cite the case of Wills et al. v. State ex rel. Hughes (1891), 128 Ind. 359, 27 N. E. 423. This case presents the identical question as that presented in the Johnston case and cites the Johnston case as the sole authority for the above stated proposition.
Appellants next cite the case of Kimerer et al. v. State ex rel. Black (1891), 129 Ind. 589, 29 N. E. 178. This case also *418cites both the Johnston and Wills cases for the sole proposition that an election board may be compelled by mandate to reassemble and,to determine a tie election by lot. Again, there is no question concerning the power of the legislature to create a vacancy notwithstanding the holdover provisions of our Constitution.
An examination of the history of the development of Burns § 48-1246 discloses the original statute was passed in 1905. At that time it did not contain the proviso concerning the creation of a vacancy by tie vote. In 1906 the Supreme Court was called upon to interpret the language of the statute in the case of State ex rel. Jett et al. v. Ives et al. (1906), 167 Ind. 13, 78 N. E. 225. In that case this Court specifically held that Article 15, § 3 of the Indiana Constitution, applies to municipal officers as well as state officers and further held that the occurrence of a tie vote does not create a vacancy in the office in question. The legislature apparently attempting to respond to the Court’s decision in the Ives case in 1909 amended the statute by adding the proviso that a tie vote would be deemed to be a vacancy. It is appellants’ contention that this amendment was a proper function of the legislature and thus validly overcomes the objection raised by the Court in the Ives case. With this we do not agree. As previously pointed out, the Constitution expressly provides that an incumbent will hold office until his successor shall have been elected and qualified. Thus by express constitutional mandate so long as there is an incumbent in the office, no vacancy exists, and although as above pointed out, the legislature has every right, and, in fact, a duty to provide for a manner in which to settle a tie vote situation, this does not mean that it has the constitutional right to say that a vacancy occurs, when by the express language of the Constitution none in fact exists. We, therefore, hold that the language in the Ives case is just as applicable today as it was in 1906, and that the attempt by the legislature to create a “vacancy” in a public office by reason of a tie vote is of no force and effect.
*419The appellants also cite the case of State ex rel. May v. Hall (1909), 173 Ind. 145, 89 N. E. 855, and state that this Court squarely addressed itself to this problem in that case. However, an examination of the Hall case discloses that there the Court was faced with the filling of a vacancy in the office of road supervisor for a township district. There the statute expressly provided that “* * * when there shall be a failure to elect a supervisor for any district, and also in case a vacancy shall occur in such office * * *, the trustee of the township * * *, shall appoint a supervisor * * In that case the Court held that under the express statutory provision it was the duty of the trustee to make the appointment in the case of a tie vote. We see no parallel between the Hall case and the case at bar.
For the reasons above stated we hold that the trial court was correct in finding that no vacancy existed in the office of Mayor of Covington, and that the appellee, Donald J. Marr, continues as Mayor of the City of Covington, Indiana.
The trial court is, therefore, in all things affirmed.
Hunter, C.J., and Arterburn, J., concur; Jackson, J., concurs in result, and DeBruler, J., concurs with opinion.

=== CASE 2212827 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:24.420571+00 ===

233 Cal.App.2d 822 (1965)
AMERICAN OIL SERVICE, INC., Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
HOPE OIL COMPANY et al., Defendants and Appellants.
Civ. No. 27961.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Four.
Apr. 26, 1965.
Brown & Grisham and Roy J. Brown for Defendants and Appellants.
Allen & Wilson and Richard G. Wilson for Plaintiff and Respondent.
JEFFERSON, J.
This appeal is taken from the judgment rendered in the second trial of an action seeking declaratory relief with respect to a written agreement providing, for the sale to plaintiff, American Oil Service, by defendants, Hope Oil Company and May and Richards, of a one-half interest in three oil well servicing rigs.
[1] In the first trial, the court entered findings that plaintiff was entitled to a half interest in the equipment but was not entitled to reimbursement for overpayments made by it, the court finding that such payments were voluntarily made. Plaintiff appealed, the judgment was reversed (American Oil Service v. Hope Oil Co., 194 Cal.App.2d 581 [15 Cal.Rptr. 209]) on the ground that the evidence was insufficient to justify a finding that plaintiff had such knowledge of the facts as would have rendered the payments voluntary, and a retrial was ordered. The doctrine, "the law of the case," is not applicable to the questions decided therein because such determinations related to the sufficiency of evidence presented on questions of fact where the sufficiency depended upon the credibility of witnesses. The doctrine of the law of the case does not foreclose redetermination of such questions. (Wallace v. Sisson, 114 Cal. 42 [45 P. 1000]; 3 Witkin, Cal. Procedure (1954)  213, pp. 2424-2426, citing cases.) However, as we point out below, the decision at the first trial, and the implication of the opinion on the first appeal, are not without significance on the present appeal.
A resume of the evidence is as follows: Plaintiff is engaged in the business of servicing oil wells. For a number of years prior to March 1952, under an oral agreement, defendants had furnished, on a rental basis, the oil well servicing rigs plaintiff used in its business. As rent for the use of the rigs plaintiff paid defendants one-half of the earnings of the rigs (the consideration plaintiff charged its customers, which was separate from the charges for the labor it furnished) *825 and defendants, at their sole expense, kept the equipment in repair and paid all taxes and insurance costs thereon.
After numerous drafts were prepared by one John Mixon, an employee of defendants, and rejected by plaintiff, the parties entered into a written agreement in December 1953, the terms of which were made retroactive to March 1, 1952.
The portions of the new contract pertinent to this appeal are as follows:
"The Party of the First Part [plaintiff] agrees to pay to the Parties of the Second Part [defendants] one-half of all gross money earned for all work done [by the equipment herein involved]. ..."
"Party of the First Part agrees to pay one-half of the repair expenses on the beforementioned equipment and Party of the First Part agrees to operate the equipment as carefully as humanly possible. Party of the First Part shall have the duty of seeing that proper repairs are made."
"* * *"
"When Party of the First Part has paid to the Parties of the Second Part one-half of the repair, together with $2,000.00 per year for insurance and $3,000.00 per year paid [sic] the Parties of the Second Part for services rendered by their officers and employees in over- seeing their interests in the above equipment and $130,000.00, Parties of the Second Part agree to deliver to the Party of the First Part a one- half interest in the equipment listed."
In the performance of the new agreement plaintiff saw that the necessary repairs were made. Plaintiff was billed and paid for such repairs and then accounted to defendants for the cost thereof. Defendants then remitted to plaintiff one-half of such cost. In addition to the billings showing the gross amount it had expended for repairs, each month plaintiff sent defendants a statement setting forth the earnings of the rigs and the total amount due defendants as its share. A check for such amount accompanied the statement. Neither the monthly statements nor plaintiff's remittance checks accompanying them set forth anything regarding the purchase price of the half interest in the rigs, and, prior to the present dispute, there was no communication or discussion as to the balance due on the purchase price. It appears that neither party kept a ledger account which clearly reflected this information.
The first dispute between the parties arose in July or August 1958, when plaintiff's president and sole stockholder, *826 Mr. Van Hooser, stated to Mr. Richards, one of defendants, that the contract was but $2,600 away from fulfillment and that he wished to pay this amount and thereby become the owner of a one-half interest in the rigs. Mr. Richards disagreed, contending that approximately $45,000 remained to be paid on the contract. Subsequently, however, upon examination of its books, plaintiff determined that it had fulfilled its obligations under the agreement nearly 13 months earlier, in May 1957.
Mr. Van Hooser and plaintiff's bookkeeper both testified that they failed to discover that the contract had been fulfilled because of an oversight on the bookkeeper's part, which oversight was caused by a split accounting system adopted by plaintiff at the request of defendant Richards; that, after the written agreement was signed, defendant Richards had requested plaintiff, for income tax purposes, to set up its books in such a way that they showed one-half of the payments being made towards payment on the equipment and the other one-half "as use of the equipment and to add to the amount due on the principal," $5,000 a year (for insurance and supervision). In Richards' testimony he denied making such a request.
In bringing this action for declaratory relief, plaintiff contended that it had fulfilled its obligations under the contract on May 31, 1957, and was entitled to a one-half interest in the oil well servicing rigs at that time, and, further, that it was entitled to a refund of overpayments amounting to $31,588.13 made to defendants between June 1, 1957, and August 31, 1958, because such payments were made under a mistake of fact. Defendants, on the other hand, contended that, before plaintiff was entitled to a one- half interest in the rigs, it was obligated, under the proper construction of the contract, to pay for all repairs, rather than one-half, and that on August 31, 1958, $30,037.94 remained due. Defendants further maintained that, if the trial court adopted plaintiff's construction of the contract, defendants were still entitled to keep the overpayments, because the mistake urged by plaintiff was a mistake of law and not of fact; even if the mistake was one of fact that plaintiff cannot recover because of a detrimental change of position by defendants; and finally, that defendants were entitled to the overpayments as tenants in common of the rigs. The parties stipulated in the pretrial conference order that, if defendants were not entitled to the payments after May 31, 1957, the overpayment would be in the amount of $31,588.13. *827
The trial court, in awarding judgment for plaintiff, found that, under the terms of the contract, plaintiff was required to pay but one-half of the repair expenses, and that plaintiff had completely performed its part of the contract as of May 31, 1957, and, on said date, became entitled to a one- half interest in the equipment described therein. The court further found that plaintiff did, due to a mistake of fact, continue to make payments as provided for in the contract and that the amount of the overpayments was in the sum of $31,588.13. Such amount, the court found, was subject however, to an equitable setoff in the sum of $18,966.77, which was found to be the reasonable value of the use by the plaintiff of defendants' one-half interest in the equipment from June 1, 1957, through August 31, 1958; and, in the sum of $902.50, which the court found represented one-half of the taxes and licenses paid by defendants during the same period. The net amount recoverable was found to be $11,711.86 with interest at the rate of 7 per cent per annum.
I.
[2a] Defendants contend that the trial court erroneously interpreted the provisions of the contract establishing the formula for determining the purchase price for the one-half interest in the equipment, "in that the court excluded from the purchase price the one-half of the repair expense paid by defendants." Defendants, in effect, maintain that, notwithstanding the fact that they had reimbursed plaintiff for one-half of the repair expenses paid by plaintiff, they were entitled to the return of this amount and that plaintiff would not become entitled to its half interest until they had been reimbursed for all the repair expenses. To support this argument, defendants direct our attention to the clause in the contract which reads, "When the Party of the First part [plaintiff] has paid to the Parties of the Second part [defendants] one half of the repair, ... Parties of the Second Part agree to deliver ... a one-half interest in the equipment listed." Defendants argue that plaintiff has not paid "to the Parties of the Second part one-half of the repair," that in actuality plaintiff has never paid any repair expenses to defendants.
There is no dispute that, as a matter of procedure in the performance of the contract, plaintiff paid the persons who repaired the equipment and then was reimbursed one-half by defendants. Plaintiff thus did not literally, as the contract stated, pay its one-half of the repair to defendants. *828
As an aid in discovering the true intent of the parties to the contract, the trial court permitted parol evidence from each side concerning the circumstances surrounding the making of the contract. Mr. Van Hooser testified as follows concerning his conversation with Mr. Richards during the negotiations leading up to the drafting of the contract: "I made an appointment to go down to his house, and I went down there and I met him. My son was with me and we went down there and talked it over, what the deal would be, and we came to this agreement: That they would own the rigs, and when he had taken out of the income--when I paid him $130,000 by paying him one-half of the income of the rigs, then half of the equipment would be mine. I will never forget him saying that. He said, 'You now own a half-interest in the Gin Pole.' One-half of the rig was supposed to belong to the American Oil Service when he had received that much money. He was to pay one-half of the repair bills and I was to pay the other half and all the repair bills was [sic] billed to the American Oil SErvice and in return he paid me back half of it by sending me a check."
Mr. Richards' testimony on this subject was as follows:
"When we [defendants] received out of our one-half of the returns that [sic] Mr. Van Hooser received from the rental of the equipment, when we received sufficient to pay for the costs set up together with all of our expenses of every nature, when we received that amount, he was to have the one-half interest in the equipment. ... The substance of that agreement was that we were to receive in addition to $130,000--that amount was not fixed at that time, but whatever the cost setup was--we were to receive that together with all of the expenses of every nature that we incurred, to come out of our one-half of the return that Mr. Van Hooser received from the oil companies."
We sustain the finding of the trial court that Mr. Van Hooser's testimony was more consistent with the language of the contract and with the parties' own contemporaneous construction thereof, and, therefore, sustain the interpretation of the contract in favor of the plaintiff.
[3] It is a well settled rule that a construction of a legal instrument, based on extrinsic evidence, should be followed by an appellate court, if that interpretation is reasonable. (1 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (1960) 7th ed., p. 246, and cases there cited.) In this case, two trial courts have agreed that the contract should be interpreted in accordance with the *829 contention of the plaintiff; and the decision on the first appeal, although, as we have said, not the law of the case, still accepted that interpretation as being reasonable.
[2b] In addition to the testimony of Mr. Van Hooser (which the trial court was free to accept over that of Mr. Richards), several factors support the reasonableness of the interpretation adopted by the lower court:
(1) If plaintiff was, in the end and as a condition precedent to acquiring a one-half interest in the equipment, to pay all of the repair charges, it was a curious circumambulation for defendants to have reimbursed plaintiff for one-half of these repairs as they were made. In discussing the provision of the contract dealing with the payment of supervisory expenses, defendant Richards testified that he had insisted, during the performance of the contract, that defendants' share of the expenses for supervision be deducted by plaintiff before plaintiff made its monthly payment of defendants' one-half share of the earnings of the equipment, instead of requiring defendants to remit separately their share of such expenses. Richards testified that he objected to the latter procedure "because there was no sense in adding something to have me pay it back later."
(2) While the contract is specific that plaintiff was to "have the duty of seeing that proper repairs were made," the only contractual provision in that paragraph of the contract relating to payment (as distinguished from "seeing to"--i.e., ordering) is that plaintiff agrees to pay to defendants one-half of such cost. It would have been consistent with the literal contractual provisions for plaintiff, acting under the authority conferred, to have ordered repairs on the credit of defendants, to be billed by the repairmen directly to defendants, with plaintiff thereafter reimbursing defendants for one-half of the bills so sent to defendants and paid by them. That the parties, in practice, did not follow this procedure does not mean that they could not; or that they did not contemplate such a procedure as possible. Had this procedure been followed in practice, the language of the next paragraph (herein relied on by defendants), would merely have implemented the earlier clause stating that plaintiff was to bear one-half of the repair costs and pay that share before it would be the owner of a one-half interest in the equipment.
(3) Until plaintiff completed its full payment of the $130,000 purchase price, the equipment belonged to defendants. It could have been subject to liens by repairmen if their bills *830 were not paid. Had this occurred, defendants would have been forced to pay the bills, in full, in order to protect their property. Again, the clause relied on by defendants was consistent with a legitimate protection against such an event.
(4) The contract reached its final form in December 1953; but it was retroactive to March of 1952. Under the agreement that it superseded, defendants had paid all of the repair charges. If any of those charges remained unadjusted in December, the provision in question, again, protected defendants and insured that the retroactivity would be fully accomplished.
We do not hold that the factors just discussed necessarily compelled a construction in favor of plaintiff. We recite them merely to show that the construction adopted by the trial court was not an unreasonable one. Since the trial court was reasonable in its interpretation, we are bound by its decision.
II.
Defendants next contend that the finding of the lower court that plaintiff overpaid the purchase price as the result of a mistake of fact is not supported by the evidence. It is defendants' position that, if any mistake was made, it was a mistake of law. [4] "A mistake of law occurs where a person is truly acquainted with the existence or nonexistence of facts, but is ignorant of, or comes to an erroneous conclusion as to, their legal effect. ... [5] A payment made by reason of a wrong construction of the terms of a contract is made under a mistake of law." (70 C.J.S., Payment,  156c, p. 366.) It is clear that money voluntarily paid with full knowledge of all the facts cannot be recovered back by the payor. (Western etc. Oil Co. v. Title Ins. & Trust Co., 92 Cal.App.2d 257, 266 [206 P.2d 643]; Texas Co. v. Todd, 19 Cal.App.2d 174, 187- 189 [64 P.2d 1180].) [6] But money paid under the mistake of fact may be recovered back, however negligent the payor may have been in making the mistake, unless payment has caused such a change in the position of the payee that it would be unjust to require him to refund the payments made. (National Bank of California v. Miner, 167 Cal. 532 [140 P. 27]; Doyle v. Matheron, 148 Cal.App.2d 521 [306 P.2d 913].) [7] Overpayments caused by clerical or accounting errors and oversights have been treated as overpayments made under a mistake of fact. (National Bank of California v. Miner, supra, 167 Cal. 532; Doyle v. Matheron, supra, 148 Cal.App.2d 521; Dunham v. McDonald, 34 Cal.App. 744 [168 P. 1063]; Burckard v. Smith, 80 Cal.App. 104 [251 P. 663].)
[8] The uncontradicted evidence presented at the trial *831 establishes that the overpayments by plaintiff from June 1, 1957, through August 30, 1958, were made under a mistake of fact in the nature of an oversight on the part of plaintiff's accountant. The evidence, in the form of the testimony of Van Hooser and plaintiff's accountant, M. T. Pihlstrom, and the statement prepared by Pihlstrom showing $2,625.13 owing as of June 30, 1958 (defendants' Exhibit A), shows that plaintiff's books were set up so that one-half of the money paid to defendants was attributed to "rental expense" and the other half to capital expenditure. (Pihlstrom testified that defendant Richards had requested that the books be set up in such manner. Richards, in his testimony, denied this, but there was no dispute as to the fact the books were in fact so arranged.) In this split system of bookkeeping, the contract price of $130,000 was split and one-half thereof--$65,000--was set up on the books as the purchase price. The mistake occurred when Pihlstrom failed to split the $5,000 per year for insurance and supervision which was added to the purchase price each year. With the erroneous addition of $5,000 a year rather than $2,500, plaintiff's books on June 30, 1958, erroneously showed that $2,635.13 remained to be paid.
III.
Defendants maintain that, even if the payments were made under a mistake of fact, (1) plaintiff should be estopped to assert it because defendants altered their position to their detriment by reason of the overpayments they received; (2) it was error for the court to fix the amount of recovery at a sum far greater than the evidence established as reasonable; and (3) the court erroneously failed to find that the gross earnings from the equipment, as of the time the plaintiff had paid for its one-half interest, were in the nature of rental income which, under the laws of cotenancy, defendants were entitled to keep.
The first of these points involves merely an argument as to the weight of the evidence, and as to inferences to be drawn from the evidence--matters on which the trial court's findings adverse to defendants are binding here. For reasons set out below, we conclude that the third point is without merit, but that, as contended in the second point, a modification of the monetary award is required.
[9] In determining the amount of money to be awarded to plaintiff in this case, it should be observed that what the court was required to do was to make an equitable adjustment *832 for a situation which arose because of a mutual mistake. Because of this mistake, plaintiff paid defendants $31,588.13 which it was not required to pay under the contract. By reason of the same mistake, plaintiff had the use of the machinery for 15 months. During this period plaintiff was a half-owner of the machinery. When the court assists plaintiff to correct the mistake and recover back what it paid, the court must also require plaintiff to do equity by paying for what plaintiff received by mistake. Plaintiff attempts to escape this equitable adjustment by reliance upon the rule that one cotenant of real property cannot, in the absence of agreement, recover rent from the other cotenant. (See Nevarov v. Nevarov, 117 Cal.App.2d 581, 585 [256 P.2d 330].) But this is not the ordinary case of a party who knowingly permits his cotenant to use the common property. In our case plaintiff is asking the court to relieve it of the consequences of a mistake. The mistake was mutual and each party received something the other would not have given if the facts had been known. The court should not relieve the plaintiff without also relieving defendants of the consequences of the same mistake.
There is no scientific or mathematically precise formula for measuring the value of the use of defendants' half-interest in this indivisible property during the 15-month period from June 1, 1957, through August 31, 1958. The contract under which the parties dealt prior to June 1, 1957, is some indication of value, but it does not provide an exact standard because the payments made by plaintiff to defendants under the contract included the purchase of an ownership interest as well as compensation for use.
Under the contract, defendants, as full owners of the machinery, received one-half of the gross rentals and paid one-half of the repairs. Plaintiff also paid defendants the agreed sum of $416.66 per month to reimburse them for insurance and supervision. The written agreement was silent as to taxes.
The trial court allowed defendants to offset (i.e., retain) for the use of their one-half interest, $18,966.77 (which is one-fourth of the gross rentals) plus $902.50, which it found represents one-half of the taxes and licenses paid by defendants.
Defendants protest that this offset is not enough. They point out that they have already paid one-half of the repair expenses for the period in question and that the testimony of plaintiff's president, Van Hooser, supports a greater allowance to them as equitable. The gist of that testimony *833 was that, in Mr. Van Hooser's opinion, defendants were equitably entitled to one-fourth of the gross earnings, subject to paying one-fourth of the expenses. We accept this concession by plaintiff as the guide for the equitable adjustment which this case requires. In computing the net sum due to plaintiff, we have disregarded the $2,000 per year paid by plaintiff for insurance; it paid this when defendants owned 100 per cent of the equipment, its share could not have been less thereafter. We disregard, also, the $3,000 per year paid toward the salary of defendants' liaison supervisor; there is no basis in the record to show that defendants would or could have had any different expense in supervising a 50 per cent interest than they had in supervising a 100 per cent interest. However, defendants paid 50 per cent of the expenses of a "contact man" (an item added to the contract by oral agreement in 1954); they should have paid only 25 per cent. With the adjustments indicated, the figures are as follows:
Tabular Material Omitted
The judgment is modified by deleting the final paragraph thereof, as it appears in lines 11 to 17 inclusive of page 2 thereof, and substituting the following:
"It Is Further Ordered, Adjudged and Decreed, that plaintiff have judgment against the defendants Hope Oil Corporation, a corporation, and May & Richards, a Joint Venture composed of F. F. Richards, The Estate of Frank May, deceased, and Charles C. May or any of them, in the sum of $3,959.50 with interest thereon at the rate of 7% per annum from August 31, 1958, in the amount of $1,316.53--a total sum of $5,276.03 together with costs in the amount of $66.35."
As so modified, the judgment is affirmed; neither party shall recover costs in this court.
Files, P. J., and Kingsley, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9737982 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:39:11.021188+00 ===

WINANS, Justice.
This is an action for breach of warranty arising out of the sale of a Chrysler automobile by the Ryan Motor Company of Sioux Falls, South Dakota. The alleged breach, -and the jury so found, was that the vehicle was delivered with an undersized crankshaft, the car was noisy, windows were incorrectly installed and the transmission would not shift properly.
Upon realizing the existence of these defects respondent returned the car to Ryan Motors for repairs under the warranty. Warranty repair work was refused because in Chrysler’s opinion the car’s mileage had been altered by disconnecting the speedometer cable. Such an action would negate the warranty under the condition contained therein that “this warranty will not apply to any vehicle on which the odometer mileage is altered”.
We must first decide the question of the admissibility of a letter written by the plaintiff-respondent to the officers of Chrysler Corporation outlining the problems respondent had experienced with the car, and demanding that Chrysler honor the warranty. The letter contained the following statement: “Further a Chrysler Dealer informed me there have been parts placed in this car that are not the proper parts * * * also * * * in his opinion we would never hold a transmition [sic] in this car with this motor in it.”
It is contended by appellant that this statement is inadmissible as hearsay, and as opinion evidence concerning a subject of a highly technical nature, which is beyond the everyday knowledge of most jurors.
Respondent answers, and we agree, that the letter was properly admissible to show notice of the defect had been given to the seller. SDCL 57-7-15, which is the counterpart of the Uniform Commercial Code, Section 2-607(3), reads as follows:
*616“Where a tender has been accepted
(1)The buyer must within a reasonable time after he discovers or should have discovered any breach notify the seller of breach or be barred from any remedy * *
Due to this action being litigated as one for breach of warranty, the burden was on respondent, as the buyer, to show that he had given proper notice pursuant to statute. The letter in question served this purpose.
This proposition is supported by Jan Ree Frocks v. Pred, 1942, 68 S.D. 356, 359, 2 N.W.2d 696, 697. Referring to a forerunner of SDCL 57-7-15, Notice to seller of breach, the court stated:
“Acceptance of goods, however, does not discharge the seller from liability in damages or other remedy for breach of the contract, unless the buyer fails to give notice to the seller of the breach within a reasonable time after he knows or ought to know of it. * * * The purchaser has neither a right of action for the breach of a promise or warranty nor a defense for the purchase price, unless the required notice has been given. * * * The giving of such notice must be pleaded and proved by the purchaser seeking to recover or defend for the breach of warranty. ” (citations omitted and emphasis supplied)
Clearly, the notice provision of SDCL 57-7-15 (U.C.C. 2-607(3)), is a fundamental prerequisite of a buyer’s recovery for breach of warranty. We hold therefore that the letter transmitted from respondent to Chrysler was properly admitted to establish that the statutorily required notice of breach was given in a timely fashion.
Appellant next maintains that the trial court committed error by not granting its motion for a directed verdict at the close of the testimony. See SDCL 15-6-50(a).
On a motion for a directed verdict the trial judge:
*617“must accept that evidence which is most favorable to the party against whom the motion is sought, and indulge all legitimate inferences in his favor that can fairly be drawn therefrom. * * * If, when so viewed, there is any substantial evidence to sustain the cause of action or defense it must be submitted to the jury.” Myers v. Quenzer, 1961, 79 S.D. 248, 254, 110 N.W.2d 840, 843.
In ruling on this motion it was not the trial court’s function, and is not now ours, to weigh the evidence or judge the credibility of witnesses. Our review is limited to the sole question of whether, in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party, there was “any substantial evidence to sustain the cause of action.” In other words, was there a failure of proof on the part of the plaintiff-respondent to establish a valid cause of action?
Appellant bases its contention that a directed verdict was in order on evidence which it argues shows that the vehicle’s mileage meter (odometer) had been tampered with. Under the terms of the warranty such tampering would end coverage.
The only supportive evidence offered by appellant Chrysler was the testimony of several Ryan Motor Company employees who stated they observed the speedometer cable was disconnected from the “speed set” on the car in question. From the fact of disconnection the naked inference may be drawn that respondent had tampered with the cable.
In opposition to this inference evidence was produced through several witnesses and the' vehicle’s oil change slips to the effect that the odometer reading on the car was accurate when it was delivered for warranty work.
Respondent’s evidence stands in direct conflict with the inference of tampering relied on by Chrysler. This court believes evidential conflicts such as this are properly resolved by a jury under instruction from the Trial Judge.
Because there is substantial evidence that respondent did not meddle with the vehicle’s odometer, a well-grounded cause of action was presented by respondent’s claim. The trial court, *618therefore, correctly decided not to short-circuit respondent’s case by granting the directed verdict.
Appellant attempts to avoid imposition of liability by shielding itself behind the disclaimer contained in the vehicle’s warranty which limits Chrysler’s obligation to repair and replacement:
“THIS WARRANTY IS IN LIEU OF ANY OTHER WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS, INCLUDING MERCHANTARILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. THE REMEDIES UNDER THIS WARRANTY ARE EXCLUSIVE AND NEITHER CHRYSLER CORPORATION NOR CHRYSLER MOTORS CORPORATION ASSUMES NOR AUTHORIZES ANYONE TO ASSUME FOR THEM ANY OTHER ORLIGATION.”
Although somewhat obscure, it appears to be Chrysler’s contention that the disclaimer should be given effect because it complies with pertinent provisions of the Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) as set forth in SDCL.
Specifically, SDCL 57-8-49 (U.C.C. 2-719(1), Agreeements limiting or excluding remedies, in pertinent part provides:
“(1) The agreement may provide for remedies in addition to or in substitution for those provided in chapters 57-2 to 57-8, inclusive, and may limit or alter the measure of damages recoverable under said chapters, as by limiting the buyer’s remedies to return of the goods and repayment of the price or to repair and replacement of nonconforming goods or parts; and
(2J Resort to a remedy as provided is optional unless the remedy is expressly agreed to be exclusive, in which case it is the sole remedy.”
While this statute seems to provide Chrysler the shield it seeks, another provision, SDCL 57-8-50 (U.C.C. 2-719(2)), strips away the defense:
*619“Failure of exclusive or limited remedy, effect.— Where the circumstances cause an exclusive or limited remedy to fail of its essential purpose, remedy may be had as provided in this title.”
Respondent does not contend that the limitations contained in the disclaimer are intrinsically unfair or unreasonable. H§ does contend that, while the limiting of remedies is proper, Chrysler may not rely on its disclaimer because the breach has caused the limited remedy to “fail of its essential purpose”. Chrysler’s breach occurred when it failed for an unreasonably long time to repair or replace defects in respondent’s automobile.
Referring to U.C.C. 2-719(2), the parallel provision to SDCL 57-8-50, it was stated that:
“[T]his provision ‘is not concerned with arrangements which were oppressive at their inception, but rather with the application of an agreement to novel circumstances not contemplated by the parties.’ ” J. White and R. Summers, Handbook Of The Law Under the Uniform Commercial Code (1972).
Thus, what was once fair, but due to novel circumstances is no longer, is the purview of this statute. As stated in the Official Comment to U.C.C. 2-719(2) (SDCL 57-8-50):
“* * * where an apparently fair and reasonable clause because of circumstances fails in its purpose or operates to deprive either party of the substantial value of the bargain, it must give way to the general remedy provisions of this Article.”
Ry delaying for an unreasonable length of time the repair of respondent’s vehicle, appellant deprived him of the “substantial value of the bargain.” Stated otherwise, the warranty was breached causing the available remedy “to fail of its essential purpose”.' Such failure brings into play all otherwise available remedial devices, to-wit: SDCL 57-8-39 (U.C.C. 2-715(1)), Incidental damages from seller’s breach; and 57-8-40 (U.C.C. 2-715(2)), Consequential damages from seller’s breach.
*620Support for our holding is found in Riley v. Ford Motor Company, 1971, 5 Cir., 442 F.2d 670. In Riley, a case strikingly similar to our own, plaintiff purchased a new automobile, which was covered by a warranty limiting the company’s responsibility to repair or replacement of improperly working parts. Numerous defects were almost immediately- discovered. Recause they were unsatisfactorily repaired, plaintiff brought suit against the company.
Whether the remedy provided in the warranty did “fail of its essential purpose” was presented to the jury by asking them if “the defendant, Ford Motor Company, has breached its warranty * * *”. 442 F.2d at 673. In the instant case the jury was asked “Did the defendant breach its obligations to the plaintiff under the warranty?” In Riley an affirmative answer to this query was held to be an implicit acknowledgement that the exclusive remedy of repair and replacement had failed of its essential purpose. This conclusion is drawn because even after defendant attempted to render the car free of defects, it remained defective. The Riley court concluded:
“Under the facts of this case, we are unable to conclude that the jury was unjustified in its implicit finding that the warranty operated to deprive the purchaser ‘of the substantial value of the bargain.’ ” 442 F.2d at 673.
As previously noted in this opinion, the Official Comment to U.C.C. 2-719(2), the counterpart of SDCL 57-8-50, states that this section of the code is activated when an otherwise reasonable clause, due to circumstances, deprives a party of the substantial value of his bargain. Because of the failure to repair, such was the situation in Riley, as it is in the instant case.
Appellant, in effect, seeks to repudiate its obligation under the warranty to repair or replace defective parts; while at the same time it attempts to shield itself behind the beneficial limitation clause contained in the-same document:
“This Court would be in an untenable position if it allowed the defendant to shelter, itself behind one segment of the warranty when it has allegedly repudiated *621and ignored its very limited obligations under another segment of the same warranty, which alleged repudiation has caused the very need for relief which the defendant is attempting to avoid.” Jones & McKnight Corp. v. Birdsboro Corporation (D.C.Ill.1970) 320 F.Supp. 39, 43.
It is impermissible for appellant to choose which sections of the warranty to be bound by. Appellant Chrysler’s actions in breaching the warranty by refusing to honor its obligations under it has caused ,the limited remedy of repair and replacement “to fail of its essential purpose”. It necessarily follows that plaintiff-respondent is entitled to seek damages for incidental and consequential losses caused by appellant’s breach.
Finally, the claim is made by appellant that the jury’s verdict is so patently excessive as to conclusively be the result of passion and prejudice.
It is provided by SDCL 15-6-59(a)(5) that “Excessive or inadequate damages appearing to have been given under the influence of passion or prejudice”, is grounds for a new trial. To find an excessive award within the meaning of this statute “ ‘the damages must be flagrantly outrageous and extravagant, or the court cannot undertake to draw the line; for * * (we) have no'standard by which to ascertain the excess.’ ” Brewer v. Mattern, 1971, 85 S.D. 356, 365, 182 N.W.2d 327, 333.
In making this determination we are also mindful that we, like the trial court, must draw those inferences from the evidence which are most favorable to the successful party. Byre v. Wieczorek, 1974, 88 S.D. 185, 217 N.W.2d 151. Because of the trial judge’s participation in the trial he is uniquely qualified to know whether an excessive verdict resulted from passion or prejudice. Wide discretionary latitude is placed in the trial judge’s hands, which this Court will not interfere with on appeal without a clear showing of abuse. Stene v. Hillgren, 1958, 77 S.D. 165, 88 N.W.2d 109.
Although substantial, we do not find the damages in this case to “be flagrantly outrageous and extravagant”. In Riley v. *622Ford Motor Company, supra, the court found a jury verdict of $30,000 for an automobile purchased for $8,476 to be excessive; and we agree. The case at bar, however, presents no such example of jury extravagance. Respondent’s vehicle was purchased for $5,416 and the jury’s verdict was in the amount of $3,500. The evidence adduced at trial shows a wide divergence between the car paid for and that received. It is unnecessary to catalog the multitude of defects contained in the car. Suffice it to say that, colloquially speaking, the vehicle in question appears to possess the identifying characteristics of a “Friday evening special.” We find no abuse of discretion.
Affirmed.
DUNN, C. J., and DOYLE and COLER, JJ., concur.
WOLLMAN, J., concurs in part and dissents in part.

=== CASE 9737931 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:37:16.128762+00 ===

DICKSON, Justice,
concurring and dissenting.
I concur with the majority in all respects except as to Part V-B. In cases where an appellant has properly preserved an objection to the jurisdiction of an improperly appointed court officer to enter a final judgment, a defendant's appeal may also present other issues unrelated to the authority of the judicial official that imposed his sentence. Such other questions may have merit. A defendant should not be required to suffer delay in the resolution of such appellate issues. This would unjustly penalize a defendant for the errors of the court. Rather than dismiss the appeal, the appellate tribunal should address the issues unrelated to sentencing and then remand the case to the trial court for a proper sentencing, if required.
While this proposed procedure could be characterized as permitting an appeal that does not arise from a valid final judgment, I believe it to be fair and just, preferring substance over form. This is consistent with our commitment to procedures that "do substantial justice, lead to disposition on the merits, and avoid litigation on procedural points." Ind.Trial Rule 8(F).

=== CASE 9737932 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:37:16.132001+00 ===

DeBRULER, Justice,
dissenting.
Indiana judges receive judicial power from popular election or appointment by the governor. State ex rel Smith v. Starke Circuit Court (1981), 275 Ind. 483, 417 N.E.2d 1115. It is from such elected or appointed judges that pro tempore judges and special judges receive their judicial power. Cartwright v. State (1993), Ind.App., 621 N.E.2d 1164. It is the mind of such a duly elected or appointed judge that is the source of authority of the pro-tem or special judge. Pro-tems, special judges, hearing officers, and magistrates and commissioners, appointed pursuant to statutory authorization, are creatures of the judi-clary.
If an elected or appointed judge manifests an intent to appoint a pro-tem, special judge, or other surrogate judge, but that manifestation does not comport with the rules governing the applicable appointive process and there is no objection to the irregularity of process, the lack of authority of the pro-tem or special judge should not be a ground for nullifying her judgment.
It has been held repeatedly by this court and the Supreme Court that when a judge has been called or an attorney appointed to try a cause, and no objection is made at the time or to his sitting in the cause when he assumes to act, all objections thereto will be deemed waived on appeal.
Jordan v. Indianapolis Coal Co. (1913), 52 Ind.App. 542, 100 N.E. 880. See also Skipper v. State (1988), Ind., 525 N.E.2d 334; Survance v. State (1984), Ind., 465 N.E.2d 1076, reh. denied. It is the "calling" of a judge, or the "appointing" of an attorney that supplies the essential bridge between the *37elected or appointed judge and the surrogate judge, such bridge being known as "color of authority." The long term appointment of a court commissioner or magistrate by the regular judge, pursuant to a statute which grants broad judicial powers to the appointee, may confer "color of authority." See Gordy v. State (1974), 262 Ind. 275, 315 N.E.2d 362. However, the constitutionality of such statutes is doubtful. Smith, 275 Ind. 483, 417 N.E.2d 1115. Where there is no support in a record of proceedings that an elected or appointed judge manifested an intent to grant a surrogate the power to judge, there is no "color of authority," a total lack of authority of such surrogate exists, and the judgment of such surrogate is a nullity. I believe the majority misreads precedent of this Court when it concludes that in the absence of the intent of an elected or appointed judge that it be so, the judicial power to enter judgment in the particular case can arise in some lawyer or court attache, through the inaction, intent, or desire of the parties.
In the Briscoe case, the court commissioner served in the case pursuant to pro-tem appointments constituting the express intention of the regular judge. The commissioner was qualified and authorized to sit in the case, and Briscoe's direct appellate claim to the contrary is properly rejected.
In the Dearman case, the court commissioner, while claiming to be a special judge, was in fact authorized at the time he acted by an appointment as judge pro-tem, constituting the express intention of the regular judge. The commissioner was qualified and acted with authority.
In the Floyd case, a complete record of proceedings fails to disclose that the regular judge manifested an intent to authorize the court commissioner to act in the case. There was no color of authority. There was no objection in the trial court to the action of the commissioner. There need not have been. The judgment and sentence is a nullity, and upon the waiver of double jeopardy by post-conviction petition, I would grant post-conviction relief and remand for trial upon the charges. The Hatcher, Manley, and Marlett cases are the same as the Floyd case for these purposes, and as such should receive the same treatment.
In the Roby case, the regular judge manifested the intent by order that the attorney who presided over the trial serve at the time as judge pro-tem. There was no like intent manifest when, on a later date, the same lawyer sentenced Roby. In my opinion, the lawyer had no authority to sentence appellant on a day that had not been contemplated by the regular judge. The sentence is a nullity. I would remand with instructions to sentence Roby anew.
I respectfully dissent.

=== CASE 2212478 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:20.376602+00 ===

222 Cal.App.2d 712 (1963)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
VICTOR LEROY McCULLOUGH, Defendant and Appellant.
Crim. No. 4242.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. Three.
Dec. 2, 1963.
Victor Leroy McCullough, in pro. per., and Philip W. Aaron, under appointment by the District Court of Appeal, for Defendant and Appellant.
Stanley Mosk, Attorney General, Albert W. Harris, Jr., and Keith E. Pugh, Jr., Deputy Attorneys General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
SALSMAN, J.
Appellant was charged with a violation of Penal Code section 12021 (ownership and possession of a concealable firearm by a felon) and convicted by a jury.
The record reveals these facts: On November 8, 1961, at *714 about 3:45 a.m., Officers Pipkin and Hale were on patrol on the coast highway between Half Moon Bay and Santa Cruz. They had observed no vehicles on the highway for several hours, until at the hour indicated, about 8 miles south of Half Moon Bay, they saw appellant's car proceeding in a northerly direction. The attention of the officers was directed to the car because it was the first they had seen for several hours, and also because it was traveling at much slower than the normal speed at which vehicles usually travel along this open stretch of highway late at night. The officers observed appellant's car until it turned right at Purissima Canyon Road and headed east towards the mountains. Purissima Canyon Road leads into a remote rural area and eventually connects with Skyline Boulevard at the crest of the mountains. One or two residences are served by this road and it is improved for only a portion of its length. Officer Pipkin testified he did not believe a vehicle could reach Skyline Boulevard by Purissima Canyon Road unless it was a four-wheel drive vehicle. Purissima Canyon Road intersects the old coast highway a short distance from the new coast highway and there are residences along the old coast highway. Appellant's car hesitated at the intersection mentioned, but continued east on Purissima Canyon Road, and the officers continued to follow. Officer Hale later testified the car appeared to be lost. After following appellant's vehicle a short distance along Purissima Canyon Road, the officers decided to stop it and question its occupants. As the officers drew close, they observed appellant and a passenger, later identified as John Masters, bend over as if placing something under the front seat. The officers then turned on their red light, stopped the vehicle, and walked over to it and began to question driver and passengers. While standing beside appellant's car the officers, with the aid of a flashlight, were able to see inside. They saw beer bottles and spilled liquid on the floor of the car and smelled the odor of alcohol. The officers asked appellant and Mr. Masters to get out of the car. Officer Hale looked into the vehicle and saw a switchblade knife on the floor. He reached in and took possession of it. The officers then arrested appellant and Mr. Masters and searched them. Officer Pipkin asked Mrs. Masters to open the glove compartment of the car. The glove compartment contained a loaded .32 caliber revolver and several rounds of ammunition. Appellant admitted ownership of the car, the gun and the ammunition. When it was later determined that appellant had been previously convicted and had served a sentence for violation *715 of title 18 United States Code section 2312 (the Dyer Act, transporting a stolen car in interstate commerce) he was charged with the offense which gives rise to this appeal.
Appellant contends that stopping his vehicle violated his constitutional rights; that his arrest, and the search and seizure which followed were illegal, and that all evidence obtained as a result should have been excluded at trial.
[1a] We must first consider whether it was proper under facts here present for the officers to stop appellant's vehicle. We have concluded it was proper, and that no constitutional right of appellant was invaded by the action of the officers.
[2] There is a difference between the right of an officer to stop a vehicle and make a reasonable inquiry of its occupants, and the right of an officer to stop a vehicle, place the occupants under arrest, and conduct a search. (See People v. King, 175 Cal.App.2d 386, 390 [346 P.2d 235].) In the latter instance, probable cause to arrest must be present, but in the former, reasonable conduct on the part of the officer is all that is required, and the question of the reasonableness of the officer's conduct must be decided upon the facts present in each case. A fixed formula by which to measure the reasonableness of the officer's conduct is difficult, if not impossible, to devise. Our own Supreme Court, however, has clearly held that it is not unreasonable for a police officer to question a citizen abroad late at night. (See People v. Simon, 45 Cal.2d 645, 650 [290 P.2d 531]; People v. Blodgett, 46 Cal.2d 114, 117 [293 P.2d 57]; see also, People v. Ellsworth, 190 Cal.App.2d 844, 847 [12 Cal.Rptr. 433]; People v. Gibson, 220 Cal.App.2d 15, 20 [33 Cal.Rptr. 775, 778].) Indeed, as the facts of this case illustrate, it may be necessary in the proper discharge of the officer's duty, to protect the very persons who are stopped for interrogation. [1b] Here, appellant's vehicle appeared to be lost, and was proceeding into an area of potential danger. Under such circumstances it seems clear that the officers, in the discharge of their duty to protect the public, including motorists who appear to be lost, acted reasonably in stopping appellant's vehicle, and it would appear unreasonable to hold that probable cause to arrest must exist before stopping the vehicle could be justified.
[3a] After the officers stopped appellant's vehicle, they approached it, made the observations set forth in the statement of facts, and placed appellant under arrest. They were fully justified in doing so. A police officer may make an arrest without a warrant when he has reasonable cause to believe *716 the person to be arrested has committed a public offense in his presence. (Pen. Code,  836, subd. 1.) [4] Reasonable cause to arrest exists when the officer, acting as a man of ordinary prudence, honestly believes the person to be arrested is guilty of a crime. (People v. Ingle, 53 Cal.2d 407, 412 [2 Cal.Rptr. 14, 348 P.2d 577].) [5] Seeing what is in plain sight is not a search. (People v. Mosco, 214 Cal.App.2d 581, 585 [29 Cal.Rptr. 644].) [3b] Here the officers observed open beer bottles on the floor of the car in front of the driver's seat, and some liquid spilled on the floor, and smelled the odor of alcohol. They could reasonably believe a misdemeanor was being committed in their presence. (Violation of Veh. Code,  23121, drinking in a motor vehicle; violation of Veh. Code,  23122, possession in a motor vehicle of alcoholic beverages in an opened container.) The officers also saw a switch-blade knife partially concealed under the front seat of the car, and from this and the furtive movements of appellant as the car was stopped, they could reasonably believe there was a violation of Penal Code section 653k (carrying a switch-blade knife) or Penal Code section 12020 (carrying a concealed dagger). Without search, and merely on the basis of their observation as they stood beside the car, the officers had reasonable cause to arrest appellant.
[1c] Appellant next contends that since the elaboration of Mapp v. Ohio, 367 U.S. 643 [81 S.Ct. 1684, 6 L.Ed.2d 1081, 84 A.L.R.2d 933], by the United States Supreme Court in Ker v. State of California, 374 U.S. 23 [83 S.Ct. 1623, 10 L.Ed.2d 726], the California rule allowing the police to stop a car for investigation is no longer proper because under federal law, the police must have probable cause to arrest before a car may be stopped (see Henry v. United States, 361 U.S. 98 [80 S.Ct. 168, 4 L.Ed.2d 134]). Subsequent to the Mapp decision and prior to the Ker decision, the California Supreme Court stated: "We do not believe that our rule permitting temporary detention for questioning conflicts with the Fourth Amendment. It strikes a balance between a person's interest in immunity from police interference and the community's interest in law enforcement. It wards off pressure to equate reasonable cause to investigate with reasonable cause to arrest, thus protecting the innocent from the risk of arrest when no more than reasonable investigation is justified." (People v. Mickelson, 59 Cal.2d 448, 452 [30 Cal.Rptr. 18, 380 P.2d 658].)
Appellant argues that the rule of the Mickelson case is no *717 longer proper in light of the Ker case. But in Mickelson, our Supreme Court said that the rule of the Henry case was not "constitutionally compelled. Given the absence of legislation, the court had to articulate the governing rule and enforce compliance with it. It did not thereby foreclose Congress or the states from articulating other reasonable rules consistent with the Fourth Amendment." (People v. Mickelson, supra, at p. 452.) Furthermore, in the Ker case, the United States Supreme Court stated that "Mapp, however, established no assumption by this Court of supervisory authority over state courts, cf. Cleary v. Bolger (1963) 371 U.S. 392, 401 [83 S.Ct. 385, 9 L.Ed.2d 390, 396], and, consequently, it implied no total obliteration of state laws relating to arrests and searches in favor of federal law." (Ker v. State of California, supra, 374 U.S. 23, 31 [83 S.Ct. 1623 at p. 1629, 10 L.Ed.2d 726, 736].) Thus we conclude the stopping of appellant's car was not violative of his rights under the Fourteenth Amendment.
[6] Appellant further contends that conviction under the Dyer Act is not a felony as that term is used in Penal Code section 12021 under which appellant was here charged and convicted. There is no merit in this contention. The penalty fixed for violation of the Dyer Act is a fine of not more than $5,000 or imprisonment for not more than 5 years, or both. (See 18 U.S.C.  2312.) 18 United States Code section 1 states: "Any offense punishable by death or imprisonment for a term exceeding one year is a felony." A copy of the record of appellant's conviction was in evidence. The cited statutes clearly define appellant's offense as a felony. Federal cases have held that it is not the actual punishment imposed but that which is authorized by the statute which determines whether the felony is a crime or a misdemeanor. (See Barde v. United States, 224 F.2d 959; Giammario v. Hurney, 311 F.2d 285, 287.) Section 12021 does not require that the prior conviction be of a crime which would be a felony under California law. Rather, it prohibits possession of certain weapons by one "who has been convicted of a felony under the laws of the United States, of the State of California, or any other state. ..." The disjunctive makes clear that prior federal conviction proscribes possession of the described weapon.
[7] Appellant further argues there is insufficient evidence to sustain the finding of criminal intent or that the weapon was under his custody and control at time of arrest. *718 The statute under which appellant was charged does not require any specific criminal intent. General intent to do the proscribed act is all that is necessary. (People v. Gonzales, 72 Cal.App. 626 [237 P. 812].) Appellant's attempt to deny possession or control of the gun by evidence that he had instructed his wife to remove the weapon from the car is of no avail. Appellant admitted ownership of the car, the gun, and the ammunition. Ownership of the gun is all that is required for a violation of the statute.
Judgment affirmed.
Draper, P. J., and Devine, J., concurred.

=== CASE 2212514 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:20.815254+00 ===

222 Cal. App. 2d 706 (1963)
35 Cal. Rptr. 423
WARINGTON LUMBER COMPANY, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
FULLERTON MORTGAGE & ESCROW COMPANY, Defendant and Appellant.
Docket No. 7131.
Court of Appeals of California, Fourth District.
November 29, 1963.
*708 Lev & Lyon and Harmon G. Scoville for Defendant and Appellant.
Blodget, Cochran & Anderson and Lew W. Blodget for Plaintiff and Respondent.
GRIFFIN, P.J.
[1] Defendant-appellant, Fullerton Mortgage & Escrow Company, appeals from a judgment in favor of plaintiff-respondent, Warington Lumber Company, for $26,756.27 in a breach of contract action brought by plaintiff-respondent, a building materials dealer who sold lumber and other building materials to Hintz Development Corporation. Hintz became delinquent in its account with plaintiff, owing about $120,000. Funds were being furnished to Hintz under a construction loan from a savings and loan company. Defendant had obtained this loan for Hintz and received a fee for this service. Upon learning that the payments or "draws" were being paid by the savings and loan company by means of checks payable to Hintz and J.W. Hartman, president and general manager of defendant escrow company, plaintiff informed defendant of its claim and said it would file a "withholding" notice with the savings and loan company unless defendant company would agree that plaintiff's claim would be taken care of out of the checks received from the savings and loan company. Defendant agreed to take care of plaintiff and sent the following letter, dated September 19, 1959, to it:
"Warrington [sic] Lumber Company 620 Vance Street Santa Ana, California
"Attn: Charles Hester
"Dear Sir:
"Please be advised that Mr. Jack Hints, president of the Hintz Development Company, has authorized us to withhold the sum of $30,000.00 from each of the following draws, dated September 28, October 5, 12, and 19, until a total of $120,000.00 is paid in satisfaction of your indebtedness on tract 2511.
"Prior to release of funds to you on the draw of October *709 19, we will want a statement of agreement between you and Hintz Development Company as to the balance due and final settlement.
"Sincerely,
"John W. Hartman
President
"APPROVED BY:
"HINTZ DEVELOPMENT COMPANY
"J.T. Hintz by Arthur E. Hintz, att. in fact."
It is apparent that in reliance on this agreement the plaintiff did not file a withholding notice. Thereafter, defendant sent plaintiff $30,000 from each of the first three draws. However, when the fourth draw was received, Hartman immediately endorsed the check and delivered it to Hintz without notifying the plaintiff. Defendant claims Hintz informed it that plaintiff had been paid all that was due it, and therefore it endorsed the loan checks and turned them over to Hintz, without calling plaintiff for verification. Hartman testified that after October 19, 1959, he received loan checks each week for several successive weeks exceeding $30,000, that he was never advised by plaintiff that Hintz owed it any amount in addition to the three payments made, and that he had no knowledge of it until January 12, 1960, and on March 29, 1960, plaintiff filed the instant action against Hintz, this defendant and others, and that Hintz defaulted and no recovery was had against it.
The record indicates that a fourth check for $63,584.38 and one for $5,540, both dated October 19, 1959, and made payable to Hartman and Hintz, were brought to Hartman by Hintz, and on that same date, October 19, 1959, Hartman endorsed the checks over to Hintz without calling plaintiff because Hintz said his lumber bill with plaintiff had been paid except for some extras and he (Hartman) never inquired of plaintiff if it was true because he did not think that was a part of his responsibility. Additional checks for $50,000 and $83,000 were received by Hartman on October 26 and November 7 and turned over to Hintz without notifying plaintiff. The trial court found that the quoted letter did constitute a binding agreement and that a valid consideration did exist by reason of the agreement not to file a "withhold" notice so that plaintiff could continue to furnish building materials on the tract, and that defendant was liable thereunder to plaintiff for the amount of the judgment.
*710 Defendant appealed and claimed: (1) that the court erred in finding that a binding contract so existed; that no contract existed between defendant and plaintiff because defendant was acting as the agent of Hintz and because there was no meeting of the minds; (2) that, assuming the existence of a contract, the court erred in failing to find a condition precedent; that defendant was not required to prove performance; (3) that, assuming the existence of a contract, the court erred in the construction of it when it concluded that defendant held itself out as an escrow company in this transaction and hence should have followed the practice that escrow companies universally followed; that the court erred when it ruled that evidence of defendant's intentions at the time of writing the letter was immaterial and that the only material thing was what plaintiff believed and was relying on; and (4) that, assuming the existence of a contract, the court erred in failing to hold that the plaintiff was estopped from enforcing it. Apparently, the original loan was for $2,000,000, and the savings and loan company agreed to pay all money to defendant company and Hintz jointly. Hartman testified that while he was in Europe his son signed an agreement in his name as attorney in fact to see that the money was applied to this tract, but on his return he called the savings and loan company and said that he would not accept this responsibility. He said his responsibility extended only to an off-site fund. Nevertheless, all checks continued to be paid to Hartman to have joint control with Hintz. At the trial, it was shown that Hintz was still, on October 19, 1959, indebted to plaintiff for lumber and materials in the amount found.
The letter and circumstances related were sufficient to support the trial court's finding that a binding agreement, for a valuable consideration, was executed by and between the parties. (Amen v. Merced County Title Co., 58 Cal. 2d 528 [25 Cal. Rptr. 65, 375 P.2d 33].) The claim that defendant was acting only as agent to Hintz would not necessarily relieve defendant of liability. [2] When the check of October 19, 1959, came into the possession of defendant, defendant became the holder of funds which defendant had theretofore agreed to pay to plaintiff, and defendant was no longer merely a disbursing agent but was a principal under the agreement. [3] Where an agent intentionally makes himself a party to a contract, recovery can be had against him as well. *711 (Marshall v. Bernheim, 64 Cal. App. 283 [221 P. 401]; London v. Zachary, 92 Cal. App. 2d 654 [207 P.2d 1067].) [4] Furthermore, neither defendant nor Hintz could unilaterally terminate the agreement, there being no option so providing. (B.L. Metcalf General Contractor, Inc. v. Earl Erne, Inc., 212 Cal. App. 2d 689 [28 Cal. Rptr. 382].) It clearly appears that there was a meeting of the minds on the subject matter. The agreement was that defendant would withhold the fourth of the four payments until the total of $120,000 had been paid, in satisfaction of the indebtedness; that prior to the release of funds to plaintiff after the October 19 payment was received, defendant would want a statement or an agreement as to the balance due. There was never any agreement between plaintiff and Hintz as to the balance due. Defendant accepted only Hintz' statement in this respect, and it is clear that under the agreement defendant was to withhold payment of any funds received on October 19 until such an agreement had been reached; that the responsibility rested on defendant as well as plaintiff; that an inquiry of plaintiff by defendant would be reasonably anticipated before defendant was released from its obligation, and particularly so where the checks were endorsed over to Hintz the same day, October 19, 1963, the date when the payment was due to be paid to plaintiff.
[5] The complaint that the court erred in concluding that defendant held itself out as an escrow company and the parties should have followed the practice usually followed by escrow companies is untenable. Defendant's title is "Fullerton Mortgage and Escrow Company." (Italics ours.) It is quite apparent that defendant did hold the funds, at least jointly with Hintz, and was permitted to authorize the payment of these funds for and on behalf of the savings and loan company and Hintz. By this agreement, defendant became further bound to pay to plaintiff such funds in accordance with that agreement, and it was liable for the breach of the agreement regardless of the fact that it was dealing in a private capacity or as an escrow agent. (Feeney v. Clapp, 126 Cal. App. 729 [15 P.2d 178].) The intentions of the parties are sufficiently set forth in the document itself.
[6] As to the claim that plaintiff was estopped from recovering because it did not make timely demand for the balance due, this is without merit. It was from the fourth deposit, made on October 19, that defendant was bound to *712 withhold the amount agreed to be due, and not from payments made thereafter. Defendant disposed of this payment immediately upon receipt of it, without notifying plaintiff of this fact or giving plaintiff an adequate opportunity to show the amount claimed due. There was no obligation on plaintiff's part to furnish such a statement prior to October 19. No estoppel, as a matter of law, was shown.
Judgment affirmed.
Coughlin, J., and Brown (Gerald), J., concurred.
A petition for a rehearing was denied December 19, 1963, and appellant's petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied January 22, 1964.

=== CASE 9737933 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:37:19.045446+00 ===

OXBERGER, Chief Judge.
Appellant Shirley K. Craig appeals and appellee Patrick J. Craig cross-appeals from the decree of the district court dis*693solving the parties’ marriage. We affirm and remand with directions.
The parties were married in Ames, Iowa, in 1970. At the time of their marriage both Pat, who was twenty-two, and Kay, who was twenty-three, had bachelor of science degrees from Iowa State University. Following their marriage, Pat attended law school at the University of Minnesota and Kay taught school. Upon Pat’s graduation from law school, he was employed by the Internal Revenue Service as an attorney in the estate tax division. Kay continued to teach school until 1976 when the parties’ first child, Suzanne, was born. In 1978, the parties moved to Eldora, Iowa, so that Pat could become a principal in a law firm there. Pat continues to practice law with the firm. The parties’ second child, Kathryn, was born in 1979.
The district court, in its decree of June 12, 1989, awarded the parties joint legal custody of their children, with primary physical care to Kay. Pat was ordered to pay child support of $750 per month until Suzanne turns eighteen or graduates from high school and then $500 per month for Kathryn. Additionally, Pat was ordered to pay alimony in the sum of $1,250 per month for eighteen months and then $250 per month for forty-two months. Pat was awarded $159,037 in property, including his share of the law firm. He is responsible for a pledge to St. Mary’s Church in the sum of $3,300 and is to pay Kay the sum of $18,500 in equal installments of $3,700 over a five-year period. In addition to the $18,-500, Kay was awarded property valued at $116,558.
Our scope of review in dissolution cases is de novo. Iowa R.App.P. 4. While not bound by the trial court’s determination of factual findings, we will give considerable weight to them, especially when considering the credibility of witnesses. Iowa R.App.P. 14(f)(7). The factors utilized by the court in dividing the parties’ property and awarding alimony and child support are detailed in Iowa Code section 598.21 (1989). There are no hard and fast rules governing economic provisions in a dissolution action; rather, each decision depends upon the unique circumstances and facts relevant to each issue. In re Marriage of Wiedemann, 402 N.W.2d 744, 747 (Iowa 1987); In re Marriage of Vrban, 359 N.W.2d 420, 423 (Iowa 1984).
I. Child Support. The first issue we consider is Kay’s claim that the trial court’s child support award is inadequate. She asks that Pat’s child support obligation be increased to $900 per month when there are two children entitled to support and that the amount be reduced to $750 per month when there is but one child entitled to support. Pat, as cross-appellant, argues that his support payments are excessive and should be reduced. He asks that his payments be reduced to $550 per month and then to $400 per month when the older child reaches eighteen or graduates from high school.
It is well established that both parents have a legal obligation to support their children. Iowa Code § 598.21(4); In re Marriage of Schettler, 455 N.W.2d 686, 689 (Iowa App.1990). The obligation to support should be apportioned according to the ability of each parent to contribute. Id.
The attorneys in their briefs to this court make reference to the Uniform Child Support Guidelines.
The guidelines provide “the court shall not vary from the amount of child support which would result from application of the guidelines without a written finding that the guidelines would be unjust or inappropriate .... ” Because the parties did not have an opportunity to show the trial court whether the application of the guidelines would be unjust or inappropriate, this matter is remanded to the trial court to conduct a hearing concerning child support pursuant to the Iowa Supreme Court order of the 29th day of September, 1989. Pending said hearing on remand, we order child support be paid as ordered by the original trial court decree. This court does not retain jurisdiction. To the extent that In re Marriage of Jennings, 455 N.W.2d 284 (Iowa App.1990), is inconsistent with this ruling, it is overruled.
*694II. Alimony. Kay is also critical of the amount and term of the alimony payments awarded by the trial court. She argues that Pat should be required to pay her $1,750 per month for twenty-seven months and then $1,200 per month in alimony for the remainder of her life. Alimony is an allowance to the spouse in lieu of the legal obligation for support. In re Marriage of Sjulin, 431 N.W.2d 773, 775 (Iowa 1988). An award of alimony is not an absolute right, but depends upon the unique circumstances of each case. In re Marriage of Cooper, 451 N.W.2d 507, 508 (Iowa App.1989).
Kay, while not having taught school on a full-time basis since 1976, does have the ability upon completion of the recertifi-cation process to obtain a teaching position paying approximately $21,000 per year. The trial court found, and we agree, that Pat can expect future gross income of approximately $65,000 per year from his law practice.
Both parties, so long as they are in reasonable health, have an obligation “to earn up to their capacities in order to pay their own present bills and not lean unduly on the other party for permanent support.” In re Marriage of Wegner, 434 N.W.2d 397, 399 (Iowa 1988). Considering the parties’ respective earning capacities, as well as the other factors detailed in Iowa Code section 598.21(3), we agree with the trial court that permanent alimony is unwarranted. We also agree with the trial court’s assessment as to alimony and accordingly affirm that part of the decree.
III. Property Division. Both parties dispute the district court’s property division assessment. Initially, we consider Kay's challenge of the district court’s valuation of Pat’s law practice. The district court found Pat’s law practice to be worth $36,700. Kay asserts the practice is worth $72,452. We find the value placed on the law practice to be well within the permissible range of evidence and decline to disturb it upon appeal. See In re Marriage of Demory, 443 N.W.2d 67, 69 (Iowa App.1989).
Pat asserts the property division made by the district court is inequitable because the trial court did not factor in approximately $7,000 in property purchased by Kay during the parties’ separation. This property, consisting largely of women’s and children’s clothing, toiletry items, and other sundry goods, was awarded to Kay with no offset to Pat. Even were we to conclude that these had a value of $7,000 at the time of trial, we find no inequity in awarding those items to Kay without an offset to Pat.
Kay also seeks interest on those assets awarded to her by the trial court. She claims that she has forgone acceptance of the property because she feared that to do so would jeopardize her appeal rights. We decline to award interest on Kay’s share of the property division. We note Kay has had possession of some of the property during the pendency of the appeal. Additionally, other property awarded her has continued to draw interest.
IV. Religious Instruction of Children. Pat asserts upon his cross-appeal that he should have primary responsibility for the children’s religious education. Iowa Code section 598.41(5) provides:
Joint legal custody does not require joint physical care. When the court determines such action would be in the best interest of the child, physical care may be given to one joint custodial parent and not to the other. If one joint custodial parent is awarded physical care, the court shall hold that parent responsible for providing for the best interest of the child. However, physical care given to one parent does not affect the other parent’s rights and responsibilities as a legal custodian of the child. Rights and responsibilities as legal custodian of the child include, but are not limited to, equal participation in decisions affecting the child's legal status, medical care, education, extracurricular activities, and religious instruction.
Under the plain language of this provision, both parties are entitled to participate in deciding questions regarding the religious instruction of the children. We will not *695prescribe what type or form of religious instruction should be provided for the children, nor which parent shall be responsible for the religious instruction of the children.
V. Attorney Fees. Kay was awarded $4,000 in trial attorney fees. She argues that the trial court should have awarded her all of her trial attorney fees and not just a portion of them. Iowa trial courts have considerable discretion in awarding attorney fees. In re Marriage of Giles, 338 N.W.2d 544, 546 (Iowa App.1983). To overturn an award the complaining party must show that the trial court abused its discretion. Id. Awards of attorney fees must be for fair and reasonable amounts, In re Marriage of Willcoxson, 250 N.W.2d 425, 427 (Iowa 1977), and based on the parties’ respective abilities to pay. In re Marriage of Lattig, 318 N.W.2d 811, 817 (Iowa 1982). We find no abuse of discretion by the trial court in not awarding Kay additional attorney fees.
Kay also seeks attorney fees for this appeal. An award of attorney fees is not a matter of right, but rests within the court’s discretion and the parties’ financial positions. In re Marriage of Kern, 408 N.W.2d 387, 390 (Iowa App.1987). We are to consider the needs of the party making the request, the ability of the other party to pay, and whether the party making the request was obligated to defend the trial court’s decision on appeal. In re Marriage of Castle, 312 N.W.2d 147, 150 (Iowa App.1981). We award Kay attorney fees of $1,000 for this appeal. Costs are assessed one-half to each party.
AFFIRMED AND REMANDED WITH DIRECTIONS.
All Judges concur except HABHAB, J., who concurs in part and dissents in part.

=== CASE 9737934 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:37:19.049255+00 ===

HABHAB, Judge
(concurring in part and dissenting in part).
I concur with the majority except that part that remands this cause for hearing pursuant to the Uniform Child Support Guidelines. As to that part, I dissent.
This cause was tried to the court on June 12, 1989. The temporary child support guidelines were not adopted as permanent child support guidelines by the supreme court until September 29, 1989. Under the circumstances here, I see no reason to remand for the guidelines were nonexistent at the time of trial.
The supreme court order that adopted the guidelines provided that when the amount prescribed was used by the trial court as the basis of an award, a rebuttable presumption of correctness was established. Since it is a rebuttable presumption, the litigants should be afforded the opportunity to make their record as to why the amount as prescribed should serve as the amount to be awarded as child support or whether that amount, because of the special circumstances of the case, should be adjusted either upward or downward. I believe that when an amount is granted that is inconsistent with the guidelines, the trial court, if it does not employ the guidelines, should be afforded the opportunity to explain by written findings why the guidelines are unjust or inappropriate. For these reasons I agree that we, as an appellate court, should not for the first time impose those guidelines. I also agree to the extent that In re Marriage of Jennings, 455 N.W.2d 284 (Iowa App.1990), conflicts with the majority opinion, it should be overruled.
However, under the circumstances here, I see no reason to remand. The trial court fixed child support under the law as it existed at trial time. The support issue was litigated in accordance with the then statutory and case law. Merely because the guidelines were adopted after trial and during the course of the appeal is not sufficient reason to remand for rehearing on the issue of child support. I, of course, would require adherence to the supreme court’s order of September 28, 1989, on all cases tried on and after the date of its adoption.

=== CASE 2212490 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:20.514853+00 ===

222 Cal. App. 2d 728 (1963)
LEONARD L. SMITH, a Minor, etc., Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
SOUTHERN PACIFIC COMPANY, Defendant and Respondent.
Civ. No. 27287.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. One.
Dec. 2, 1963.
Jones & Weldon and Charles R. Weldon for Plaintiff and Appellant.
E. D. Yeomans, William E. Still and John J. Corrigan for Defendant and Respondent. *729
FOURT, J.
This is an appeal by plaintiff from a judgment entered after the trial court granted defendant's motion for summary judgment in an action for personal injuries. Plaintiff, a 15-year old minor, sustained the injury when he attempted to hitch a ride on defendant's train, lost his hold and fell underneath a moving freight car.
The chronology of significant events is as follows:
On March 29, 1962, plaintiff filed his complaint for personal injuries. Therein it was alleged in substance that defendant owned and operated a railroad right of way through the City of Norwalk; that at the time of the injuries complained of and for many years prior thereto the defendant's tracks and spur lines through the area were regularly, habitually, frequently, continuously and commonly used by children of the community as a common playground; that the use by the children was at all times well known to defendant; that at the time of the injuries and for many years prior thereto children of the community regularly, habitually, frequently, continuously and commonly would jump upon, play upon and ride upon the freight cars to such an extent that the custom became well and generally known to the people and children in the community and was at all times known to the defendant. That on or about May 1, 1959, at or about 7:55 a.m., plaintiff, then 15 years of age, together with other children in the course of traveling to high school, was playing in and around the railroad spur line; that at that time a train of freight cars operated by the defendant's employees was operating along the track; that as the freight train proceeded the employees of defendant observed, or should have observed in the exercise of ordinary care, the plaintiff and other children playing and walking on, about and near the railroad line and "at said time and place the plaintiff attempted to hitch a ride on said train, lost his hold, fell underneath the moving freight car and suffered injuries. ..." That the injuries to the plaintiff were the result of carelessness, recklessness and negligence of the defendant herein. That as the said freight train proceeded through the above mentioned area, the employees of defendant observed or should have in the exercise of ordinary care observed the plaintiff and the other children playing and walking on, about and near the said railroad line. At said time and place the plaintiff attempted to hitch a ride on said train, lost his hold, fell underneath the moving freight car and suffered injuries as more particularly set forth hereinafter; that the *730 injuries to the plaintiff were the result of the carelessness, recklessness and negligence of the defendant herein (a) in failing to anticipate and guard against the actions of the plaintiff and children in said area in attempting to board defendant's train, (b) in failing to have one of its employees stationed at a point on the train to prevent children playing on said trains or track, (c) in failing to enclose the said area and post adequate barriers, barricades and obstructions to prevent its use by the plaintiff and other children and failure to post a watchman to prevent children from using the said area and the trains passing through as a playground, (d) in failing to use due care under the circumstances to avoid injuring the minor plaintiff after having knowledge of his presence alongside the train, (e) in assenting to the children of the community playing in and about the said area and in and about the freight trains passing through the said area, (f) in knowingly allowing the children to play about and ride on said freight trains, (g) in failing to have a watchman on said train when defendant knew or should have known that the children of the community jumped on the passing freight cars which were dangerous to them.
Defendant Southern Pacific Company filed its answer on May 4, 1962. Among other things it admitted that on or about May 1, 1959, plaintiff was then 15 years old and was injured while jumping on and off one of defendant's moving trains traveling along upon its private railroad right of way; that plaintiff attempted to hitch a ride on the train and lost his hold and fell under the moving freight car. Defendant asserted as a second separate distinct answer and defense that plaintiff was contributorily negligent and as a third affirmative defense that plaintiff "assumed the risk in connection with the accident alleged to have given rise to his injuries by voluntarily placing himself on the railroad tracks and railroad train of the defendant located on the defendant's private railroad right of way at or about 7:55 a.m. on May 1, 1959; that the nature and condition of said premises, right of way and railroad train allegedly under the control of the defendant at the times and places referred to in the plaintiff's complaint and the dangers inherent by such conditions were fully known to the plaintiff and fully understood and appreciated by him, and he freely and voluntarily assumed the risk attendant upon such conditions as they existed during the times referred to in the plaintiff's complaint." *731
On January 11, 1963, defendant filed a notice of motion for summary judgment. It was indicated therein that defendant would move for a dismissal of plaintiff's complaint and entry of summary judgment and/or judgment on the pleadings "on the grounds that, as a matter of law, plaintiff has failed to state a claim as against the defendant ... upon which relief can be granted to the plaintiff. Said motion will be made on the following additional grounds: That, at the time and place of the accident alleged in the plaintiff's complaint, the defendant, Southern Pacific Company, as a matter of law, was not guilty of negligent conduct, and on the further ground that the plaintiff was negligent and assumed the risk as a matter of law and that his negligence was a proximate cause of the accident. Said motion will be based upon all of the records, papers and files in this case, the depositions of Leonard L. Smith and Alma E. Dunworth, the originals of which are in the possession of the attorneys for the plaintiff and which the defendant requests be filed for consideration in connection with this motion, the affidavit of John J. Corrigan, as well as the memorandum of points and authorities, copies of which are attached to this motion and served herewith."
The affidavit of John J. Corrigan in support of the motion for summary judgment provides in substance that he is one of the attorneys representing defendant, that on August 2, 1962, at 10 a.m. he took the deposition of plaintiff and his guardian ad litem, that Alma E. Dunworth, the mother and guardian ad litem of plaintiff, testified that for two years prior to the accident referred to in plaintiff's complaint, plaintiff and she along with the rest of the immediate family resided on Ringwood Street in Norwalk, California; she further testified that behind the house during that time and at the time of the accident there was a chain link fence, behind the fence was the railroad right of way in question; that prior to the accident she had told plaintiff not to go onto the right of way or railroad track, she testified that plaintiff was an average student in school and that on occasion he had had the responsibility of taking care of her younger children; that he had the ability to respond to and follow her warnings; that the plaintiff Leonard L. Smith testified that at the time of the accident he was 15 years of age, that he lived at the Ringwood Street address for two years before the accident, that at the back of the house separating it from the right of way there was a 5 to 6-foot chain link fence. He *732 testified that prior to the accident his mother had told him to stay away from trains, not to walk on the railroad track and that she had been telling him that ever since he lived at the Ringwood Street address, that prior to the accident he knew it was wrong, dangerous for him to jump on trains, that he knew his mother did not want him to walk on the railroad track, that there were "no trespassing" signs on the right of way before the accident. He further testified that just before the accident he climbed the chain link fence behind his house and started walking onto the right of way, that as he was so walking a freight train of 25 cars passed him going 10 to 15 miles per hour, that at that time he was walking in a ditch alongside the tracks, that after 8 or 10 railroad cars passed him he jumped on a railroad car loaded with lumber, that as he jumped on the car the train did not jerk or jolt but continued at a steady, fluid movement, that later he jumped off while the train was moving about 20 miles per hour and at that time there was no jerk or jolt of the train but still a steady fluid movement, that when he jumped he fell under the train. He further testified that from his house to the school where he was going at the time of the accident there was a sidewalk and pedestrian bridge which he could have walked on instead of the right of way. The depositions of Alma E. Dunworth and Leonard L. Smith were incorporated by reference and made a part of the affidavit.
On January 11, 1963, Danny R. Jones, one of the attorneys representing plaintiff, filed his affidavit in opposition of the motion for summary judgment. Jones in his affidavit did not controvert the allegations contained in Mr. Corrigan's affidavit. The gist of Mr. Jones' affidavit was to show that defendant railroad was aware of the fact that children were often in the area playing around the trains, trying to hop rides onto the trains, and that it was common knowledge among train crew members to expect children in that area, that the area was continuously used by them as a route to and from school. A copy of a deposition of Mr. William Franklin Stevens was attached to and made a part of Mr. Jones' affidavit. It is then asserted in the affidavit that the complaint on file "states a meritorious cause of action, and that there are triable issues of fact for the consideration of the court or jury; particularly, but not exclusively, the issue of fact as to whether or not the plaintiff Leonard L. Smith stood in the position of a continuous trespasser upon a limited area, and, if he was, whether the defendants discharged their duty of care owed to such a person." *733
On January 18, 1963, the trial judge granted defendant's motion for summary judgment. Judgment was entered January 28, 1963, and the within appeal followed.
[1] Plaintiff's first contention is that the trial court erred in granting defendant's motion for summary judgment because there were questions of fact as to whether the defendant was negligent, and as to whether the plaintiff was contributorily negligent.
Defendant takes the position that plaintiff is proceeding upon the theory of attractive nuisance and defendant cites the cases of Herrera v. Southern Pac. Ry. Co., 188 Cal. App. 2d 441 [10 Cal. Rptr. 575]; Gutirrez v. Southern Pac. Co., 174 Cal. App. 2d 866 [345 P.2d 326]; and Joslin v. Souther Pac. Co., 189 Cal. App. 2d 382 [11 Cal. Rptr. 267], for the proposition that plaintiff cannot prevail in an action predicated upon the attractive nuisance doctrine. Plaintiff, on the other hand, denies that he is proceeding under the attractive nuisance doctrine and asserts that his theory is that he is a continuous trespasser upon a limited area and that as such he is elevated to the status of a licensee. Defendant's affidavit in support of the summary judgment establishes that plaintiff both voluntarily and knowingly exposed himself to an obvious danger--assumption of risk. [2] Where a defendant's affidavit establishes a complete defense to plaintiff's action and the plaintiff's affidavit in reply does not show a triable issue of fact with respect to that defense no amount of factual conflicts upon other aspects of the case will affect the result and the motion for summary judgment should be granted. (Security First National Bank v. Ross, 214 Cal. App. 2d 424, 432 [29 Cal. Rptr. 538]; Tell v. Taylor, 191 Cal. App. 2d 266, 269 [12 Cal. Rptr. 648]; Keylon v. Kelly, 188 Cal. App. 2d 490, 493 [10 Cal. Rptr. 549]; Martelli v. Pollock, 162 Cal. App. 2d 655, 660 [328 P.2d 795].)
The judgment is affirmed.
Wood, P. J., and Lillie, J., concurred.

=== CASE 2212504 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:20.710438+00 ===

650 N.E.2d 741 (1995)
Rebecca C. MEIER, As Chairperson and John C. Bailey, Michael L. Jordan, James R. Martin, Lt. Governor Frank O'Bannon, Patrick R. Ralston, Claude C. Reeck, Jr., Wayne T. Swallow and Roy J. Winkler, Each As Members, of the Water Pollution Control Board of the State of Indiana, and Kathy L. Prosser, Commissioner of the Indiana Department of Environmental Management, Appellants-Defendants below,
v.
AMERICAN MAIZE-PRODUCTS COMPANY, Inc., Bethlehem Steel Corporation, Commonwealth-Edison Company of Indiana, Inc., Fibre Form Corporation, Indiana-Kentucky Electric Corporation, Indiana Michigan Power Company, Landis & Gyr Metering, Inc., Ltv Steel Company, Inc., National Steel Corporation, Phelps Dodge Magnet Wire Company, Southern Indiana Gas & Electric Company, Appellees-Plaintiffs below.
No. 49A02-9304-CV-185.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, Second District.
May 23, 1995.
Transfer Denied October 10, 1995.
*742 Ronald E. Elberger, Keith E. White, George T. Patton, Jr., Bose McKinney & Evans, Indianapolis, for appellants.
Bryan G. Tabler, Peter J. Rusthoven, Barnes & Thornburg, Indianapolis, for appellees.
OPINION UPON REHEARING
SULLIVAN, Judge.
American Maize Products, et al. (collectively, AMP) has filed the present petition for rehearing based upon our opinion in Meier v. American Maize-Products, Inc. (1995) 2d Dist. Ind. App., 645 N.E.2d 662. We write in order to clarify our original decision.
In its petition for rehearing, AMP complains that this court's previous disposition was fundamentally flawed because we failed to take into account specific admissions made by the Water Pollution Control Board (Board) with regard to the fee scheme it established in the Final Rule. AMP argues that we overlooked the Board's admissions, contained in the Statement of Issues and Undisputed Material Facts, that there were no cost differentials in the Fee Statute's cost-related factors as between private and public dischargers, and that the Board's fee differentials, as adopted in the Final Rule, were not based upon any differences in surveillance, cost of issuance of permits, or costs of supervision and review of dischargers. AMP contends that, as a result of this conceded lack of cost differences, our determination, which allowed the Board to establish a fee scheme, was based upon non-existent cost differences.
AMP seems to base its petition upon one specific portion of our opinion:
*743 "Whether or not the clearly appropriate ability of the Board to charge different permit fees for different dischargers carries with it the authority to totally exempt some sources, while charging some more and others less, presents a corollary question. Here, the Board altogether exempted certain publicly-owned facilities from paying fees for NPDES permits.
It is a longstanding principle of modern society that state-owned facilities differ from privately-owned facilities:
`The private corporation, whatever its public duties, is organized for private ends and may be presumed to intend to make whatever profit the business will allow. The municipal corporation is allowed to go into the business only on the theory that thereby the public welfare will be subserved. So far as gain is an object, it is a gain to a public body and must be used for public ends. Those who manage the work cannot lawfully make private profit their aim, as the plaintiff's directors not only may but must.' Springfield Gas and Electric Co. v. Springfield (1921) 257 U.S. 66, 70 [42 S. Ct. 24, 25, 66 L. Ed. 131] [Further citation omitted.].
In the context of water pollution control, it seems the public/private distinction is rational because of the relative ease with which public dischargers, and their records, may be accessed by a similar state agency; it seems a most basic concept that necessary surveillance of private dischargers requires additional resources. That the Board distinguished sources upon the bases of ownership, i.e., public or private, is a rational decision which was not unreasonable based upon the differing concerns associated with the different contaminant sources. Consequently, we find that the Board's authority to entirely exempt some dischargers is inherently encompassed within the confines of I.C. 13-7-7-2's authorization to establish a classification system."[1] 645 N.E.2d at 670.
However, as a whole, AMP misconstrues the decision. The quoted portion states that the Board possessed the authority to create an exemption between public and private dischargers based upon the inherent differences between, and the different concerns associated with, the classes of entities. While we did theorize that the possibility may exist that the surveillance costs may be different as between the two, that underlying rationale was not crucial to our conclusion that the exemption of public entities from paying a fee for discharge permits was a rational one. We did not base our conclusion that the Board was authorized to create a fee scheme upon overlooking the key undisputed material facts, as AMP argues, but upon the language of the authorizing statute itself, I.C. 13-7-7-2.
Although we may have misled AMP, we intended only that the exemption of municipal dischargers be based upon an examination of the differing concerns among the entities. Indeed, in that decision, we quite properly isolated the question of whether the Board could lawfully differentiate among classes of dischargers from the question as to the propriety of the actual amounts charged to those classes.
AMP's real challenge, however, seems to stem from the fact that we left open for the trial court's determination the propriety of the amount of NPDES permit fees the Board established based upon the cost factors:
"We conclude that, though the Board was authorized to establish a differentiated fee scheme, summary judgment in favor of the Board would have been inappropriately rendered. The Fee Statute allows the Board only to recoup its costs; thus, the question remains as to whether the monetary amounts the Board set in its existing fee scheme are, in fact, logically tied to the recoupment of its costs. This must be a question of fact for the trial court's determination." 645 N.E.2d at 674.
AMP seems to argue that, because the Board admitted that the cost factors were not different, *744 the amounts set could not have been logically tied to cost-recoupment. We recognize that, in our initial decision upon this matter, and as AMP has brought to our attention, we could have gone further; we could have recognized AMP's necessarily implicit argument  that the amounts the Board set in its Final Rule were arbitrary and capricious because the Board itself admitted that there was no difference in the Fee Statute's cost-related factors as between the two classes of dischargers. Further, upon review, we recognize that the most prudent course of action may be to proceed as AMP requests.
However, we make very clear that AMP's initial argument did not assert that the Board's determination of permit fee amounts was necessarily arbitrary and capricious because it lacked any factual evidentiary basis. Rather, it argued that the Board did not have statutory authorization to set such a permit fee scheme. That the lack of differences in the statutory cost factors, when determined to have no factual predicate, might support a grant of summary judgment in favor of AMP is an issue separate and apart from the question of law. See Ray v. State Election Board (1981) 4th Dist. Ind. App., 425 N.E.2d 240, 242; see also Indiana Environmental Management Board v. Indiana-Kentucky Electric Corp. (1979) 181 Ind. App. 570, 393 N.E.2d 213, 222 n. 1 (Sullivan, J., dissenting). Thus, in extending this analysis, we are doing something that is very different than determining the limits to which the Board's statutory authority to create a fee scheme extended, and upon which AMP focused.
Therefore, we reiterate our decision upon the applicable law  that the Board did possess the statutory authority, per I.C. 13-7-7-2, to differentiate between private and public dischargers. However, as the reviewing court, we are not empowered to reweigh the Board's decisions; we may only determine whether the Board's actions, in setting the specific amounts here at issue, were arbitrary and capricious, were unsupported by substantial evidence, or were in violation of the relevant rules of law or procedure. See Metropolitan School District of Martinsville v. Mason (1983) 1st Dist. Ind. App., 451 N.E.2d 349, 353; see also Riggin v. Board of Trustees of Ball State Univ. (1986) 489 N.E.2d 616, 625, trans. denied (court cannot interfere with acts of an agency which are within the allowable scope of discretion unless that act is arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion or unsupported by substantial evidence).
That the Board is empowered to differentiate among classes of dischargers based upon their ownership, however, will not condone action of an arbitrary and capricious nature, justified by no empirical or factual basis upon which to premise those differentiated amounts charged. Where, as here, the agency's action is quasi-legislative in nature, we must remain cognizant that our review is limited to an examination of the "reasonableness" of the "administrative legislation." Indiana-Kentucky Electric Corp., supra, 393 N.E.2d at 222. In that instance, unless the agency's quasi-legislative action "`appears to be purely arbitrary, [it] is not the subject of judicial review.'" Id. (quoting Wallace v. Feehan (1934) 206 Ind. 522, 533, 190 N.E. 438, 443).
Here, a unique factual situation exists. We have no basis upon which to determine that the Board has properly complied with the Fee Statute's cost factors while at the same time restricting itself to cost-recoupment. Furthermore, as the Board has admitted, once the Fee Statute's cost factors are taken into account, there is no evidence that differences exist to justify the higher amounts charged to private dischargers. The Board, has then, in essence, admitted that it has neither properly taken the Fee Statute's cost factors into account, nor restricted itself to cost-recoupment, as it is bound to do.
Though normally the burden to prove that the Board's actions were arbitrary falls upon the party challenging the action,[2] in light of the Board's admissions, we may conclude that the Board disregarded the applicable substantive law. Because it disregarded the *745 facts and circumstances, the Board's action was inappropriate. See Ray, supra, 425 N.E.2d at 242. Further, were we to remand to the trial court in order to determine whether the amounts set by the Board were arbitrary and capricious, the court could reach no other decision than that the agency did not properly apply the Fee Statute's cost factors.
The question remains as to the proper course of conduct for this court to take under the present circumstances. We must determine whether the Board may essentially retroactively justify the amounts (but not the differentiation based upon status) it established in the Fee Statute by considering further supporting facts in additional proceedings before it.[3]
The sole remedy the trial court or the Court of Appeals may afford when an administrative decision is found unlawful is to vacate that decision and remand to the Board for further proceedings. Mason, supra, 451 N.E.2d at 353. By definition, our authority extends only to reversing the agency's actions. Therefore, as the reviewing court, our sole recourse is to vacate the fee scheme's factually unsupported amounts. We would step beyond our bounds, as well as our expertise, were we to move past a simple reversal of the agency's actions to actually set the proper permit fee amounts. See Ray, supra, 425 N.E.2d at 242.
Were we to remand to the Board to reconsider the amounts charged, the Board could not supplement its original findings, because those amounts it set were admittedly not tied to the Fee Statute's cost factors. The Board would, however, be bound to establish any new amounts for NPDES discharge permit fees in accordance with the law it is bound to follow. And, as the Board is empowered to set the fee scheme, we do not require the Board to re-evaluate those classifications; we only require that any actual dollar amounts the Board wishes to collect be logically tied to the Fee Statute's cost factors with some factual basis. That the Board may be forced to re-evaluate its classification scheme in the process is not our concern.
We therefore determine that, although the trial court's decision that the Board had no statutory authorization to differentiate among classes of dischargers was erroneous, the Board could not have enforced those permit fees because those fees lacked a rational evidentiary basis. To that extent, the Petition for Rehearing is granted, and the Board is enjoined from collecting those fees it established pursuant to the Final Rule.
SHARPNACK, C.J., and KIRSCH, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  The concomitant footnote reads:
"In so holding, we emphasize that any such exemption must be granted by resort to reasonable and rational analysis of the circumstances. They may not be arbitrarily granted or withheld." 645 N.E.2d at 670.
[2]  Riggin, supra, 489 N.E.2d at 625.
[3]  We note here that, in the future, the issue as to the proper amount of fees for NPDES discharge permits has been foreclosed by the General Assembly.

=== CASE 2212507 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:20.744129+00 ===

650 N.E.2d 294 (1995)
272 Ill.App.3d 73
208 Ill. Dec. 837
In re the MARRIAGE OF Sharon Ann MESECHER, n/k/a Sharon Ann Schmitt, Petitioner-Appellee, and Barry Lee Mesecher, Respondent-Appellant.
No. 4-94-0439.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Fourth District.
May 16, 1995.
*295 Robert Weiner, Springfield, for appellant.
Mark Rabin, Long, Morris, Myers, Rabin, Shuff & Taylor, P.C., Springfield, for appellee.
Justice COOK delivered the opinion of the court:
Respondent Barry Lee Mesecher appeals an April 26, 1994, order of the circuit court of Sangamon County requiring him to pay $27,366.19 in unpaid child support and insurance costs to petitioner Sharon Ann Mesecher, n/k/a Sharon Ann Schmitt. Respondent contends that petitioner's present action for unpaid support is barred under the doctrine of res judicata, because petitioner seeks arrearages that accrued prior to an October 22, 1991, court order which had determined the amount of child support arrearages then due. Respondent further contends that the April 26, 1994, order is void because petitioner failed to notify or join the Illinois Department of Public Aid (IDPA) as a necessary party to her present action. We reject both arguments and affirm the trial court's order.
I. BACKGROUND
The parties were married on October 16, 1978. Two children were born to the parties: Michelle Lynn, born August 9, 1978, and Melissa Sue, born February 26, 1980. On January 22, 1981, a judgment of dissolution of marriage was entered. Respondent was ordered to pay $235 per month in child support and to maintain health and hospitalization insurance for the minor children.
Respondent did not meet his obligations, and petitioner approached the IDPA for help with collection proceedings. The IDPA did not initiate any collection proceedings at that time. Petitioner then applied for public aid, apparently sometime in 1986. By virtue of accepting public aid, petitioner assigned to the IDPA her rights to child support, up to the amount of financial aid provided by the IDPA. 305 ILCS 5/10-1 (West 1992).
After petitioner began receiving public aid, the IDPA initiated collection proceedings against respondent. On November 24, 1986, the trial court found that the IDPA had provided $2,324 for respondent's children and entered a judgment against respondent and in favor of the IDPA for that amount. Respondent was ordered to pay child support of $40 per week, plus $4 per week on the judgment. The order did not indicate how the arrearage was calculated. The order stated that "[t]he question of health/hospitalization insurance is reserved."
Respondent did not make payments on the $2,324 arrearage, and on June 1, 1987, the State's Attorney filed a petition for rule to show cause why respondent should not be held in contempt. On July 21, 1987, the trial court found respondent owed "$3,168 in back child support as of July 13, 1987." The order did not make clear whether judgment was in favor of the IDPA or petitioner, but respondent's $10-per-week payments on the arrearage were to be forwarded by the clerk of the circuit court to the IDPA until the IDPA notified the clerk that petitioner was no longer receiving public aid. The IDPA filed such notice in April 1989.
Again respondent did not pay. The IDPA, through the office of the State's Attorney, filed a petition alleging respondent was in arrears $3,133 as of August 16, 1990. The trial court found that respondent was in arrears $4,715 "as of May 6, 1991," and awarded judgment in favor of "the petitioning parties" in that amount. An order dated October 22, 1991, clarified that of this $4,715, $2,649 was owed to petitioner and $2,066 was owed to the IDPA.
*296 On November 10, 1993, petitioner filed a petition seeking $17,773.50 in unpaid support allegedly accruing prior to November 24, 1986, judgment for IDPA. Petitioner also sought reimbursement for $9,592.69 she had spent maintaining medical insurance for the benefit of the parties' children. At the hearing on this petition, respondent did not contest petitioner's figures, but he maintained that the October 1991 order barred further litigation on arrearages owed prior to that date. Petitioner then testified that she came to court the day the October 1991 order was entered in response to a letter from the IDPA. The State's Attorney was representing the IDPA in several arrearage cases that day, and the hearing on petitioner's case lasted only about 15 minutes. Petitioner was not represented by counsel at that time, and she believed that the State's Attorney was representing the IDPA alone. Petitioner signed the October 1991 order after the State's Attorney explained that it covered only arrearages accruing after petitioner began receiving public aid.
Respondent presented no evidence concerning the subject matter of prior proceedings. The trial court concluded that the October order did not preclude the present action for arrearages accruing prior to November 24, 1986, and accordingly it entered judgment in favor of petitioner for $27,366.19.
II. WAS PETITIONER'S PRESENT ACTION BARRED UNDER THE DOCTRINE OF RES JUDICATA?
The supreme court recently set forth the standards for deciding whether res judicata applies to bar a claim:
"Under the doctrine of res judicata, a final judgment rendered on the merits by a court of competent jurisdiction is conclusive as to the rights of the parties and their privies and, as to them, constitutes an absolute bar to a subsequent action involving the same claim, demand, or cause of action. (People v. Kidd (1947), 398 Ill. 405, 408[, 75 N.E.2d 851, 853].) Where there is identity of parties, subject matter, and cause of action, the doctrine of res judicata extends not only to every matter that was actually determined in the prior suit but to every other matter that might have been raised and determined in it. (Boddiker v. McPartlin (1942), 379 Ill. 567, 577[, 41 N.E.2d 756, 761].)" Torcasso v. Standard Outdoor Sales, Inc. (1993), 157 Ill. 2d 484, 490, 193 Ill. Dec. 192, 195, 626 N.E.2d 225, 228.
What is involved in this case is estoppel by judgment (claim preclusion) and not collateral estoppel (issue preclusion). If petitioner had obtained the October 1991 order, we would agree that she could not obtain a subsequent order for arrearages accruing before 1986, because there was only one cause of action for unpaid child support. If petitioner had obtained the October 1991 order, that order would bar a subsequent action not only for matters actually determined in that suit, but matters which could have been raised and determined, including arrearages prior to 1986. Petitioner, however, contends her present action is not barred by res judicata, because there is no privity between herself and the IDPA. We agree.
Res judicata will not operate to preclude a subsequent suit unless there is an identity of parties or privity. (People ex rel. Burris v. Progressive Land Developers, Inc. (1992), 151 Ill. 2d 285, 296, 176 Ill. Dec. 874, 879, 602 N.E.2d 820, 825.) Privity exists "between `"parties who adequately represent the same legal interests."'" (Progressive Land Developers, Inc., 151 Ill.2d at 296, 176 Ill. Dec. at 879, 602 N.E.2d at 825, quoting Hartke v. Chicago Board of Election Commissioners (N.D.Ill.1986), 651 F. Supp. 86, 90.) "It is the identity of interest that controls in determining privity, not the nominal identity of the parties [citation]." Progressive Land Developers, Inc., 151 Ill.2d at 296, 176 Ill. Dec. at 880, 602 N.E.2d at 826.
Here, petitioner testified that although she appeared as a witness at prior collection proceedings, those proceedings were initiated by the IDPA, through the office of the State's Attorney. The issue is therefore whether the IDPA adequately represented petitioner's interests in these prior proceedings. We hold that it did not. The separate parties claim separate monies. Petitioner presented uncontroverted testimony that the IDPA sought only to recoup the public aid monies it had expended; the IDPA was unconcerned with arrearages accruing *297 prior to petitioner's receipt of public aid. Since the IDPA was not interested in the recovery of all monies due, it was not an adequate advocate for petitioner's interests.
We find the case of Department of Public Aid ex rel. Stark v. Wheeler (1993), 248 Ill. App. 3d 749, 188 Ill. Dec. 741, 618 N.E.2d 1311, to be instructive. There, the IDPA brought suit to decide the paternity of twins and the liability of the alleged father for support. Prior to the action initiated by the IDPA, the twins' mother had filed a paternity suit against the same alleged father. The mother's suit had been dismissed with prejudice, which operated as an adjudication on the merits. (Wheeler, 248 Ill.App.3d at 750-51, 188 Ill. Dec. at 743, 618 N.E.2d at 1313.) The court held that the IDPA's claim was not barred by res judicata, because the IDPA was not in privity with the mother. (Wheeler, 248 Ill.App.3d at 751, 188 Ill. Dec. at 743-44, 618 N.E.2d at 1313-14.) The court explained the interests of public agencies providing aid to children are different from the interests of the children's caretakers. Wheeler, 248 Ill.App.3d at 751, 188 Ill. Dec. at 744, 618 N.E.2d at 1314.
In Wheeler, it is difficult to see exactly how the interests of the mother and the IDPA diverged, because both parties would have benefited from a judgment of paternity. Here it is clear that the IDPA and petitioner's interests are distinct, because the IDPA would have gained nothing by establishing respondent had debts other than those owed the IDPA.
Respondent cites Draper v. Truitt (1993), 250 Ill.App.3d 654, 190 Ill. Dec. 333, 621 N.E.2d 202, and In re Connors (1994), 255 Ill.App.3d 781, 194 Ill. Dec. 529, 627 N.E.2d 1171, in support of the proposition that petitioner and the IDPA were privies. In Draper, mother brought a paternity and support action on behalf of her minor daughter after mother had herself lost a paternity action against the same alleged father. The court held that the minor's interests had been adequately represented by mother in the earlier paternity action, because the mother fully litigated the issue of paternity. (Draper, 250 Ill.App.3d at 659, 190 Ill. Dec. at 337, 621 N.E.2d at 206.) We question the soundness of Draper, which seems to abandon the requirement of privity in cases where the issues are fully litigated. In some paternity cases (even fully litigated ones) there may be a difference between the mother's interests and the child's interests, as illustrated by the fact that under section 8 of the Illinois Parentage Act of 1984 a child may bring the action not later than two years after the child reaches the age of majority, while the mother's action must be brought not later than two years after the birth of the child. (750 ILCS 45/8(a)(1), (a)(2) (West 1992); see Simcox v. Simcox (1989), 131 Ill. 2d 491, 137 Ill. Dec. 664, 546 N.E.2d 609, (prior action an uncontested dissolution proceeding); In re Marriage of Ingram (1988), 176 Ill.App.3d 413, 418, 125 Ill. Dec. 918, 921, 531 N.E.2d 97, 100 (mother sought "to deprive the child of the only father he has known").) Even applying Draper, the IDPA here did not fully litigate the issue of arrearages accruing prior to petitioner's receipt of public aid.
In Connors, the State attempted to subject respondent to involuntary commitment. After failing to commit respondent, the State tried again by finding a new person to sign the petition. The court found that despite the different names on the petitions, the State was the real party in both proceedings. (Connors, 255 Ill.App.3d at 783, 194 Ill. Dec. at 530-31, 627 N.E.2d at 1172-73.) There is no suggestion in the record that petitioner is attempting such a ruse.
Since the IDPA and petitioner were not privies, respondent's defense of res judicata must fail. We recognize that the presence of the IDPA in child support proceedings creates problems for payors of child support by adding another party to deal with and creating the possibility that the payor may be forced to litigate similar issues more than once. Nevertheless, we are unwilling to force a recipient of child support to give up a legitimate claim which that party has not in fact litigated. Perhaps the solution for child support payors is to make sure that both the recipient and the IDPA are parties in each proceeding.
III. WAS THE TRIAL COURT'S ORDER VOID BECAUSE THE IDPA WAS NOT JOINED AS A NECESSARY PARTY?
On appeal, respondent argues that the trial court's order is void, because the *298 IDPA was not joined as a party to the present action. Respondent cites In re Marriage of Clark (1988), 170 Ill.App.3d 690, 121 Ill. Dec. 343, 525 N.E.2d 149, and In re Marriage of Johnson (1981), 97 Ill.App.3d 634, 53 Ill. Dec. 72, 423 N.E.2d 264, in support of the proposition that the IDPA became a necessary party to any arrearage action brought by petitioner, by virtue of petitioner's assignment to the IDPA of her right to receive child support payments. In both Clark and Johnson, mothers currently receiving public aid petitioned for back child support without notifying the IDPA. In both cases the trial courts granted the petitions, but the appellate courts reversed, because the IDPA, as an assignee of the mother's support rights, was entitled to notice when its interests were at stake. The Johnson court explained: "Whenever a party has been omitted whose presence is so indispensable to a decision upon the merits that an order cannot be made without materially affecting his interests, the court should not proceed to a decision on the merits." Johnson, 97 Ill.App.3d at 636, 53 Ill. Dec. at 73, 423 N.E.2d at 265.
The present case is distinguishable. Unlike the mothers in Johnson and Clark, petitioner seeks arrearages that accrued before she received public aid. Furthermore, the present judgment against respondent in no way compromises the interests of the IDPA. Respondent was not relieved of any indebtedness due the IDPA. Since the present order did not materially affect the interests of the IDPA, we hold that the IDPA was not a necessary party.
IV. CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the judgment of the circuit court of Sangamon County.
Affirmed.
GREEN and STEIGMANN, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2212510 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:20.778658+00 ===

226 N.W.2d 768 (1975)
193 Neb. 283
STATE of Nebraska, Appellee,
v.
Michael GARZA, Appellant.
No. 39575.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
March 13, 1975.
Paul E. Watts, J. Joseph McQuillan, Gerald E. Moran, George R. Sornberger, Omaha, for appellant.
*769 Clarence A. H. Meyer, Atty. Gen., Harold Mosher, Asst. Atty. Gen., Lincoln, for appellee.
Heard before WHITE, C. J., and SPENCER, BOSLAUGH, McCOWN, NEWTON, CLINTON and BRODKEY, JJ.
BRODKEY, Justice.
Appellant, Michael Garza, has appealed his felony conviction under section 28-532, R.R.S.1943. The specific language of the information charged that he "did willfully, maliciously, and forcibly and with the intent to commit rape on the person of Vida (sic) M. Cernius in the dwelling hereinafter described, break and enter into said dwelling located at 3407 V Street, in the City of Omaha." The jury returned a verdict of guilty, and the trial court sentenced appellant to serve a term of 10 years in the Nebraska Penal and Correctional Complex. The appellant assigns as error the action of the trial court in instructing the jury on the issue of aiding and abetting, asserting that there is no evidence in the record to support such instruction. We affirm.
The facts of this case are that in the early morning hours of September 24, 1973, someone entered the bedroom of Vita Cernius at 3407 V Street in Omaha, Nebraska, awakened her in some manner by putting physical pressure on her chest and a hand over her mouth. At that time the intruder stated "`Don't scream or I'll kill you.'" He made no attempt to kiss or fondle Vita, and after a struggle lasting approximately 30 seconds he struck her on the mouth and rushed out of the room. The bedroom was dark and Vita could not tell who the intruder was. Vita's father was awakened by the sounds of the struggle and attempted to stop the intruder in the hall, but was unsuccessful. Mr. Cernius did not get a good look at the intruder because of darkness. The intruder exited from the house through a back door, and in order to do so had to break the glass on the door with his foot. Omaha police officers arrived to investigate the matter and discovered blood leading out the back door of the house. They were able to follow a trail of blood, which led them to 3121 T Street. They entered the house and found appellant lying on a couch with a bleeding foot. At the trial evidence was adduced as to an intimate relationship Vita had previously had with an individual who called himself Mike Gonzales, but she was unable to identify appellant as the same person whom she knew as Mike Gonzales. The police officer who interviewed Vita the day of the incident testified she told him that the intruder was possibly a Negro with an afro style haircut. There was also testimony adduced concerning an unidentified black man present at the preliminary hearing held in the case.
Appellant contends that it was error for the court to instruct the jury as to the law of aiding and abetting for the reason there was no testimony that anyone saw two people in the Cernius house during the incident described above. Moreover, the evidence in the record would seem to indicate that the appellant was tried as a principal, and not as an aider, abettor, or procurer.
Instruction No. 13 given by the court to the jury in this case was the standard N.J.I. No. 14.12 as follows:
"To be guilty of the crime charged it is not necessary that the state prove that the defendant himself committed the unlawful act or acts in question.
"Whoever aids, abets, or procures another to commit any offense may be prosecuted and punished as if he were the principal offender.
"If you find from the evidence beyond a reasonable doubt that the unlawful act or acts in question were committed by another person who was:
"1. Engaged by the defendant to commit the unlawful act or acts; or
"2. Engaged with the defendant in a common, concerted unlawful act or acts; or
"3. Incited or encouraged by defendant to commit the unlawful act or acts, *770 then the defendant is as guilty as if he himself committed the unlawful act or acts, and it is your duty to find the defendant guilty.
"Aiding and abetting involves some participation in the criminal act and must be evidenced by some word, act, or deed. No particular acts are necessary; nor is it necessay that any physical part in the commission of the crime is taken or that there was an express agreement therefor. Mere encouragement or assistance is sufficient.
"On the other hand, evidence of mere presence, acquiescence, or silence is not enough to sustain the state's burden of proving the defendant guilty." (Emphasis supplied.)
It is clear from the above instruction that it is first necessary for the jury to find from the evidence beyond a reasonable doubt that the unlawful act or acts in question were committed by another person, before considering or applying the law of aiding and abetting to this case, as explained in the instruction and in section 28-201, R.R.S.1943. Thus the jury was obviously required first to make a factual determination from the evidence that two or more persons were involved in the crime. It is the general rule that an instruction which submits an issue to the jury not supported by the evidence is erroneous. See Bell v. State, 159 Neb. 474, 67 N.W.2d 762 (1954). Appellant contends there was no evidence to support the aiding and abetting instruction. Let us examine that contention.
It appears from the record that the suggestion there may have been more than one person in the house at the time of the incident was first raised by counsel for the appellant himself in the cross-examination of George Cernius, father of Vita. After he testified that he had seen a man 5 feet from Vita's bedroom, counsel for appellant asked him: "Well, you're assuming he came out of there, but there might have been more than one person. Did you see him come out of the bedroom?" The State's objection to this question was, however, sustained by the court. Later in the trial police officer Pignotti was asked what description Vita Cernius gave him of the person in her room and he replied: "Her description was, `A male, 20's, possible Negro.'" From this description alone the jury could have concluded that there were two persons in the Cernius house because the defendant was not a Negro but, according to the arresting officer's testimony, was a Mexican male. Further, when Vita Cernius was being cross-examined she was asked about a black man who attended the preliminary hearing. When asked if that black man was the man in her bedroom, Vita Cernius replied, "I don't know." Also, Anna Cernius, mother of Vita, testified that she saw a black male at the preliminary hearing who was seated in the same row she was sitting, and that she saw him get up and walk from the courtroom. She described him as tall and skinny, walked with a limp; and that he called out the name "Mike" a couple of times. It appears the foregoing testimony might well have raised the question in the minds of the jurors as to whether there was more than one intruder in the Cernius home the night of the crime. The trial judge was apparently of the same opinion as he stated during the conference on instructions: "And there's sufficient evidence introduced by the State, as well as Cross Examination, of the potentiality of more than one person." The court also noted after closing arguments that the instructions on aiding and abetting were to be submitted "because of the fact that it was dwelled upon in the opening statements and there was evidence both on Direct and Cross which raised some question," and further stated "Let the record show that, while the closing argument was not reported, the Court made notes, and Mr. Watts argued it with quite deliberation in his closing argument, and his statement was, in all probability, someone else was along with the Defendant and someone else was there, He repeated that several times." It seems clear that the court in this case was faced with the dilemma *771 as to whether or not to give the instruction on aiding and abetting, and in an abundance of caution, and for the purpose of resolving any doubts the jury may have had and to expedite further proceedings, gave the standard instruction set out above, which made it a question of fact for the decision of the jury as to whether there was more than one person in the home that night, and, if so, then whether the aforesaid instruction should be considered and applied in this case.
However, even assuming, without conceding, that there was no competent evidence to support the giving of the aiding and abetting instruction, we believe that the action of the court in giving such instruction would be erroneous only, and not ground for reversal, in the absence of a showing of prejudice. At the most it would constitute harmless error under section 29 2308, R.R.S.1943, which provides, among other things: "No judgment shall be set aside, or new trial granted, or judgment rendered in any criminal case, on the grounds of misdirection of the jury, or the improper admission or rejection of evidence, or for error as to any matter of pleading or procedure, if the Supreme Court, after an examination of the entire cause, shall consider that no substantial miscarriage of justice has actually occurred." In Wilson v. State, 150 Neb. 436, 34 N.W.2d 880 (1948), the defendant claimed, as did the appellant in this case, that the court committed reversible error in instructing the jury on the issue of aiding and abetting when it responded to no issue in the case. In discussing this contention, the court stated: "The effect of the instruction was to tell the jury that if the defendant aided, abetted, or procured another to commit the offense charged he could be prosecuted and punished as if he were a principal offender.
"An examination of the record discloses that the evidence was in proof of guilt of this defendant as a principal and not as aider, abettor, or procurer hence the instruction was upon an issue not presented. It was therefore, as contended, error to give it. The error was however without prejudice and cannot be considered as ground for reversal. The giving of it could have in nowise prejudiced any substantial right of the defendant. Unless the error complained of could be considered as prejudicial to the rights of defendant it may not be considered here as ground for reversal. § 29-2308, R.S.1943; Mason v. State, 132 Neb. 7, 270 N.W. 661; Jackson v. State, 133 Neb. 786, 277 N.W. 92." The same rule was reaffirmed in the recent case of State v. Morgan, 187 Neb. 706, 193 N.W.2d 742 (1972). See, also, State v. Roan Eagle, 182 Neb. 535, 156 N.W.2d 131 (1968).
We conclude, therefore, that the instruction given by the court was supported by evidence and was properly given, and, further, even assuming that the giving of the instruction was erroneous, it was clearly harmless error and not ground for reversal. We therefore affirm appellant's conviction.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 2212513 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:20.811845+00 ===

650 N.E.2d 287 (1995)
272 Ill.App.3d 140
208 Ill. Dec. 830
In the Matter of Eric HERBOLSHEIMER (People of the State of Illinois, Petitioner-Appellee, v. Eric Herbolsheimer, Respondent-Appellant).
No. 3-94-0594.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Third District.
May 12, 1995.
*288 Melissa McGrath, Guardianship Advocacy Com'n, Peoria, Jeff M. Plesko, Guardianship Advocacy Com'n, Anna, for Eric Herbolsheimer.
John X. Breslin, Deputy Director, State's Attorneys Appellate Prosecutor, Ottawa, Kevin W. Lyons, State's Atty., Peoria, Judith Z. Kelly, State's Attorneys Appellate Prosecutor, for the People.
Justice LYTTON delivered the opinion of the court:
The respondent, Eric Herbolsheimer, appeals from the trial court's order subjecting him to involuntary administration of psychotropic medication. We affirm.
On July 15, 1994, Herbolsheimer was admitted to a mental health facility for examination. A petition to involuntarily commit him to Zeller Mental Health Center was filed on July 18. On July 19, counsel was appointed for Herbolsheimer, and Herbolsheimer received notice that a hearing on the petition was scheduled for July 20.
At the start of the hearing, Herbolsheimer indicated that he and his appointed attorney, John Riddle, disagreed over trial strategy, and he requested a continuance to enable him to obtain private counsel. Riddle suggested a continuance of two or three weeks to allow the State "to get their petition for meds on file" because Herbolsheimer was "telling [him] he won't take meds."
On July 21, the trial court entered an order continuing the hearing until August 3, 1994, and appointed an assistant public defender as Herbolsheimer's counsel. Herbolsheimer was notified of the new hearing date on July 21. The day before the scheduled hearing, the State filed a petition to involuntarily administer psychotropic medications to Herbolsheimer; neither Herbolsheimer nor his appointed counsel received formal notice of this petition. Riddle met with Herbolsheimer to discuss the case on August 2.
At the outset of the August 3 hearing, the trial judge stated that the hearing would concern both the Petition for Involuntary Admission to a Mental Health Facility and the Petition for Involuntary Administration of Psychotropic Medication. Because Herbolsheimer had not obtained private representation, the trial judge again appointed Riddle as his counsel. Riddle then stated that he had considered himself Herbolsheimer's attorney since the start of the case and indicated that he was adequately prepared "to deal with the issues." Neither Herbolsheimer nor Riddle objected to the lack of notice or requested a continuance for the medication petition.
Dr. Jaya Attaluri, Herbolsheimer's treating psychiatrist, testified that Herbolsheimer had been diagnosed with chronic undifferentiated schizophrenia since 1990 and had been repeatedly hospitalized. At the hospital, he exhibited paranoia and accused various parties of conspiring to keep him away from his wife, who had obtained an order of protection against him. His behavior had been "very agitated and aggressive" and had included throwing chairs on two occasions and using inappropriate language. Dr. Attaluri added *289 that his last three or four hospital admissions had been for aggressive behavior.
Dr. Attaluri testified that Herbolsheimer was unable to work and that his ability to care for himself was deteriorating. He had been repeatedly calling and threatening his wife, his mother, Department of Child and Family Services personnel, and La Salle County police officers. Dr. Attaluri believed that if he were released, he would harass other people to find his wife and child and could become violent toward his wife if he found her.
Herbolsheimer's mother testified that after he had been admitted to the hospital he had put his hands around her neck and told her that she would be sorry if she did not get him out. She also stated that he had knives and that he had previously told her that "he had been good long enough and it [was] time people saw the real Eric." He then explained that he hoped "he would finally become crazy enough" to kill everyone without remembering it and then kill himself. His mother testified that she was concerned that he might attack someone if he were released. Herbolsheimer testified that in the hospital he had put his hands around another patient's neck and had "pushed him around" after the man allegedly hit him in the eye.
Dr. Attaluri stated that Herbolsheimer did not believe that he needed treatment and had a history of failing to take his medication after being released from the hospital. She wanted to prescribe Haldol or Risperdal to reduce his aggressive behavior and paranoid thoughts and testified that the benefits outweighed the potential harm. She also stated that a less restrictive treatment setting was impossible because Herbolsheimer exhibited poor judgment and lacked insight into his condition.
Herbolsheimer testified that his problems were related solely to his family situation and that he needs medication only to help him sleep. He explained that he objected to taking Haldol because it produced serious side effects, and he lacked control when he was medicated. He stated that after his last release from the hospital he had sought counseling but had not taken his medication.
At the conclusion of the parties' closing arguments, the trial court granted the State's petitions for involuntary commitment and involuntary administration of psychotropic medications. Herbolsheimer appeals from the medication order.
On appeal Herbolsheimer presents four issues: (1) whether he was denied due process when both petitions were considered in a single hearing, (2) whether the absence of formal notice of the hearing on the petition for involuntary medication was reversible error, (3) whether the trial court's failure to appoint separate counsel on the medication petition prior to the hearing was reversible error, and (4) whether Herbolsheimer received ineffective assistance of counsel.
1. Combined Hearing on Petitions
Herbolsheimer contends that he is entitled to separate hearings on the petitions for involuntary commitment and administration of psychotropic medication under the Mental Health and Developmental Disabilities Code (the Code). He argues that section 2-101 of the Code requires separate hearings to declare a respondent legally disabled and to subject that person to involuntary commitment. (405 ILCS 5/2-101 (West 1992).) He also claims that because he must be involuntarily committed before he is eligible for involuntary medication as "a recipient of services" (see 405 ILCS 5/2-107.1(a) (West 1992)), separate hearings must be held. We disagree.
Neither section 2-101 nor section 2-107.1 preclude both petitions from being considered in the same hearing. (405 ILCS 5/2-101, 2-107.1.) Indeed, section 2-101 is inapplicable here. Herbolsheimer was not the subject of a competency hearing, nor was he determined to be legally disabled within the meaning of section 2-101. He became eligible for involuntary medication under section 2-107.1 as "a recipient of services" when he was initially examined by a mental health professional on July 18; a prior hearing on the State's commitment petition was unnecessary. 405 ILCS 5/1-123 (West 1992); In Re C.E. (1994), 161 Ill. 2d 200, 231, 204 Ill. Dec. 121, 135, 641 N.E.2d 345, 359.
Herbolsheimer also argues that because the issues and liberty interests involved in *290 the two petitions are different, separate hearings must be held to determine the appropriate procedural protections. (See Morrissey v. Brewer (1972), 408 U.S. 471, 481, 92 S. Ct. 2593, 2600, 33 L. Ed. 2d 484, 494) He asserts that since a medical specialist must make the ultimate treatment decision (see Parham v. J.R. (1979), 442 U.S. 584, 609, 99 S. Ct. 2493, 2508, 61 L. Ed. 2d 101, 123), Dr. Attaluri's testimony alone was relevant to the medication petition. Thus, other testimony relating to the involuntary commitment petition exposed the trial court to irrelevant and prejudicial testimony.
Herbolsheimer has not specifically alleged how the trial court was prejudiced by considering both petitions in a single hearing; we do not believe that such prejudice can be shown. Because Dr. Attaluri's testimony sufficiently established Herbolsheimer's need for medication, any additional testimony could not have improperly influenced the court's consideration of the medication petition.
Trial judges are frequently required to consider evidence on several issues and to make multiple determinations within a single proceeding. Here, the trial court made separate findings on the two petitions and relied on different evidence in its orders. Herbolsheimer's due process rights were not infringed simply because the petitions were heard in a single proceeding.
(The discussion of the remaining issues is not to be published pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 23 (Official Reports Advance Sheet No. 15 (July 20, 1994), R. 23, effective July 1, 1994).)
Conclusion
The judgment of the circuit court of Peoria County is affirmed.
Affirmed.
STOUDER, P.J., and McCUSKEY, J., concur.

=== CASE 2212518 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:20.863578+00 ===

57 Mich. App. 405 (1975)
226 N.W.2d 106
CATES
v.
MOYSES
Docket No. 18078.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided January 7, 1975.
*406 Van Benschoten & Van Benschoten, P.C., for plaintiffs.
Durance & Sheldon, for defendant Detroit Automobile Inter-Insurance Exchange.
Before: T.M. BURNS, P.J., and R.B. BURNS and CARLAND,[*] JJ.
Leave to appeal granted, 394 Mich ___.
CARLAND, J.
The facts upon which the issues here involved must be determined have been stipulated and agreed upon by all parties. Following an automobile accident, suit was instituted by the plaintiffs against the defendants on July 12, 1968. A judgment was entered on November 17, 1971 in favor of the plaintiffs and against the defendants in a total sum of $60,000. The judgment assessed costs against the defendants which were later paid. Interest on the judgment was awarded in favor of the plaintiffs from the date of the filing of the complaint. At the time of the accident, defendant David D. Moyses was insured by garnishee defendant Detroit Automobile Inter-Insurance Exchange, hereinafter referred to as "the company", to the limit of $10,000.
Following garnishment proceedings by the plaintiffs against the company, a disclosure was filed admitting the liability of the company under the policy in question. By this disclosure the company admitted owing under its policy $8,511 (it having previously paid $1,489 thereon) plus interest at the rate of 5% per annum on this amount from the date of suit (July 12, 1968) to date of payment.
*407 On September 12, 1972, a hearing was had on plaintiffs' petition for discovery of assets under MCLA 600.6104; MSA 27A.6104. On September 20, 1972, after the first hearing on the above mentioned motion, the company paid into court the sum of $10,330.20 which represented the sum admitted to be due under its policy plus interest at 5% from July 12, 1968 to September 20, 1972.
Later, on May 15, 1973, the company made a motion for a rehearing in connection with the garnishment proceedings and further sought a determination by the court as to the interest, if any, due under the judgment.
By an amended order dated October 12, 1973, the trial court found the company to be liable for the limits of its policy in the sum of $10,000. The court also found the company to be liable under its policy for interest at the rate of 5% per annum on the entire judgment of $60,000 computed from July 12, 1968 to September 20, 1972. This order further provided, as summarized in the parties stipulation of facts, as follows:
"(c) It was ordered that the balance now due in the amount of $10,418.45 representing interest on the entire judgment from date of complaint, July 12, 1968 to September 20, 1972, be paid by garnishee defendant to the plaintiffs. In addition thereto, garnishee defendant was to pay at the rate of five per cent (5%) per annum on said sum of $10,418.45 until said obligation was fully paid and discharged."
By this portion of its order, the trial court thereby tolled the further payment of interest upon the judgment of $60,000 as of September 20, 1972.
From this order the company appeals and the plaintiffs cross-appeal.
It is the contention of the appellant company *408 that it should not be required to pay interest upon the entire judgment prior to the date of the entry thereof. The company further maintains that if it was obligated to pay interest upon the entire judgment for any period of time that that obligation was fulfilled upon the deposit of funds with the court on September 20, 1972.
On the other hand, the plaintiffs maintain that the company is obliged to pay interest on the entire judgment from the date that suit was instituted until its entire policy indebtedness was paid in full. That since the sums deposited in court did not discharge this obligation in full on September 20, 1972, that interest continued to run on the entire judgment.
By stipulation, the parties have agreed that the relevant provisions of the insurance policy involved are found in section 1 of said policy and are identified as "supplemental provisions". These provisions are as follows:
"As respects the insurance afforded for Section 1, the Exchange agrees to pay in addition to the applicable limits of liability:
"(a) All expenses incurred by the Exchange, all costs taxed against the insured in any such suit and all interest on the entire amount of any judgment which accrues after the entry of judgment and before the Exchange has paid, tendered or deposited in court that part of such judgment which does not exceed the limits of the Exchange's liability thereon;"
We agree with the circuit court that the company's reliance upon Cosby v Pool, 36 Mich. App. 571; 194 NW2d 142 (1971), is misplaced. The language of the policy in Cosby is clearly distinguishable from the policy here in question. In Cosby, the insurer had limited its interest liability by the following language:
*409 "2. As respects such insurance as is afforded by the other terms of this insuring agreement, the company shall
* * *
"(b) pay in addition to the applicable limits of the insuring agreement (1) all costs taxed against the insured in any legal proceeding defended by the company according to the foregoing paragraph, and interest accruing on verdict or after judgment up to the date of payment or tender to the judgment creditor, or his attorney of record, by the company upon the company's share of such verdict or judgment rendered in connection therewith * * *."
We therefore adopt the following findings of the trial judge in his construction of the policy here before us:
"The language in Cosby is obviously different from that in this case where it speaks of `all interest on the entire amount of any judgment' which this court would not regard as ambiguous but rather a clear undertaking to pay all interest on the entire judgment."
The appellant company relies upon the following language found in Cosby on page 578:
"This, however, is applicable only to that interest which accrues upon the defendant insurance company's portion of the verdict."
We hold such language to have been at the most dicta since its use was determinative of no issue then before the court.
The subject of an insurer's liability on excess of judgment over policy limits has come to the attention of appellate courts throughout the country on numerous occasions. The resulting conflict of authority makes it difficult to state on which side the *410 weight of such decisions lie. This difficulty is pointed out in the following annotation in ALR 2d:
"Since the jurisdictions which have expressly dealt with the matter are fairly evenly divided, one can hardly speak of the weight of authority supporting one view or the other. However, there seems to be a trend in favor of holding the insurer liable for interest on the entire amount of the judgment, as illustrated by the two most recent cases in which prior opposite holdings were disapproved. Thus, if a prognostication may be made as to which view uncommitted jurisdictions are more likely to adopt, the choice would be in favor of extending the liability of the insurer to the entire amount of the judgment because of the seemingly greater appeal of the arguments advanced in support of this theory, as best exemplified in River Valley Cartage Co v Hawkeye Security Ins Co, 17 Ill 2d 242; 161 NE2d 101; 76 ALR2d 978 (1959)." 76 ALR2d 983, § 2, p 987, Liability Insurer's Liability for Interest and Costs on Excess of Judgment Over Policy Limits.
The competing rationale and arguments on the issue before us all have substantial merit and logical persuasiveness. There does not appear to be any clearly satisfactory and convincing way in which they may be reconciled. While as stated above we find the language of the policy to be "a clear undertaking to pay all interest on the entire judgment", we assert that a finding of ambiguity would offer little comfort to appellant company. Affirmance of the trial court in the event of ambiguity could be sustained by resorting to the rule of construction that "any ambiguity in the language of an insurance policy is to be resolved against the insurer". State Farm Mutual Auto Insurance Co v Coon, 46 Mich. App. 503, 508; 208 NW2d 532 (1973); Vermont Mutual Insurance Co v Dalzell, 52 Mich. App. 686, 691; 218 NW2d 52 (1974).
We therefore hold that by the plain and unambiguous *411 provision of its policy the company became obligated to pay interest on the entire judgment.
Having made such a determination, we must next decide as to the date that such interest begins to run. It should be noted that it is stipulated that the sum paid by the company on September 20, 1972 was purported to be in payment of the balance due under the policy plus interest thereon from the date that suit was commenced. Such interest was paid under the mistaken belief that this was the extent of the company's obligation. And to the extent of this admitted obligation, it thereby conceded that it was bound to pay interest from July 12, 1968. We perceive of no reason why this date so fixed for the commencement of interest should be changed simply because we decide that the company's obligation extends to the entire judgment. Interest is to be computed as of the date the complaint was filed, MCLA 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013. When Cosby, supra, stated that an insurance company can limit its risks, it was discussing only the issue of the amount on which the company's interest liability would be based, not the date the interest was to begin. In its holding on the date issue, the Cosby court held that the statute requiring interest to be computed as of the date suit was commenced replaced the contrary policy provision and that therefore the statute superseded the interest clause of the policy. Again we affirm the circuit court and hold that interest shall be computed from the date of commencement of suit.
Although the trial court held the insurer to be liable for interest on the entire $60,000 judgment, it also held that the accrual of interest on that judgment was tolled when on September 20, 1972 the company paid its policy limit plus the interest *412 that had accrued on that limit. In their cross-appeal plaintiffs contend that since this was only a partial payment of the insurer's liability, it only tolled the interest on the amount paid. On the other hand, the company asserts that the payment made on September 20, 1972 was sufficient to toll the accrual of interest on the entire judgment because there was an honest dispute as to its liability for interest.
In a case where a similar issue arose, the Supreme Court held that the tender into court of part of a claimed liability only cuts off the interest as to the amount tendered, Kleynenberg v Highlands Realty Corporation, 340 Mich. 339; 65 NW2d 769 (1954). Therefore we hold that the trial court was in error in holding that the insurer tolled the accrued interest on its entire liability by making a tender of only that amount for which it believed itself to be liable. Only interest on the amount paid was tolled.
Affirmed in part and reversed in part. We remand for the entry of judgment consistent with this opinion. Plaintiffs may recover costs.
All concurred.
NOTES
[*]  Circuit judge, sitting on the Court of Appeals by assignment.

=== CASE 2212488 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:20.498226+00 ===

226 N.W.2d 907 (1975)
STATE of Minnesota, Respondent,
v.
Eugene RILEY, Appellant.
No. 44436.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
March 7, 1975.
*908 C. Paul Jones, Public Defender, Robert E. Oliphant, Sp. Asst. Public Defender, Minneapolis, for appellant.
Warren Spannaus, Atty. Gen., William B. Randall, Co. Atty., Steven C. DeCoster, Asst. County Atty., St. Paul, for respondent.
Considered and decided by the court without oral argument.
SCOTT, Justice.
Defendant was found guilty by a district court jury of aggravated rape, Minn.St. 609.291, and aggravated sodomy, Minn.St. 609.293, subd. 2, and sentenced by the presiding judge to a maximum indeterminate term of up to 30 years in the State Prison. He contends in this appeal from the judgment of conviction that there was insufficient evidence to convict and that the trial court committed prejudicial error in admitting into evidence testimony by police describing the appearance of defendant's penis, testimony which tended to corroborate the victim's testimony that defendant was the man who attacked her. We affirm.
Late in the afternoon of July 27, 1972, a man described as black, in his early twenties, about 5 feet 8 inches tall and somewhat heavyset, with slight facial acne and a medium-length Afro hair style, and wearing a brown long-sleeved studded shirt and tan pants with patch pockets, committed aggravated rape and aggravated sodomy upon the complainant, a single, 27-year-old teacher who had just returned from work to her St. Paul apartment. Immediately after her assailant left, complainant reported the incident to St. Paul police who arrived on the scene moments later. While the police officers were questioning complainant, another officer arrived on the scene with a suspect he had just detained who apparently matched the description which first went out over police radio. Complainant stated definitely that this suspect was not her assailant. Approximately a half hour after the arrival of the officers and while being driven to the hospital, complainant observed, about eight blocks from her apartment, a group of three males, one of whom she told the police officers was her assailant. They drove by slowly and complainant repeated her positive identification, whereupon the police arrested defendant. Not only did complainant's earlier description of her assailant's physical features fit defendant, but her description of his clothing was accurate as well.
Sergeant Cecil Westphal testified for the state, over objection by defendant, that after learning from the complainant the day after the incident that her assailant had unusual markings on the left side of the *909 penis,[1] he took defendant from his cell to an interrogation room and asked him to lower his trousers; that defendant did so; and that he observed four small projections on the left side of defendant's penis about an inch from the tip.
The overriding issue in this case is adequately stated in defendant's brief as follows:
"Does an in-custody close range inspection of an accused's penis constitute a search within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution?"
Defendant essentially contends that this was a search under the Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution, as applied to the states through the Fourteenth Amendment. He concludes that it was prejudicial error for the trial court to admit the evidence obtained from this warrantless police search of his private person. This court accepts the views expressed by Mr. Justice Powell in his concurring opinion in United States v. Robinson, 414 U.S. 218, 237, 94 S. Ct. 467, 494, 38 L. Ed. 2d 427, 441 (1973), wherein he emphasized what he felt was the basic premise of the majority opinion in that decision:
"The Fourth Amendment safeguards the right of `the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures * * *.' These are areas of an individual's life about which he entertains legitimate expectations of privacy. I believe that an individual lawfully subjected to a custodial arrest retains no significant Fourth Amendment interest in the privacy of his person. Under this view the custodial arrest is the significant intrusion of state power into the privacy of one's person. If the arrest is lawful, the privacy interest guarded by the Fourth Amendment is subordinated to a legitimate and overriding governmental concern. No reason then exists to frustrate law enforcement by requiring some independent justification for a search incident to a lawful custodial arrest. This seems to me the reason that a valid arrest justifies a full search of the person, even if that search is not narrowly limited by the twin rationales of seizing evidence and disarming the arrestee. The search incident to arrest is reasonable under the Fourth Amendment because the privacy interest protected by that constitutional guarantee is legitimately abated by the fact of arrest."[2]
Consistent with this rationale, there should no longer be any difference between searches of a defendant immediately incident in time to the custodial arrest and searches made of a defendant later during *910 his custody. In either case, the significant intrusion is the fact of custody of defendant's person, and any warrantless search of the defendant during that custody would seem to be proper even absent some independent justification. Therefore, such a search, conducted where there existed overwhelming independent justification and where the facts established ample probable cause for defendant's arrest, was proper.
Accepting this constitutional concept, as we do, it becomes immaterial whether the trial court was correct in determining that this was not a search and only an observation by Sergeant Westphal. The only issue that develops is whether the state's failure to give notice as to this evidence, under State ex rel. Rasmussen v. Tahash, 272 Minn. 539, 141 N.W.2d 3 (1965), operated as a bar to the admission of this evidence.[3] We hold that in this case it did not. The test in cases of this sort is whether the state's failure prejudiced defendant. See, State v. Kluck, 299 Minn. 161, 217 N.W.2d 202 (1974); State v. Doust, 285 Minn. 336, 173 N.W.2d 337 (1969); State v. Fields, 279 Minn. 374, 157 N.W.2d 61 (1968). We cannot conclude that defendant was prejudiced in any way by the lack of a timely Rasmussen notice. The record indicates that defendant was allowed to give a full explanation to the court of the facts concerning this matter and then waived any further hearing to more fully explore these facts.
Finally, we need not get into whether or not the facts show tacit consent by the defendant, nor discuss the defendant's contention that the evidence was insufficient to support the conviction. Suffice it to say, there is no merit whatsoever to these contentions.
Affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  Complainant testified that during the time that the defendant was holding her by her hair and pulling her head down over him, she observed sores or growths on the left shank of his penis, which he explained were birthmarks. She kept pulling her head back and tried to resist whenever she could, but feared that she would be killed if she resisted further.
[2]  See, also, State v. Emerson, 266 Minn. 217, 123 N.W.2d 382 (1963), in which this court discussed authority for requiring an accused to reveal portions of his anatomy in a variety of situations. In Emerson, we cited State v. Miller, 71 N.J.L. 527, 60 A. 202 (1905), which allowed a physician to testify to the results of an examination which disclosed wounds on the back of defendant's hand. In holding such testimony admissible, the New Jersey Court of Errors and Appeals reasoned:
"* * * If the wound were upon the face or hand, or a part of his person exposed to common view, it would be absurd to say that testimony of what the wound presented to common observation was compelling a person on whom the wound was to be a witness against himself. I think it is equally absurd to say that the testimony of the observation of a wound in any part of the body, although obtained by a forcible removal of what concealed it, is to be rejected as produced by compelling a person to be a witness against himself." 71 N.J.L. 533, 60 A. 204.
[3]  In State ex rel. Rasmussen v. Tahash, 272 Minn. 539, 141 N.W.2d 3 (1965), this court declared that at the time of arraignment or as soon thereafter as possible, the state must notify the court that the state's case will include evidence obtained as a result of search or seizure, evidence derived from a search, or confessions, admissions, or evidence in the nature of a confession.

=== CASE 9737964 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:38:39.63663+00 ===

Concurring
DeBruler, J.
The basic issue presented by this appeal is whether Article 15, § 3, of the Constitution of Indiana applies to officers of municipal corporations. If it does apply, then the General Assembly may not constitutionally create a vacancy in the office of a municipal corporation as a result of a tie vote in an election. If it does not apply then no such limitation on.the power of the General Assembly exists. I concur with the resolution of this issue in the affirmative and arrive at this conclusion from what I consider to be the clearest and most obvious meaning of the words of the provision itself and the holding of State ex rel. Jett, et al. v. Ives, et al. (1906), 167 Ind. 13, 78 N. E. 225, and the supporting cases cited in. it.
*420I do not, however, agree with the analysis and lack of weight given by the majority to the case of State ex rel. May v. Hall (1909), 173 Ind. 145, 89 N. E. 855. In my judgment this case is directly on point with the case on appeal and fully supports appellants’ position that Article 15, § 3, does not create a limitation upon the power of the General Assembly to create a vacancy in a municipal office following a tie vote as it did in Burns’ § 48-1246, and that case is, therefore, in direct conflict with the Ives case and our holding today. I, therefore, conceive the Ives and Hall cases to be irreconcilable and the effect of our opinion today to be the overruling of the Hall case.
In the event an incumbent municipal office holder, who was not a candidate to continue in office and consequently for whom no one voted, holds over following a tie vote, the termination of his term can be brought about by the election of a successor in a special election called for that purpose.
Note. — Reported in 254 N. E. 2d 868.

=== CASE 2212503 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:20.709972+00 ===

222 Cal. App. 2d 424 (1963)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
HAROLD CHARLES MORANDA, Defendant and Appellant.
Crim. No. 4367.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. Two.
Nov. 19, 1963.
Harold Charles Moranda, in pro. per., for Defendant and Appellant.
Stanley Mosk, Attorney General, and Albert W. Harris, Jr., Deputy Attorney General, for Plaintiff and Respondent. *425
TAYLOR, J.
In this appeal from a judgment of conviction finding him guilty of petty theft (Pen. Code,  484) with a prior felony conviction (Pen. Code,  667),  [fn. 1] appellant, Harold Charles Moranda, in pro per., contends that he was erroneously convicted of a felony.
The clerk's transcript indicates that on February 28, 1963, an information was filed, charging the appellant with a felony, petty theft in violation of section 484 of the Penal Code, and a prior felony conviction and service of term. The information did not mention section 667 of the Penal Code. Appellant was arraigned and counsel appointed to represent him. He entered a plea of guilty to the petty theft charge and admitted serving a prison term for a prior felony conviction, second degree burglary. Thereafter, the court rendered its judgment finding appellant guilty of a felony and sentenced the appellant for the time prescribed by law.  [fn. 2] An examination of the record below discloses no prejudicial error.
[1a] Appellant contends that he was erroneously convicted of a felony as petty theft is only a misdemeanor.  [fn. 3] Section 667 of the Penal Code makes petty theft a felony when the accused has been previously convicted of a felony and served a term therefor. The information in this case charged the appellant with a felony, violation of section 484 of the Penal Code and a prior conviction. Appellant argues that because section 667 was not specifically mentioned in the information, he was not apprised of the fact that he was being charged with a felony.
[2] A defect in criminal proceedings, to constitute prejudicial error, must affect the substantial rights of the accused. (Cal.Const., art. VI,  4 1/2; Pen. Code,  1258.) [1b, 3] The failure to allege a violation of section 667 is not a prejudicial error when the precise elements of the offense *426 are set forth with clarity in the information (In re Mitchell, 56 Cal. 2d 667 [16 Cal. Rptr. 281, 365 P.2d 177]). Likewise, the appellant here could not possibly have been misled as all of the elements of section 667 were set forth in the information. The only purpose of charging the prior conviction was to convert the misdemeanor into a felony. Appellant had the advice and assistance of counsel prior to and at the time of his plea and admission of the prior conviction. Appellant's plea of guilty and admission of the prior conviction fully support the judgment (People v. O'Neal, 204 Cal. App. 2d 707 [22 Cal. Rptr. 641]). The failure to specifically allege section 667 in the information constitutes only a procedural irregularity in the judgment, not prejudicial error (In re Mitchell, supra, at pp. 671-672).
Judgment affirmed.
Shoemaker, P. J., and Agee, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. This section provides: "Every person who, having been convicted of any felony either in this State or elsewhere, and having served a term therefor in any penal institution, commits petty theft after such conviction, is punishable therefor by imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding one year or in the State prison not exceeding five years."
[fn. 2]  2. This sentence is for the maximum (five years) unless and until the Adult Authority acts to fix a shorter term (In re Mills, 55 Cal. 2d 646, 653 [12 Cal. Rptr. 483, 361 P.2d 15].)
[fn. 3]  3. Section 484 defines theft; sections 485, 486, 487 set forth the degrees of theft and define grand theft. Section 488 provides: "Theft in other cases is petty theft." Section 490 provides: "Petty theft is punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding six months, or both." Thus, petty theft is a misdemeanor as defined in section 17 of the Penal Code.

=== CASE 3030399 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2015-10-13 22:44:17.769406+00 ===

United States Court of Appeals
FOR THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT
___________
No. 02-3618
___________
Troy R. Elliott,                       *
*
Appellant,                *
* Appeal from the United States
v.                               * District Court for the Western
* District of Arkansas.
Jeff Atkinson, Jr.,                    *
*      [UNPUBLISHED]
Appellee.                 *
___________
Submitted: November 29, 2002
Filed: December 3, 2002
___________
Before WOLLMAN, MORRIS SHEPPARD ARNOLD, and MELLOY, Circuit
Judges.
___________
PER CURIAM.
Arkansas inmate Troy R. Elliott appeals the district court’s1 pre-service
dismissal of his 42 U.S.C. § 1983 lawsuit. Having carefully reviewed the record, we
conclude the district court properly dismissed the complaint as frivolous for the
1
The Honorable Robert T. Dawson, United States District Judge for the
Western District of Arkansas, adopting the report and recommendations of the
Honorable Beverly Stites Jones, United States Magistrate Judge for the Western
District of Arkansas.
reasons that the court discussed. Accordingly, we affirm the judgment. See 8th Cir.
R. 47A(a).
A true copy.
Attest:
CLERK, U.S. COURT OF APPEALS, EIGHTH CIRCUIT.
-2-

=== CASE 2212521 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:20.898341+00 ===

57 Mich. App. 602 (1975)
226 N.W.2d 579
PEOPLE
v.
SAYIG
Docket No. 19774.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided January 9, 1975.
Frank J. Kelley, Attorney General, Robert A. Derengoski, Solicitor General, William L. Cahalan, Prosecuting Attorney, Patricia J. Boyle, Principal Attorney, Research, Training and Appeals, and Arthur N. Bishop, Assistant Prosecuting Attorney, for the people.
Solomon & Stern, for defendant.
*603 Before: J.H. GILLIS, P.J., and ALLEN and PETERSON,[*] JJ.
ALLEN, J.
Originally charged with breaking and entering with intent to commit larceny, MCLA 750.110; MSA 28.305, defendant pled guilty on January 21, 1974, to attempting to commit that particular act. MCLA 750.92; MSA 28.287. On February 11, 1974, defendant was sentenced to three to five years in prison. He appeals, arguing that the trial court's failure to inform defendant of his right to have compulsory process issued for witnesses on his behalf requires that his guilty plea be reversed.
Although the plea proceedings were otherwise quite proper, at no point did the trial court specifically tell defendant that by pleading guilty he was waiving his right "to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor". GCR 1963, 785.7(1)(d)(iii). As recently indicated by the Michigan Supreme Court in People v Shekoski, 393 Mich. 134; 224 NW2d 656 (1974):
"The bench and bar are hereby advised that strict adherence to those requirements is mandatory and that neither substantial compliance nor the absence of prejudicial error will be deemed sufficient. GCR 1963, 785.7(5)."
Pursuant to that mandate, we must agree with defendant.
Reversed and remanded.
All concurred.
NOTES
[*]  Circuit judge, sitting on the Court of Appeals by assignment.

=== CASE 9737937 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:37:34.414099+00 ===

JUSTICE STEIGMANN delivered the opinion of the court: In July 1990, plaintiff, Mark Brown, sued defendant, R.R. Donnelly & Sons Company, his former employer, alleging that defendant wrongfully terminated his employment in violation of the terms of defendant’s employee handbook. In March 1994, the trial court dismissed plaintiffs complaint with prejudice, finding plaintiff was an employee terminable at will. Plaintiff appeals, and we affirm. I. BACKGROUND Plaintiff alleged in his complaint that defendant hired him in December 1980 as a temporary employee at defendant’s Mattoon manufacturing division. Plaintiff became acquainted with defendant’s "employee relations manual” (manual) during his temporary employment, and he believed the terms of the manual would govern his employment when he accepted a full-time position with defendant in 1982. Plaintiff worked continuously as a full-time employee for defendant from 1982 until he was fired in August 1988. Plaintiff further alleged that Dan Silverman and Mark Smith, management employees of defendant, falsely accused him of (1) disrupting the workplace, (2) threatening to kill co-workers, (3) holding a gun to his supervisor’s head, (4) being unable to discharge his duties, and (5) lying to company officials. Silverman and Smith confronted plaintiff with these allegations, and he denied them. Defendant subsequently fired plaintiff for lying to company officials, based upon his denial of the allegations, and for committing the alleged acts. Plaintiff claims his termination violated the following sections of the manual: (1) section ER1-0200, entitled "The Open Door Policy,” which provided in part that "[i]t is Company policy to assure that every employee gets a square deal, fair treatment, and *** [an] impartial hearing and handling of complaints”; (2) section ER1-0600, entitled "Employment Security,” which provided under subsection II(J) that "[i]t is Company practice to: [b]ase all separations on verified facts, not on anyone’s whim or unsupported opinion”; and (3) sections ER5-0110 and ER5-0150, which described the company’s formal and informal grievance procedures. In May 1992, defendant moved to dismiss the complaint pursuant to section 2 — 615 of the Code of Civil Procedure (111. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 110, par. 2 — 615). In July 1992, the trial court ruled that section ER1-0200 of the manual, which provided that every employee was entitled to a "square deal” and "fair treatment,” did not contain terms that were sufficiently clear to create enforceable contract rights. Accordingly, the court struck the reference to section ER10200 from plaintiff’s complaint, and plaintiff did not appeal that ruling. The trial court allowed plaintiff to proceed under the theory that the remaining sections of the manual created enforceable rights. In February 1994, the court heard additional arguments attacking the legal sufficiency of plaintiffs complaint, and in March 1994, reversed its earlier ruling and entered a written order concluding that none of the remaining sections of the manual could be interpreted as creating contractual rights. II. STANDARD OF REVIEW  The parties agree that the sole issue on appeal is whether the language of defendant’s employment manual contained a promise which was sufficiently clear and definite to constitute a contractual offer. This issue constitutes a question of law to be determined in the first instance by the trial court, not a trier of fact. (Harrell v. Montgomery Ward & Co. (1989), 189 Ill. App. 3d 516, 521, 545 N.E.2d 373, 376.) The correctness of the trial court’s ruling on this question of law will be determined by this court independently of the trial court’s judgment. Hicks v. Methodist Medical Center (1992), 229 Ill. App. 3d 610, 613, 593 N.E.2d 119, 121. III. ANALYSIS  An employment relationship with no fixed duration is presumed to be terminable "at will” by either the employer or employee for any or no cause. (Anders v. Mobil Chemical Co. (1990), 201 Ill. App. 3d 1088, 1094, 559 N.E.2d 1119, 1122.) However, this presumption may be overcome by demonstrating that the parties contracted otherwise. (Duldulao v. Saint Mary of Nazareth Hospital Center (1987), 115 Ill. 2d 482, 489, 505 N.E.2d 314, 318.) In Duldulao, the supreme court established the following test for determining whether an employee handbook constitutes a contract of employment: All three of these conditions must exist to create enforceable contract rights. (Rudd v. Danville Metal Stamping Co. (1990), 193 Ill. App. 3d 1009, 1011, 550 N.E.2d 674, 676.) In this case, defendant does not argue that the second or third condition does not exist in the present case, but contends that the first condition of the Duldulao test is absent because none of the manual sections plaintiff relied upon contains a clear promise. We agree. "[A]n employee handbook or other policy statement creates enforceable contractual rights if the traditional requirements for contract formation are present. First, the language of the policy statement must contain a promise clear enough that an employee would reasonably believe that an offer has been made. Second, the statement must be disseminated to the employee in such a manner that the employee is aware of its contents and reasonably believes it to be an offer. Third, the employee must accept the offer by commencing or continuing to work after learning of the policy statement. When these conditions are present, then the employee’s continued work constitutes consideration for the promises contained in the statement, and under traditional principles a valid contract is formed.” (Duldulao, 115 Ill. 2d at 490, 505 N.E.2d at 318.)  We conclude that subsection II(J) of section ER1-0600 of the manual, which states that it is Company practice to "[b]ase all separations on verified facts, not on anyone’s whim or unsupported opinion,” is too vague to be reasonably construed as an offer. Indeed, we view the presence of the qualifying phrase "it is Company practice to” as rendering the language that follows contingent and uncertain. This is not just an interpretation of "lawyer talk,” but an assessment of standard English usage. The phrase "it is Company practice to” contains several different shades of meaning, but in all instances, it means at least the following: "This is something the company has done in the past and likely to do in the future, but you cannot count on it.” As opposed to typical contractual language, in which the offeror speaks prospectively, the phrase that "it is Company practice to” speaks retrospectively. In a normal offer leading to a contract, A promises B that A will do something in the future, if B similarly does something in the future. When A uses the phrase in question here, A is asking B to infer A’s likely conduct in the future based upon A’s past performance, but that is far short of a promise by A to engage in that conduct. The rules for construing contracts are essentially the same as those for construing statutes, and one of the primary tenets of statutory construction is to not disregard certain phrases or language. Plaintiff’s position violates that rule by literally reading out of the manual the phrase, "it is Company practice to.” Plaintiff does this by construing this section of the manual as if it stated that, "the company promises to base all separations on verified facts, not on anyone’s whim or unsupported opinion.” If the manual so read, then at least a statement concerning a promise of future behavior would exist, however uncertain that promise might be. This manual does not contain that language, however, and this court cannot rewrite a contract any more than it can rewrite a statute. We further disagree with plaintiff because we view the manual phrase "base all separations on verified facts, not on anyone’s whim or unsupported opinion” as hortatory language, falling short of the kind of promise upon which a contract could be premised. This phrase is like a statement that the company "will treat its employees fairly.” We agree with the trial judge’s findings, as follows: "[This language] appears to be a kind of language that one might find in advertising, or something of that kind, as opposed to legal contracts. *** The terminology used does not appear to reach the level of a promise. *** Rather, [it] appears to suggest the manner in which the company generally operates, without binding itself to operating in only this particular fashion.” Further, it is impossible to determine what defendant must do in order to comply with subsection II(J) that speaks of "verified facts” sufficient to discharge an employee. The subsection gives no indication of what constitutes "verified facts,” nor does it say who must verify the grounds for dismissal or what procedures must be followed. The present case is distinguishable from Duldulao and Mitchell v. Jewel Food Stores (1990), 142 Ill. 2d 152, 568 N.E.2d 827, two cases in which the supreme court found promises sufficiently clear to constitute offers. In Duldulao, the manual provided that three warning notices within a 12-month period were "required” before an employee was dismissed. (Duldulao, 115 Ill. 2d at 491, 505 N.E.2d at 318.) In Mitchell, the handbook stated that an employee "shall not” be dismissed without just cause. Mitchell, 142 Ill. 2d at 156, 568 N.E.2d at 828. In Rudd, this court stated that "[ajrticulated procedures are a fundamental and necessary part of an employment contract.” (Rudd, 193 Ill. App. 3d at 1012, 550 N.E.2d at 676.) The discharged employee in that case relied upon an employee manual which stated as follows: " 'Violations [of the manual’s rules and regulations] will be grounds for progressive disciplinary action, which may [(emphasis in original)] include a correction interview, written warning, probation, suspension without pay, or [(emphasis in original)] termination.’ ” (Emphasis added.) (Rudd, 193 Ill. App. 3d at 1010, 550 N.E.2d at 675.) This court noted that the employee manual did not contain a description of specific disciplinary procedures, nor did it purport to promise specific procedures would ever be used prior to termination. (Rudd, 193 Ill. App. 3d at 1012, 550 N.E.2d at 676.) Accordingly, we affirmed the trial court’s dismissal of the employee’s complaint. Likewise, we hold the manual in this case lacks both the specificity and guarantees necessary for a contractual offer. Plaintiff would also find specific disciplinary procedures which must be followed prior to termination in the grievance procedures set forth in sections ER5-0110 and ER5-0150, and he urges this court to read these sections in conjunction with section ER1-0600. We decline to follow plaintiff’s interpretation of the grievance procedures. Nowhere in these lengthy sections is there any reference to the discipline or termination of employees. Instead, the grievance procedures appear to allow employees to discuss problems which arise on the job. The introduction to section ER5-0150 states that "[t]he purpose of this practice is to provide an effective way for employees to present problems or grievances for consideration, or to obtain correction of unsatisfactory conditions.” Sections ER5-0110 and ER5-0150 both provide that "it is [company] policy *** that every employee gets a square deal, fair treatment,” but in context, this refers to defendant’s guarantee that an aggrieved employee has a right to discuss grievances with the employee’s immediate supervisor and appeal, if necessary, the supervisor’s decision to higher company officials. IV. CONCLUSION For the reasons stated, we affirm the trial court’s order dismissing plaintiff’s complaint. Affirmed. LUND, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9737938 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:37:34.418257+00 ===

JUSTICE COOK, dissenting: I respectfully dissent. I cannot agree that an employee relations manual which states that it is company policy to assure that every employee gets "[an] impartial hearing and handling of complaints,” and that it is company practice to "[b]ase all separations on verified facts, not on anyone’s whim or unsupported opinion,” is too vague to constitute a contract. A fair reading of the language is that employees are entitled to a hearing and will not be discharged without cause. The words "it is Company practice to,” or "it is Company policy to,” indicate that the procedures mentioned will be followed unless there is some reason to do otherwise. No such reason has been suggested in this case. Perhaps the company was free to change its policies at any time, but the policies were effective until it did so. The majority’s argument is inconsistent with Mitchell-. " Tf there is in effect a policy to dismiss for cause only, the employer may not depart from that policy at whim simply because he was under no obligation to institute the policy in the first place. Having announced the policy, presumably with a view to obtaining the benefit of improved employee attitudes and behavior and improved quality of the work force, the employer may not treat its promise as illusory. Toussaint [v. Blue Cross & Blue Shield (1980), 408 Mich. 579, 619, 292 N.W.2d 880, 895.]’ ” Mitchell, 142 Ill. 2d at 171, 568 N.E.2d at 835. Defendant relies on Rudd as support for the proposition that "[a]rticulated procedures are a fundamental and necessary part of an employment contract.” (Rudd, 193 Ill. App. 3d at 1012, 550 N.E.2d at 676.) The provisions quoted above are brief, but a contract need not be wordy to be clear. In Mitchell, the supreme court found an employee was not terminable at will where the employee handbook provided permanent employees could only be terminated for "just cause,” although the handbook did not describe any termination procedure, and gave only a nonexhaustive list of examples of "just cause.” (Mitchell, 142 Ill. 2d at 162, 568 N.E.2d at 831.) Rudd is a much easier case than the present one. In Rudd, the manual provided for progressive discipline, but further provided that progressive discipline might include immediate termination. . We should be careful equating employment manual guidelines with contractual obligations, but employers can protect themselves without arguing that they did not mean what they said. Illinois courts have repeatedly found that an employee handbook is not reasonably interpreted as part of the contract for employment when the manual contains language that disclaims the creation of a contract of employment. (See, e.g., Spann v. Springfield Clinic (1991), 217 Ill. App. 3d 419, 577 N.E.2d .488.) There was no disclaimer here. I would reverse the decision of the trial court and remand for further proceedings.

=== CASE 9737939 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:37:35.012592+00 ===

REYNOLDSON, Justice.
Plaintiff is owner of a truck damaged when it came into collision with defendant’s' railroad overpass. At close of all evidence trial court directed a verdict in defendant’s favor and plaintiff appeals. We reverse and remand for new trial.
The railroad overpass spanned Second Avenue in Grinnell, Iowa. Its elevation above street level varied from approximately 8 feet 5 inches to 8 feet 10 inches. Plaintiff’s boom truck was about 9 feet 6 inches in height. On the morning of August 24, 1970 it was operated by Mike Cornelius, a student of construction technology at Iowa State University then employed as a welder in plaintiff’s grain handling equipment business. Cornelius was driving the truck from one job to another. He was unfamiliar with Grinnell streets and had never before driven beneath the railroad overpass on Second Avenue. The approach to the underpass was unobstructed but downhill. Cornelius observed no clearance or warning signs and thought the truck would clear until just before the collision.
In sustaining defendant’s motion for directed verdict, trial court held as a matter of law defendant had no “duty” to post low clearance warning signs and that Cornelius was contributorily negligent in operation of the truck.
Appealing, plaintiff asserts the railroad had a common law “duty” to warn users of public highways of dangerously low clearances of overhead bridges, and that his driver was not contributorily negligent as a matter of law.
I. Failure to warn.
Defendant rightly argues there is no statute in Iowa requiring a railroad to post low clearance warning signs. But that is only the beginning of a necessary analysis.
In absence of a statutory obligation, to state there is or is not a duty is merely to state a result, a conclusion that plaintiff’s interests are or are not entitled to legal protection against defendant’s action or lack thereof. MacLean v. Parkwood, Inc., 247 P.Supp. 188, 191 (D.N.H.1965), affirmed 354 F.2d 770 (1 Cir. 1966).
“It is better to reserve ‘duty’ for the problem of the relation between individuals which imposes upon one a legal obligation for the benefit of the other * *. In other words, ‘duty’ is a question of whether the defendant is under any obligation for the benefit of the particular plaintiff; and in negligence cases, the duty is always the same, to conform to the legal standard of reasonable conduct in the light of the apparent risk.
“ * * * It is a shorthand statement of a conclusion, rather than an aid to analysis itself. * * * [l]t should be recognized that ‘duty’ is not sacrosanct in itself, but only an expression of the sum total of those considerations of policy which lead the law to say that the partic*824ular plaintiff is entitled to protection.” (Emphasis added.)
—Prosser, The Law of Torts § 53, pp. 324-26.
See also 2 Harper and James, The Law of Torts § 18.8, pp. 1058-61 (“Another and sounder objection to the duty analysis is that it is unnecessary and simply duplicates the inquiry into negligence.” Id. p. 1060).
In short, there is a place in our negligence law for a designation of duty: as a statutorily imposed obligation or as a label to signify a relationship between the parties, e. g., owner-licensee, carrier-passenger, manufacturer-consumer, employer-employee, in which the law recognizes a potential liability for harmful conduct. But as a label it carries with it no combination to unlock this issue: whether, applying logic, sound reason, and enlightened public policy, this railroad should be immune from liability to plaintiff, if it failed to act in a situation clearly entailing foreseeable harm or damage to plaintiff and others driving through the underpass.
Defendant asserts only “the authorities” are permitted to post low clearance warning signs, citing sections 321.253 and 321.255, The Code. To follow that rationale would in instances jeopardize any relief to injured or damaged persons. A tort claim against the State unquestionably would be met with an immunity defense grounded on the theory posting of such warnings involves exercise of discretion. See Seiber v. State, 211 N.W.2d 698 (Iowa 1973).
We would have no difficulty holding any other nongovernmental person or corporation maintaining a rigid obstruction across a highway at a height no higher than the ceiling in the ordinary home had an obligation to warn affected motorists. There should be no reason to exempt railroads unless our statutes compel it.
Of course, if there was no “duty” to the plaintiff at eight and a half feet then there was no “duty” at four feet or even two feet. But where the obstruction is reduced to ground level we have held a common law obligation to warn arises. Jasper v. Chicago Great Western Railway Company, 248 Iowa 1286, 84 N.W.2d 21 (1957); see Lindquist v. Des Moines Union Ry. Co., 239 Iowa 356, 30 N.W.2d 120 (1947). This anomaly resulting from trial court’s ruling should be carefully examined in reaching our decision on appeal.
In asserting its lack of obligation to warn comports in some manner with a legislative expression the defendant apparently relies on 1) failure of the State to impose this obligation by statute and 2) imposition of an obligation to warn on the State, when it considers a warning necessary.
Taking up the first point, the fact certain conduct of railroads is prescribed or proscribed by statute does not mean it is immune from tort liability for other negligent conduct. In railroad law as in our motor vehicle law, tort liability can arise outside the confines of statute-mandated conduct. See Lindquist v. Des Moines Union Ry. Co., supra, 239 Iowa at 360, 30 N.W.2d at 122 (“We have always recognized the rule that negligence may be predicated upon a statute violation or upon the common law rule of ‘ordinary care under the circumstances.’ It may be based upon acts of commission or of omission.”); Anderson v. United States R. Adm., 197 Iowa 1, 5, 196 N.W. 584, 586 (1924) (“[I]f, by reason of obstructions to the view of one passing over the crossing, it was more than ordinarily dangerous, and the exercise of ordinary care on defendant’s part required that the whistle on an approaching engine should be sounded, then a duty to do so arose, notwithstanding that no such duty was imposed by statute.”).
Turning to the second consideration, the defendant misplaces its reliance on statutes which require the state highway commission to adopt a manual and specifications for traffic-control devices “ * * * consistent with the provisions of this chapter * * (§ 321.252, The Code) (Emphasis added) and to place and maintain such signs *825(§ 321.253, The Code). Even the railroad signs and signals which the code does prescribe are not in chapter 321. See, e. g., § 478.1, The Code. And a clear distinction is made between the traffic-control devices referred to in §§ 321.252 through 321.255 and railroad signs. See § 321.259 Unauthorized signs, signals, or markings (“ * * official traffic-control device or any' railroad sign or signal * * * ”) (Emphasis added); § 321.260 (“ * * * any official traffic-control device * * * any railroad sign or signal * * * ”). Compare § 321.1(62) with § 321.1(64), The Code.
The same defense raised by defendant in this case was rejected in Jasper v. Chicago Great Western Railway Company, supra, 248 Iowa at 1296, 84 N.W.2d at 27:
“Defendant argues it would have violated section 321.259, Code 1954, I.C.A., if it had erected a barricade or warning sign near the ápparent crossing. The statute is too long to set out here in full. It provides in substance that no person shall maintain upon any highway any unauthorized sign which purports to be an official sign, traffic-control device or railroad sign or which attempts to direct traffic. ‘This shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.’
“If this statute has any application here it seems clear defendant could have erected a barricade or warning sign near this apparent crossing without violating the section. The crossing on the night in question was not in fact a public one. It only appeared to be. Defendant could certainly have erected a barricade or sign to direct traffic toward the old established crossing until the construction work was completed.”
If § 321.259 is applicable here, it is just as apparent this railroad could have placed a sign on its own property (either on its overpass or its grade) warning motorists of the low clearance. The great weight of authority is that even an unauthorized sign is not meaningless when questions of negligence are under consideration. Geisking v. Sheimo, 252 Iowa 37, 41, 105 N.W.2d 599, 601 (1960).
Obviously the main purpose of § 321.259 is to prevent commercial interests from using imitation official signs to slow or direct traffic or to erect devices which would obscure official signs. Certainly that statute cannot excuse one who maintains a traffic hazard for failing to warn those who might be injured thereby.
We are not required here to determine whether defendant might be negligent for failing to warn had the state or municipal government placed and maintained a visible warning sign. This issue was determined in favor of the railroad by the Texas court in Lewie Montgomery Truck. Co. v. Southern Pacific Co., 439 S.W.2d 691 (Tex.Civ.App.1969). This leaves two Illinois decisions in support of defendant’s position. The decision in older lead case, Carr v. Chicago & Northwestern Ry. Co., 333 Ill.App. 567, 572, 77 N.E.2d 857, 860 (1948), was apparently based in part on proximate cause:
“There is no negligence on the part of defendant in failing to post signs of the clearance. [Citations omitted.] There was no statutory requirement that it do so. There is no showing otherwise of any duty to do so, or as to how it could be effectively done, or that it would have made any difference in this case.” (Emphasis added.).
That reasoning is not persuasive in the circumstances of this case.
Over all, while not always factually on all fours, the federal appellate decisions which hold a railroad is not absolved from liability by a statute which imposes an obligation to warn on a governmental agency are more persuasive and logical. See Ryan v. St. Johnsbury & Lamoille County Railroad, 290 F.2d 350, 352 (2 Cir. 1961) (“We do not sustain defendant’s contention that the *826Vermont statutes with respect to warning signs relieved it as a matter of law from any responsibility for unsafe clearances of an underpass properly constructed in the first instance. Although the statutes prohibited defendant from erecting signs without the Highway Board’s consent, they did not ban its communicating to the Board any knowledge it had that the latter’s sign overstated the clearances.”); Illinois Central Railroad Company v. Farris, 259 F.2d 445, 448 (5 Cir. 1958) (“In this case, the liability of Panola County, if it had no governmental immunity, would be clear and undisputable * * *. But it does not follow that the Illinois Central, which constructed the crossing, and is obligated to conduct its operations with due care to the public, is free from responsibility because of Panola County’s duty to maintain roads and post signs. Both parties owe a duty to the travelling public * * *.”); Norfolk Southern Ry. Co. v. Davis Frozen Foods, 195 F.2d 662, 665 (4 Cir. 1952) (“It was the duty of plaintiff [railroad] to give adequate warning to travelers along the highway of this dangerous low underpass, notwithstanding that the highway was constructed and maintained by the Highway Commission and a similar duty may have rested upon it. The crossing above the leval [sic] of the highway was for the benefit of the railroad as well as of the public; and, if there was danger to the public in its maintenance, the railroad as the owner in charge of the property, the presence of which constituted the danger, was under obligation to see that due warning thereof was given.”); Contino v. Baltimore & Annapolis R. Co., 178 F.2d 521, 524 (4 Cir. 1949) (“The Commission * * * was directed to erect and maintain along the rights of way the necessary signs * * * and all other persons were forbidden to display any such sign * * *. The liability of the Commission, if it were not immune as an agency of the state, would be clear and indisputable; but it does not follow that the Railroad Company, which participated in the construction of the crossing, is free from responsibility * * * [E]ven where there is no statute covering the situation, the duty of a railroad to exercise due care in its operations cannot be disputed.”).
At the foundation of the federal decisions is a simple concept of black-letter law we all recognize:
“As to persons on highways or private premises near its tracks, a railroad company owes the duty to use reasonable or ordinary care to avoid injuring them. * * * What constitutes ordinary care depends on circumstances, and must be commensurate with the danger to be apprehended of inflicting injury at the particular place where it occurred.”
—75 C.J.S. Railroads § 984, p. 432.
Nor can we discern how defendant derives support from § 321.456, The Code. The last amendment to that statute authorized highway travel by vehicles five feet higher than this overpass. The legislative afterthought that railroads and public authorities were not required to raise overpasses does not abrogate an obligation to warn of low clearance. In fact, § 321.456 put this railroad on notice of the danger inherent in its structure:
“We think that a railroad company * * must know or should be held to knowledge of the fact that tall trucks and trailers are using the roads in increasing numbers. If there was any doubt, the doubt was resolved when the legislature of Mississippi in its 1942 Code put railroads on notice that trucks up to twelve feet six inches in height would use the roads — and be subjected to the dangers of overhead structures.”
—Illinois Central Railroad Company v. Farris, supra at 449.
The railroad’s alleged negligence in failing to warn should not have been adjudicated as a matter of law.
II. Lastly, we hold trial court was wrong in holding plaintiff’s driver contribu-torily negligent as a matter of law. See *827Krause v. Southern Pac. Co., 135 Ore. 310, 295 P. 966 (1931). A jury could have permissibly found plaintiff’s driver had never driven beneath this overpass before, he observed the overpass, saw no warning signs, and reasonably judged the truck could safely pass. While the question here is close, only in the exceptional case does a party having the burden of proof on such issue establish it as a matter of law. See Meade v. Roller, 212 N.W.2d 426, 429 (Iowa 1973); Ruby v. Easton, 207 N.W.2d 10, 15 (Iowa 1973); rule 344(f)(10), Rules of Civil Procedure.
In Georgia R. & Banking Co. v. Sewell, 57 Ga.App. 674, 679, 196 S.E. 140, 144 (1938), an overpass case, the Georgia court approvingly quoted the following from Bush v. Jenkins, 128 Ark. 630, 194 S.W. 704, 706:
“In driving or passing under objects, the most careful and prudent man frequently overestimates the height of the object. For example, hats are knocked off and faces scratched by limbs overhanging the road on account of parties overestimating the height thereof. Many a careful, cautious farmer has had a close call and been injured when driving into a barn door. It is easier to hear noises and see objects than to measure and estimate distances.”
Any person who has bumped his or her head on a car door frame or on a closet shelf would probably agree even a reasonably prudent person might misjudge a vertical height. The issue here was for the jury.
This case is therefore reversed and remanded for new trial on all issues. Reversed and remanded.
MASON, RAWLINGS, UHLENHOPP, HARRIS and McCORMICK, JJ., concur.
REES, J., and MOORE, C. J., dissent.
LeGRAND, J., joins Division II of dissent.

=== CASE 9737940 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:37:35.017386+00 ===

REES, Justice
(dissenting).
The majority remands this case for new trial, holding the railroad’s alleged negligence in failing to post signs warning of low clearance under its overpass and plaintiff’s driver’s alleged contributory negligence in misjudging the clearance beneath that overpass were issues which should have been submitted to the jury. I cannot agree, and would hold trial court correctly decided both those issues as a matter of law in favor of defendant.
I. The traditional formula for the elements necessary to a cause of action founded upon negligence contemplates proof defendant was under an antecedent duty to conform to a certain standard of conduct, i. e., to use care, for the protection of others against unreasonable risks. See Prosser, Law of Torts, 4th Ed. § 30, p. 143, et seq.; 2 Harper and James, The Law of Torts, § 18.-1, p. 1015. Ordinarily, the question whether a duty exists is “entirely a question of law, to be determined by reference to the body of statutes, rules, principles and precedents which make up the law; and it must be determined only by the court.” Prosser, supra, § 37, p. 206. See also Passwaters v. General Motors Corp., 454 F.2d 1270 (8th Cir. 1972), 57 Am.Jur.2d, Negligence, § 34, p. 381.
In the instant case trial court decided the duty question presented here adversely to plaintiff, holding there is no duty under Iowa law requiring railroads to warn motorists of low clearance between railroad overpasses and the highways they span. The majority concludes the duty question was so bound up with the ultimate question of defendant’s negligence that it should have been left for the jury. Relying on the foregoing authority, I believe the duty question was for the court alone, and if it interpreted the Iowa law accurately in finding no duty existed this court should affirm.
The majority concedes defendant was under no statutory duty to post signs advising motorists of low clearance beneath railroad overpasses but apparently goes on to hold that a jury applying logic, sound reasoning and enlightened public policy might none*828theless find such a duty existed even though it was not statutorily imposed. While I would be persuaded by that line of reasoning in the ordinary case, I cannot reconcile it here in the face of § 321.259, The Code. That statute provides:
“No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any highway any sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official parking sign, curb or other marking, traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal, if such sign, signal, marking, or device has not been authorized by the state highway commission with reference to highways under their jurisdiction, local authorities with reference to streets and highways under their jurisdiction, and the Iowa state commerce commission with reference to railroad crossings, and no person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. This shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
“Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice.” (emphasis added)
It seems obvious to me that had defendant posted a warning sign on or near the overpass in question here, it would have acted in violation of the foregoing statute. In my opinion that circumstance, coupled with the fact there is no statutory duty imposed on railroads to post warning signs, amply justified trial court in concluding as a matter of law no such duty existed, and on that ground directing a verdict for defendant.
II. I believe trial court was likewise justified in holding alternatively that plaintiff was contributorily negligent as a matter of law and on that ground directing a verdict for defendant.
The record reveals plaintiff’s driver had an unobstructed view of the railroad overpass for a considerable distance down Second Avenue. Though according to his own testimony he had never been on the avenue before, the driver admitted to having increased his speed 15-20 miles per hour as he proceeded toward the bridge and said that he never slowed his vehicle or even considered the possibility he might not clear the overpass until he was under it. The driver implied he would have proceeded in the same fashion had his truck been four feet higher.
A number of other courts dealing with cases involving vehicular-overpass collisions, many on facts far less compelling than those presented here, have found drivers contributorily negligent as a matter of law for failing to judge clearance accurately. See e. g., Echols v. Atlanta B. & Q. RR. Co., 45 Ga.App. 609, 165 S.E. 484; Carr v. Chicago N. W. Ry. Co., 333 Ill.App. 567, 77 N.E.2d 857 (1948); Kutsenkow v. Chicago N. W. Ry. Co., 99 Ill.App.2d 265, 240 N.E.2d 805 (1968); Illin. Cen. RR. Co. v. Farris, 259 F.2d 445 (5th Cir. 1958); Norfolk So. Ry. Co. v. Davis Frozen Foods, 195 F.2d 662 (4th Cir. 1952); Lewie Montgomery Truck Co. v. Southern Pacific Co., 439 S.W.2d 691 (Tex.Civ.App.1969); Barfield v. Southern Ry. Co., 118 Ga. 256, 45 S.E. 282 (1903). See generally Annot., 67 A.L.R.2d 1364, 1378-1380. It might be noted in passing that of the cases cited approvingly by the majority for the proposition contributory negligence should not have been decided as a matter of law in the instant case, Bush v. Jenkins involved a situation where plaintiff’s vehicle lacked clearance by but one or two inches and Georgia R. & Banking Co. v. Sewell involved a structurally defective *829200-foot long underpass which provided adequate clearance at one end but not at the other, the clearance diminishing “impercep-tively” along the way.
In my opinion trial court justifiably directed a verdict for defendant on either or both the grounds a) defendant was under no duty to warn motorists of low clearance beneath its overpass, b) plaintiff’s driver was contributorily negligent as a matter of law.
I would affirm trial court.
MOORE, C. J., joins this dissent.
LeGRAND, J., joins Division II of this dissent.

=== CASE 2212562 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:21.347052+00 ===

650 N.E.2d 298 (1995)
272 Ill.App.3d 57
208 Ill.Dec. 841
The PEOPLE of the State of Illinois, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Andrew MAXWELL, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 4-93-0918.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Fourth District.
May 16, 1995.
*299 Daniel D. Yuhas, Deputy Defender, Judith L. Libby, Office of State Appellate Defender, Springfield, for Andrew Maxwell.
Thomas J. Brown, State's Atty., Pontiac, Norbert J. Goetten, Director, Robert J. Biderman, Deputy Director, Leslie Hairston, Staff Atty., State's Attorneys Appellate Prosecutor, Springfield, for People.
Justice LUND delivered the opinion of the court:
A jury found defendant Andrew Maxwell guilty of aggravated battery (720 ILCS 5/12-4(b)(6) (West 1992)), and the trial court sentenced him to 10 years' imprisonment. Maxwell now appeals, raising two issues. We affirm.
At the pretrial hearing held on August 17, 1993, Maxwell made motions for dismissal of the indictment on the basis of selective prosecution (denied) and for interlocutory appeal (denied). On the first day of the trial, Maxwell made motions to denote race and gender of prospective jurors during voir dire examination (allowed), to ask prospective jurors certain preliminary questions (allowed in part, denied in part), for a daily transcript of the proceedings (denied), to proceed to trial without mechanical restraint (denied), and for appointment of outside counsel (denied). In addition, Maxwell filed two motions in limine to prevent anyone from eliciting details concerning the prior convictions of his witnesses (allowed, but the State would be permitted to impeach with prior felony convictions) and to prevent witnesses from mentioning Officer Ronald French, since the State would not call him as a witness (denied). Maxwell also moved for production of prisoners as witnesses for the defendant, which was allowed in part and denied in part. Maxwell wanted to call more than a dozen condemned prisoners, most of whom had not been timely disclosed. Maxwell argued many of the rejected witnesses were essential to his defenses of necessity and defense of others. Ultimately, the trial judge allowed one witness who was not timely disclosed to testify. Subsequent to the hearing on Maxwell's motions, the jury was sworn and opening statements given. On the second day of trial, Maxwell filed a motion for substitution of judge for cause. The trial court determined the motion was not timely.
At trial, the State's evidence revealed the following. On November 11, 1992, inmate David Smith, located in the condemned unit of Pontiac Correctional Center (Pontiac), threw hot water on an officer and scalded him. Correctional captain David Miller, Officer Ronald French, and correctional lieutenant Joseph Brewer went to Smith's cell, No. 410, to move him from that cell, which had bars, to a cell with a steel door. Defendant Maxwell resided in an adjacent cell, No. 411. Smith was calm and offered no resistance. His hands were cuffed behind his back and he was removed from his cell. Smith was taken to a landing where there was a set of stairs leading to the gallery below. Officer French searched Smith on the middle of the landing. Smith was not leaned over the railing, and he did not say French was attempting to throw him over the railing. Brewer told Miller he would go to the gallery below and open the cell door. As Brewer passed between French and cell No. 411, Maxwell threw hot liquid on Brewer. The liquid contained an oily substance which Brewer was unable to remove. The inmates have "stingers," which are essentially hot plates used to heat water and coffee. A stinger can boil a cup of water in one minute. The inmates also have baby oil in their cells, and the substance thrown on Brewer was consistent with baby oil. Brewer left the gallery to receive medical attention. Brewer had first-and second-degree burns on his face, ear, neck, shoulder, and back, with permanent scarring. He also had an inner ear problem after the incident. He was in the hospital for *300 one week and did not return to work for one month.
Maxwell decided to represent himself, and his evidence revealed the following. On November 11, 1992, Miller approached Smith's cell with a can of Mace pointed at Smith. The other inmates yelled at Miller not to use the Mace, and Miller did not. Smith offered no resistance and allowed himself to be handcuffed. The officers opened Smith's cell door, grabbed him by the collar, and pulled him to the edge of the gallery. The gallery is a walkway four or five feet wide. It has a waist-high railing consisting of two horizontal bars. The distance to the next gallery below is 8 or 10 feet. As Smith was pulled toward the edge of the gallery, he yelled that the officers were trying to throw him over the railing and he yelled for help. Smith was pressed against the railing, and it was the only thing preventing him from falling off the gallery. Smith was bent over the railing, and he tried to wrap his leg around the railing. At that point, Maxwell threw hot water, which he had already boiled for his coffee, on the officers. Maxwell threw the water on the officers in defense of Smith because Maxwell thought the officers were planning to push Smith over the railing.
Outside the presence of the jury, the trial court informed Maxwell that he could inform the jury of his prior felony convictions to lessen the impact of the convictions. The trial court told Maxwell that if he did not inform the jury of his prior convictions, the State would be allowed to inform the jury of the convictions in rebuttal. After receiving this information, Maxwell decided to testify to his prior convictions. The court reopened testimony and allowed Maxwell to reveal to the jury that he had prior convictions for murder, two armed robberies, and attempt (armed robbery). The State also impeached Maxwell's two witnesses with their prior convictions for murder.
On appeal, Maxwell first argues the trial court erred in not scheduling a hearing before another judge on his motion for substitution of the trial judge for cause. Section 114-5(d) of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963 provides:
"In addition to the provisions of subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this Section the State or any defendant may move at any time for substitution of judge for cause, supported by affidavit. Upon the filing of such motion a hearing shall be conducted as soon as possible after its filing by a judge not named in the motion; provided, however, that the judge named in the motion need not testify, but may submit an affidavit if the judge wishes. If the motion is allowed, the case shall be assigned to a judge not named in the motion. If the motion is denied the case shall be assigned back to the judge named in the motion." (725 ILCS 5/114-5(d) (West 1992).)
The Supreme Court of Illinois has repeatedly stated that a motion for substitution of judge, due to the alleged prejudice of the assigned judge, must be made at the earliest practical moment after any potential prejudice is discovered. The rule is designed to prevent the defendant from first determining the attitude of the trial judge in a hearing related to some of the issues and then asserting the prejudice of the court if the court's rulings are not consistent with the defendant's theory. (People v. Taylor (1984), 101 Ill.2d 508, 518, 79 Ill.Dec. 151, 156, 463 N.E.2d 705, 710.) When a court has held a hearing and by its rulings indicated its views on the merits of the case, it is too late for the party against whom such rulings have been made to move for a substitution of judge. People v. Chambers (1956), 9 Ill.2d 83, 89, 136 N.E.2d 812, 815.
The present case involves a situation which the rule meant to remedy. Maxwell filed his motion for substitution of judge after the trial started and after the trial judge had ruled on his numerous motions. Since Maxwell's motion for substitution of judge came after the trial court ruled on substantive issues involved in the trial, the motion was not timely. Therefore, no error occurred when the trial court denied Maxwell's motion and did not schedule a hearing before a different judge on the motion.
Second, Maxwell argues the trial court erred by allowing the State to impeach him and other defense witnesses with prior felony convictions. Maxwell's two witnesses *301 were impeached by their prior murder convictions. Although Maxwell revealed his convictions to the jury, he did so only after the trial court stated it would allow the State to use his convictions for impeachment purposes if Maxwell did not reveal his convictions. In light of Maxwell's pro se status and the trial court's "advice" to Maxwell, we will consider Maxwell to have been impeached by the State.
The State concedes in its brief that the convictions were improperly admitted for impeachment purposes in light of People v. Williams (1994), 161 Ill.2d 1, 204 Ill.Dec. 72, 641 N.E.2d 296, but it argues the errors were harmless. We think the State makes its concession too readily. In People v. Montgomery (1971), 47 Ill.2d 510, 516, 268 N.E.2d 695, 698, the supreme court adopted the proposed Federal Rule 609 for impeachment by evidence of conviction of a crime. That rule allowed impeachment of a witness' credibility by a prior conviction if (1) the crime was punishable by death or imprisonment in excess of one year under the law under which the witness was convicted; or (2) the crime involved dishonesty or false statement regardless of the punishment; unless (3) in either case, the judge determines that the probative value of the evidence of the crime is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice.
In Williams, the supreme court revisited the rule stated in Montgomery. The supreme court determined the lower courts were mechanically applying the Montgomery rule to permit impeachment of a testifying defendant with virtually all types of prior felony convictions. The court was concerned with the lack of emphasis lower courts have placed on the third prong of the Montgomery rule (probative value versus unfair prejudice). The court emphasized the importance of conducting the balancing test of probative value versus prejudicial effect before admitting prior convictions for impeachment purposes. Williams, 161 Ill.2d at 38-41, 204 Ill.Dec. at 87, 641 N.E.2d at 311-13.
There is, arguably, dicta in Williams which indicates that something more than the fact that a conviction is a felony is required under the first prong of the Montgomery rule. Such an interpretation of Williams would place the appellate court and the trial courts of this State in a quandary when a testifying defendant is impeached by a prior felony conviction. If a prior felony conviction must affect the defendant's credibility in a manner other than by showing a disrespect for societal order, then there would seem to be no distinction between the first two components of the Montgomery rule. (See Montgomery, 47 Ill.2d at 516, 268 N.E.2d at 698 (first componentthe crime was punishable by death or imprisonment in excess of one year under the law under which the witness was convicted; second componentthe crime involved dishonesty or false statement regardless of the punishment).) Under what appears to be the Williams analysis, it is difficult to see how there could be a prior felony conviction which affects the credibility of the witness (other than by showing a disrespect for societal order) but does not fall within the second component of the Montgomery rule.
From our examination of Williams, we conclude the Supreme Court of Illinois was not abandoning the well-settled interpretation given Montgomery, which provides in the first prong that all felonies may be used for impeachment, and in the second prong allows nonfelonies to be used for impeachment if they relate to truth or veracity. Both the first and second prongs are subject to the third prong, which provides for a determination that the impeaching offense has a probative value not substantially outweighed by its prejudicial effect. The Williams opinion expresses concern about lower courts applying Montgomery in such a way as to allow all previous felony convictions for impeachment, negating the importance of the third prong. Williams, in effect, warns of the importance of conducting the balancing test.
In Williams, the impeaching offense also had the effect of proving the offense then before the trial court. This, the court recognized, had the necessary prejudicial significance. (We note the difference between Williams and our court's opinion in People v. Hester (1995), 271 Ill.App.3d 954, 208 Ill.Dec. 690, 649 N.E.2d 1351, where the prosecution *302 correctly introduced a prior like-kind offense for purposes of proving the new offense but also had the result of impeachment.) Williams also warns that close attention should be given to whether prior felonies actually have the ability to impeach veracityand this should be done when determining whether the probative value is outweighed by the prejudicial effect.
In the present case, the trial court did not err in allowing the impeachment of defendant by the prior conviction. The jury was well aware that defendant was a prison inmate. The current offense necessarily involved defendant's prison status. The disclosure of the prior offense removed that issue from the jurors' speculation. The disclosure prejudice was substantially reduced because of the information already before the jury. The prior conviction was initially admissible under the first prong of Montgomery. When the third prong was considered, the trial court could properly determine the impeachment probative value was not outweighed by the prejudicial effect.
The same reasoning applied to defendant applies to the impeachment of convicts testifying for the defense. Defendant complains that impeachment was not necessary because his witnesses testified on direct examination that they were residents of the condemned unit at Pontiac. We do not find that information equivalent to the actual offense. The prior offenses were murder convictions and are admissible under the first prong. The trial court's decision was within its discretionary authority. Accordingly, the judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
Affirmed.
GREEN and McCULLOUGH, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2212568 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:21.42274+00 ===

172 Cal.App.2d 560 (1959)
ERNEST M. McKEE, SR., Appellant,
v.
STATE OF CALIFORNIA et al., Respondents.
Civ. No. 9556.
California Court of Appeals. Third Dist.
July 31, 1959.
Spurr & Brunner and Neil Tocher for Appellant.
Stanley Mosk, Attorney General, and Paul M. Joseph, Deputy Attorney General, for Respondents.
VAN DYKE, P. J.
This is an appeal from a judgment denying appellant's petition for a writ of mandate directed against the State of California, the Department of Finance and the members of the State Lands Division. All of the respondents will be referred to as the State.
The transactions involved here have to do with proceedings taken by appellant with the purpose of acquiring as lieu land, under the School Land Grant, 440 acres of land in Lake County belonging to the federal government. Appellant's contentions are that he purchased from the State an indemnity certificate, commonly called scrip; that he paid therefor; that the scrip was issued to him and that he then proceeded to have it applied to lieu lands on an acre-for-acre basis, thereby becoming entitled to a certificate of purchase. The contentions of the State are that the transactions were not "scrip" transactions, but instead that appellant made application to purchase the lieu lands for cash on an appraisal basis under which method of acquisition a preliminary deposit is first made and later, and after the lands have been clear-listed to the State and have been appraised, the purchaser pays any sum by which the appraisal exceeds the preliminary deposit.
Petitioner in mandate, appellant here, alleged that on December 5, 1951, he purchased from the State Lands Commission a scrip certificate covering 440 acres of land in the Death Valley National Monument in Inyo County, California, and paid the price thereof, to wit, the sum of $2,200; that on the same day he surrendered the scrip to the State and made his application to have selected for him by the State, in lieu of the land covered by the certificate, 440 acres of federally-owned land in Lake County; that he acted pursuant to sections 7412 and 7413 of the Public Resources Code and paid all fees required; that his application was forwarded to the federal government, but was rejected; that through the State, but in his own interest, he appealed from the rejection order *562 and by decision on appeal the order was vacated and the application was allowed; that the land applied for was then clear-listed to the State; that pursuant to the Public Resources Code applicable to lieu lands, and in particular pursuant to section 7417 thereof, petitioner thus became entitled to have issued to him a certificate of purchase showing full payment for the lieu lands; that notwithstanding he demanded such certificate of purchase the State demanded that he pay an additional sum of $97,900, the sum by which the appraisal exceeded his payment of $2,200, failing which his application for the purchase of said lieu lands would be cancelled and the lands would be offered for public sale. The petition further alleged that the proceedings for appraisal of the lands and the demand for the additional payment were proceedings in excess of the jurisdiction of the State agencies involved; that the law cast upon the State the ministerial duty through its proper agencies of issuing the purchase certificate.
The superior court issued its alternative writ. The return and answer of the State denied that there had occurred any transaction by which scrip was purchased under the Public Resources Code, but that instead appellant had simply made application to purchase lieu lands for cash, had paid $2,200 as a preliminary deposit, together with expense deposits, and that the proceedings had were pursuant to rules 2400 through 2402 of the rules and regulations of the State Lands Commission adopted pursuant to Public Resources Code provisions in sections 7301, 7405.1 and 7406; that the parties contemplated throughout that the lieu lands were to be sold for a price determined by an appraisal after being clear-listed to the State; that when the land had been clear-listed it was appraised at $100,100; that in accordance with the application of appellant and in accordance with commission rules a demand was then made upon the appellant to pay the balance of the $97,900 as the price of the land; that appellant had failed to pay the same and the commission ordered that his rights would be terminated unless he did so; that he failed to pay the additional amount and by so failing had failed to comply with the conditions upon his part to be performed under the law.
[1] As stated by appellant the question presented is, Did appellant purchase scrip and apply it upon the lieu lands or did he apply for the purchase of the land direct?
The trial court found that on December 5, 1951, appellant *563 applied in writing to the commission to buy from the State for cash at a price to be fixed by an appraisal by the State the 440-acre parcel of Lake County lands; that the land was then vacant land owned by the United States; that at the time of appellant's application the land was subject to location and selection by the State through the State Lands Commission in lieu of the 16th and 36th sections granted to the State for the use of the public schools and in lieu of losses sustained by the State to its school land grant; that appellant's application was made by him and filed by the commission pursuant to the provisions of sections 7301, 7405.1 and 7406 of the Public Resources Code and other provisions of said code relating to the sale by the State of indemnity lands of the United States pursuant to rules 2400 through 2402 of the State Lands Commission (Cal. Admin. Code, tit. 2, div. 3, art. VI,  2400-2402); that appellant when he filed his application paid to the commission as an initial offer $5.00 per acre for the said land so applied for, aggregating the sum of $2,200 and agreed to pay the balance of the purchase price, if any, within 20 days after demand by the commission. It is not disputed on this appeal that if the evidence before the court was sufficient to support the foregoing findings the judgment appealed from must stand.
A careful reading of the transcript and consideration of the documentary evidence convinces us that the trial court's findings are substantially supported and that the judgment must be affirmed. We find much conflict on the essential points, but under the familiar rule that will not aid appellant. Appellant did testify that he was familiar with the longstanding provisions whereunder indemnity certificates, "scrip," could be purchased from the State and thereafter "located" upon lieu lands for which the State, responsive to its obligations under scrip purchases, and upon clear-listing of the federal lieu lands to it would issue its fully-paid certificate of purchase. Appellant said that he informed the State's agents with whom he dealt that such was his intention; that upon being informed the Lake County lands were available as lieu lands which the State could obtain he returned to Willits, where the witnesses were who had gone over the Lake County lands with him, filled out the necessary forms and mailed them to the commission along with the required funds. In support of his contention that he was buying scrip under provisions of the Public Resources Code authorizing sale of scrip and its later "location" he points to a certificate of *564 indemnity in the usual form where such purchases are being made which, when his application was received, was in fact made out by the commission's employees and, in form at least, executed by the proper officers of the State and thereafter retained in the State's file covering his application. This certificate, which was introduced in evidence and which had been produced from the State's file, reads as follows:
Graphic Material Omitted
It is not disputed that this indemnity certificate is in the form of scrip ordinarily issued to purchasers of scrip and if regularly issued and delivered to appellant would have entitled him at any future time to have surrendered it on an acre-for-acre basis for lieu lands available. There is nothing on the face of this instrument to indicate that it was other than what it purports to be. There is nothing concerning an appraisal *565 of lands or the possibility that further compensation would have to be paid.
But there is much evidence opposed to appellant's testimony and to his claim that he had in fact purchased scrip, that it had been delivered to him for the price paid, and that, simultaneously with its issue and because he was applying at the same time to purchase lieu lands by use of the scrip, he left the scrip in the possession of the State as a surrender thereof pursuant to his application for purchase of lieu lands. We will state that evidence as briefly as we can. Mr. Ireland, who, on behalf of the State, signed the purported certificate of indemnity and who had worked for the State Lands Commission from 1911 to 1953 and was in charge of the Sacramento office of the Division of State Lands in 1951, and until his retirement in 1953, testified as follows: Pursuant to an act passed in 1909, the Surveyor General sold scrip at public auction in his office on the first Monday in January, March, July and September which gave the purchaser the right to make selections of vacant unappropriated nonmineral open land upon surrendering certificates in payment therefor. This system for the sale of scrip at public auction was discontinued somewhere about 1920, at which time the price of scrip was fixed by the State Board of Control and anyone could secure scrip certificates either by writing in by mail or personally at the fixed price. When the money was sent in the scrip was issued and delivered to the purchaser. In the late 1940's another plan was begun which was described in a bulletin issued, reading in part as follows: "The price of indemnity certificates is fixed by the State Lands Commission, but in no event to be less than $5.00 per acre. Before the price is fixed, however, it will be necessary for an appraisal to be made of the government land desired and, in the event the value thereof is fixed at a price in excess of $5.00 per acre, the price so fixed would be the price the applicant would have to pay the State for the scrip in order to purchase the government land." Ireland testified that under this practice a prospective purchaser on getting in touch with the State office would be required to deposit money to cover the cost of an appraisal by the State of the federal land sought; that the appraisal would then be made by the State and after the appraisal the prospective purchaser would be advised of the cost of the scrip (the appraised value of the lieu lands) and he would then file an application with the State office, paying for the scrip, together with necessary fees of the United States and the State of California. In *566 1949 provisions were made in the Public Resources Code which authorized cash sales of lieu lands in accordance with commission rules. Rules 2400 through 2402 of the State Lands Commission were adopted and published in the Administrative Code under an entitlement: "Sale of Vacant United States Land." Under these rules, in addition to the various filing fees and expense deposit of $100, there was required a minimum initial offer of $5.00 per acre for the land applied for. Upon receiving the application and the necessary deposits the rules provided that the State, through the State Lands Commission, would make the selection by forwarding to the federal land office the necessary papers filed by the applicant and the selection papers necessary to be made out by the State. Then upon allowance of the State's selection by the federal land office the land would be appraised by the State and thereafter the price would be fixed at $5.00 per acre or at the appraised value, whichever was greater. The price so fixed would be the price the prospective purchaser of the lands would be required to pay. Ireland testified in effect that it was this later procedure which was followed by appellant and by the State land office and that there was no purchase of scrip made or intended. The State, in support of Ireland's testimony as to the nature of the transactions between the State and appellant, points to the application form filled out by appellant. In substance, this form, entitled, "Application to Purchase Lieu Lands," recites that appellant applies to purchase certain lands; that he asserts the land is not occupied; that he has personally examined each and every legal subdivision thereof and wants to purchase the same for his own use and benefit and has made no contract or agreement to sell the same. The following then appears in the form: "In accordance with Sections 7403, 7413 and 7416 of the Public Resources Code, I hereby surrender the following Certificates of Indemnity or Scrip in payment for said land: __________." At the bottom of the application form in large letters the following appears: "Each Application must be accompanied with a filing fee of $5.00, expense deposit of $100.00, and a minimum deposit of $5.00 per acre for the scrip pending appraisal of the land." The reference in the application form to sections 7403, 7413 and 7416 of the Public Resources Code and to the surrender of scrip is relied on by appellant as showing that the parties were dealing with a purchase of lieu land to be paid for with scrip. On the other hand, respondent points to the fact that there was no description *567 of the scrip purported to be surrendered and explains the presence of the language referring to a scrip purchase as something that happened because a form ill-adapted to the actual transaction was used. The State points to the statement at the end of the application form hereinbefore quoted, which refers to "a minimum deposit of $5.00 per acre for the scrip pending appraisal of the land" as substantiating its contention that no sale of scrip was involved and that the transaction was one to bring about a purchase of the lieu lands for cash on an appraisal basis. Concerning the presence in the commission's file of the document entitled "Indemnity Certificate of Location," which we have hereinbefore quoted in full, there was testimony that it was never delivered nor intended to be delivered as scrip purchased by appellant, was a mere office memorandum to indicate the Inyo County lands lost to the State from the original federal grant of school lands constituting the bases for lieu land selections. According to the witness Ireland the scrip certificate was made out and placed in the file covering appellant's application for purchase of land merely as an office memorandum so that there would be a record of the base land in Inyo County being surrendered by the State to the United States for the lieu lands selected; that it was a convenient way of keeping track of such base lands by having such memorandum in each application file, instead of having to go to some record book in the office; that the certificate was not meant to indicate full payment for the lieu lands to be received by appellant. Another witness testified that in 1951 such memorandum was placed in all application files. As she put it, "At that time every application had an indemnity certificate of location, using old forms which were in the office, which showed the down payment." Ireland said that the certificates were "written up and put into the application [file] for reference purposes when we wanted to determine what piece of land was outstanding, without having to go through what we call an indemnity list." It was further testified, and this testimony was not controverted, that the certificate was fully made out and placed in appellant's file by a commission employee on the day that the application to purchase was received; that it remained in the file, its presence being unknown to appellant; that the knowledge of its existence was not obtained by appellant until years after it was placed in the file when appellant was in the office of the commission looking through the file for purposes of his own; that at that time he made no claim that it constituted his property *568 and that it remained in the file where he had seen it. There was further evidence concerning the validity, as a title document, of the certificate, but enough has been recited to show that the trial court was justified in finding as it did that the certificate had never been delivered to McKee and never had become a muniment of title. Specifically, the court's findings, which we hold to be supported, were: "that upon the date the petitioner applied to the State Lands Commission for said land and upon which the said Commission filed said application, but after said application had been filed, the State Lands Commission filled out a form that had been previously used by said Commission as the form for indemnity certificates of location; that said form was signed by an agent of the said Commission authorized to sign the same and was sealed with the seal of said Commission; said form was never delivered to petitioner or any person other than petitioner, but, instead, was placed in the file of said Commission relating to petitioner's said application and was at all times retained in the possession of said Commission; that said form was not intended by the said Commission or any of its employees or representatives as or for an indemnity certificate of location or scrip certificate under the provisions of the Public Resources Code or any other laws or any rules or regulations pertaining to the application, selection or sale of indemnity lands; that the said form contained a description of certain land in the Death Valley National Monument in the County of Inyo, State of California, intended by the said Commission to be used as base land and to be relinquished by the State of California to the United States upon the listing (or conveyance) to the State of California of the land in the County of Lake applied for by petitioner and about to be selected by the State of California from the United States; that said form, as so filled out, was intended by the State Lands Commission to be, and at all times was, an office memorandum of the State Lands Commission."
In support of its position that appellant bought land, not scrip, the State points to a letter written to appellant acknowledging receipt of appellant's application, reading as follows: "Receipt is acknowledged of your application to purchase, through this office with State scrip, the S1/2, W1/2 of NE1/4 and SE1/4 of NE1/4 of Section 15, T. 11 N., R. 8 W., M.D.M., containing 440.00 acres in Lake County. Said application was accompanied with the required State filing fee of $5.00, expense *569 deposit of $100.00 and $2,200.00 to cover the minimum scrip deposit of $5.00 per acre, pending appraisal."
As further support for the State's contentions it appears that after appraisal of the land demand was made upon appellant for the payment of the large sum of money constituting the difference between the amount he had already paid in and the appraisal figure and he did not protest that the State was obligated to issue him a certificate of sale without further money, but, on the contrary, entered into negotiations with the State concerning the appraisal figures. There is a good deal in support of the contentions of both sides which we have not related. Undoubtedly, the forms used were not apt to truly reflect the transactions between the parties, but we think it unnecessary to discuss further the sufficiency of the evidence to support the trial court's related findings. The issue under the evidence was one of fact for resolution by the trial court. That court's resolution of the issue is supported by substantial evidence and is binding on appeal.
[2] Appellant contends that the court committed prejudicial error in receiving into evidence over objection testimony as to the departmental practice of the State with respect to the sale of lieu lands or of scrip to be used for the purchase of lieu lands after statutory law had been enacted permitting cash sale of the land on an appraisal basis. There was introduced records of sales on such basis dating from 1949 through 1951, thus bracketing the proceedings between appellant and the State and showing that the sales were made on an appraisal basis. Other testimony was admitted concerning the same subject matter, the avowed intent of the State being to prove that after cash sales on an appraisal basis were authorized under rules to be adopted by the commission scrip sales were discontinued. The State seeks to justify the admission of this material upon the theory that since the nature of the transaction in litigation was in issue the State could show its custom and practice concerning other proceedings of like nature had with others. The cases cited do not support the State's theory as to the admissibility of the evidence objected to. The issue here was as to the contract between appellant and the State. What the State may have contracted for with others would not prove the nature of its contract with appellant. It was still lawful to sell scrip with the right to apply it upon lieu land. The only question was as to which of these alternate roads had *570 been traveled. Cited cases holding that evidence of transactions of like kind with others can be introduced against the party having such transactions upon the theory that the course of conduct so evidenced constitutes admissions against interest have no application here where just the reverse is attempted, that is, where the person having such other transactions is attempting to prove that the transaction with the adverse party was the same as those with others. (Lande v. Southern Calif. Freight Lines, 85 Cal.App.2d 416 [193 P.2d 144].) We think that it was error to receive this evidence.
Under the constitutional mandate this judgment cannot be reversed unless there has been a miscarriage of justice because of the error in the receipt of evidence. We are satisfied that from the whole record it cannot be said a different result would probably have been reached by the trial court had this evidence not been offered and received. When McKee mailed in his application for purchase of lieu lands the form he used plainly stated in capital letters that he was making a minimum deposit of $5.00 an acre pending appraisal of the land. On the day that application was received its receipt was acknowledged by a letter from Ireland heretofore quoted ascribing the same character to the transaction, and appellant made no protest.
Appellant did not advance his claim that he was attempting to acquire the lands by buying scrip and that he had bought and paid for scrip which he was entitled to surrender in full payment of the selected lieu lands until long after he had received notice direct by letter that the appraisal was about to be made, had been asked to participate in the appraisal proceedings, had done so, had protested against the appraisal figures as being excessive and had negotiated for a reduction. In view of all this we believe that the same judgment would have been entered had the evidence objected to been excluded.
For the reasons given the judgment is affirmed.
Schottky, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9737941 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:37:46.832522+00 ===

Spencer, J.
Defendant appeals her conviction for possession of a controlled substance with intent to deliver. Defendant alleges 13 assignments of error. Essentially there are only three: (1) The trial court erred in overruling defendant’s motion to suppress; (2) the trial court overruled defendant’s motion for a new trial when it became aware that the State’s expert witness had misrepresented his credentials; and (3) the trial court committed an abuse of discretion in imposing a clearly excessive sentence on the defendant. We affirm.
Defendant contends the affidavit in support of the application for the search warrant was not legally sufficient to constitute probable cause for the issuance of the warrant. The affidavit and application for issuance of a search warrant made by an Omaha police officer on June 5, .1973, states, so far as material herein, as follows: “That he has just and reasonable grounds to believe, *192and does believe that 'there is concealed or kept as hereinafter described, the following property, to-wit: Opium or its derivatives, Cocaine, Marijuana or its derivatives, or any other illegally possessed drugs, and instruments for administering the afore mentioned drugs, either homemade or manufactured.
“That said property is concealed or kept in, on, or about the following described place or person, to-wit: GLOUSER, Barbara Jean - White female - 33 Years old DOB 6 Jan 1940- - 5 foot 4 in. 110 to 120 pounds. OPD # 70143 also she will have in her possession some suit cases and bags.
“That said property is under the control or custody of GLOUSER, Barbara Jean OPD # 70143.
“That the following are the grounds for issuance of a search warrant for said property and the reasons for his belief, to-wit: On 5 June 1973 Sgt. R. R. Caruso of the narcotic office received a telephone call from a person who has given the Officers in the narcotic office information in the past that has been found to be good reliable information and has resulted in the arrest of several parties on drug charges and also has resulted in the recovery of large amounts of narcotics and drugs. The informant stated that a person was taking flights to and from San Diego, Calif, leaving and coming back on the same day. Also this party was taking these flights just a few days apart. The informant stated the name being used by this party was B. GLOUSER. Officers R. Wiese arid K. A. Miller took a police mug photo of a party known to them as GLOUSER, Barbara Jean OPD # 70143 and she was named as the party taking the flights. One of the flights was to San Diego, Calif, on Friday 1 June 1973 and she returned the same night. She then left on a flight to San Diego, Calif, on Monday 4 June 1973 with reservation to return the same night but did not board this flight. She is on a plane now which left San Diego, Calif, on Tuesday morning 5 June 1973 and due to arrive in Omaha, Nebraska at *1931335 hours on Tuesday 5 June 1973. The informant further stated she travels with a very small amount of luggage. It is known by Officers R. Wiese and K. A. Miller that GLOUSER, Barbara Jean is married to a GLOUSER, Larry and both parties have police records with the Omaha Police Dept, of past Drug and narcotic arrests. Information from other reliable sources state that Larry GLOUSER is still involved in the narcotic operation within the City of Omaha. It is the Officers opinion that GLOUSER, Barbara Jean is bringing narcotics back to Omaha from the San Diego, Calif, or Mexico area. Officers are requesting this search warrant in order to search the person of GLOUSER, Barbara Jean and any or all of the luggage that she might have.”
Defendant contends there is no information presented in the affidavit which shows the underlying circumstances from which the informant drew the conclusion's related and that the affidavit does not supply sufficient information to support the reliability of the informant. In State v. LeDent (1970), 185 Neb. 380, 176 N. W. 2d 21, we held: For an affidavit (based upon) a tip from an informant to be sufficient, the magistrate must be informed of (1) some of the underlying circumstances from which the informant concluded that the narcotics were located where he claimed they were, and (2) some of the underlying circumstances from which the officer concluded that the informant was credible. The affidavit herein meets these two tests. Sufficient underlying circumstances are set out and sufficient information to support the reliability of the informant is given. We must not lose sight of the principle enunciated in Le-Dent: “Affidavits for search warrants must be tested in a common sense, realistic fashion.”
Defendant also contends that the question of the sufficiency of the affidavit, which is based on hearsay information supplied by an unknown person, requires that every item of the affidavit be subjected to precise judicial scrutiny, separately and independently, to deter*194mine whether the affidavit passes constitutional muster. Additionally, defendant raises several other alleged deficiencies in the affidavit, none .of which merit discussion.
This case, on its facts, is not too different from Draper v. United States (1959), 358 U. S. 307, 79 S. Ct. 329, 3 L. Ed. 2d 327, where the question involved was whether the arrest, search, and seizure were lawful where no search warrant was involved. In Draper a federal narcotics agent was told by an informer, whose information the agent had always found to be accurate, that petitioner whom the agent did not know but who was described by the informer, was peddling narcotics and had gone to Chicago to obtain a supply and would return on a certain train on a certain day or the day after. The agent met the train, easily recognized the petitioner from the informer’s description, and without a warrant arrested him, searched him, and seized narcotics and a hypodermic syringe found in his possession. These were later admitted in evidence over the objection of petitioner at the trial at which he was convicted of violating a federal narcotics law. The Supreme Court held that even if the' information received by the agent from the informer was hearsay, the agent was legally entitled to consider it in determining whether he had probable cause within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution, and reasonable grounds within the meaning of 26 U. S. C., section 7607, to believe that petitioner had committed or was committing a violation of the narcotic laws. The information in the possession of the narcotic agent was sufficient to show probable cause as well as reasonable grounds to believe that petitioner had violated or was violating the narcotic laws and to justify his arrest without a warrant. The arrest was lawful and the subsequent search and seizure having been made incident to a lawful arrest were likewise valid.
United States v. Harris (1971), 403 U. S. 573, 91 S. Ct. 2075, 29 L. Ed. 2d 723, teaches that an affidavit for a *195search warrant may be based on hearsay information and need not reflect direct observations of affiant so long as the magistrate is informed of some of the underlying circumstances supporting the affiant’s' conclusions. In Harris, the affidavit unlike Jones v. United States (1960), 362 U. S. 257, 80 S. Ct. 725, 4 L. Ed. 2d 697, did not aver that the informant had previously given “correct information.” The court held this' was not essential when supported by other information. The instant case is analogous to Jones which did give sufficient information for the magistrate to judge'the reliability of the informant.
In Spinelli v. United States (1969), 393 U. S. 410, 89 S. Ct. 584, 21 L. Ed. 2d 637, which is cited extensively by defendant, the court said: “The • detail provided by the informant in Draper v. United States * * * provides a suitable benchmark. * * * A magistrate, when confronted with such detail, could reasonably infer that the informant had gained his information in a reliable way5.” Footnote No. 5 reads: “While Draper involved the' question whether the police had probable cause for an arrest without a warrant, the analysis required' for an answer to this question is basically similar to that demanded of a magistrate when he considers whether a search warrant should issue.”
■ The affidavit herein was sufficient to justify the issuance of the search warrant. It goes tó great lengths to outline the underlying circumstances from which the informant concluded the articles were located oh the person "or in' the' baggage of the defendant. Thé- flights arid the short intervals between departure and return; the' Very small amount of luggage taken on the flights; and the fact that the flights were to an area of known drug source, as well as .the information that the defendant and her husband had a history of association with drugs, would reasonably indicate to a magistrate a drug operation. The underlying .circumstances from which the officer concluded the informant was credible *196are stated. He had given reliable information in the past, which had resulted in several arrests as well as the recovery of large amounts of narcotics. Testing this affidavit in a common sense, realistic fashion, we can come to but one conclusion: It was amply sufficient to justify the search warrant.
Defendant’s next major assignment is that the lower court erred in overruling her motion for new trial based upon newly discovered evidence. Hugh J. McGuire, a chemist, who identified the substance seized as heroin, testified that he held a Bachelor’s degree in chemistry and had taken graduate training. In support of her motion for new trial defendant adduced that Mr. McGuire had not received a Bachelor’s degree from Creighton University and had not taken graduate training as per his testimony. The court found that neither defendant’s counsel nor the Douglas county attorney had reason to believe at the time of the trial that McGuire’s testimony as to his academic credentials was inaccurate.
The contention raised by defendant on the motion for new trial is that McGuire’s lack of academic credentials renders him incapable of qualifying as an expert witness and giving any opinion as to the result of his analysis of the substance seized. The lower court overruled the motion for new trial, and held: “* * * there is no rational basis to conclude that the discrediting evidence that McGuire did not have a degree or that his training in the various tests were not graduate work, even might have changed the result.”
The State agrees that the discovery of Mr. McGuire’s falsification of his credentials would constitute newly discovered evidence. The issue is the effect of the falsification of an expert witness’ credentials. A motion for new trial for newly discovered evidence will not be granted where the other evidence is sufficient to sustain the verdict. The newly discovered evidence offered in this case is of an impeaching character to discredit the witness.
*197While the precise issue of the falsification of the credentials of an expert witness has not heretofore been presented to this court, the New Jersey Superior Court considered the precise issue involved in Ginnelly v. Continental Paper Co. (1959), 57 N. J. Super. 480, 155 A. 2d 154. There the witness, who qualified as a construction expert and construction engineer, falsely represented that he had been graduated from Catholic University with a degree in architectural engineering. In overruling the motion for a new trial, the court held: “But more fundamentally, the test is whether the evidence of the plea and conviction, if competent, would probably alter the judgment. In view of the undisputed fact that the witness had four years of preparatory engineering at Stevens, four years of architectural engineering at Catholic University (without receiving a degree), and 38 years’ experience in the construction and engineering business, we are not prepared to say that the trial judge abused his discretion in ruling that a correct statement of Connolly’s qualifications would not probably alter the result.”
Did the trial court abuse its discretion in refusing to grant a new trial herein? In Finnern v. Bruner (1960), 170 Neb. 170, 101 N. W. 2d 905, we held: “The newly discovered evidence must be of such a natúre that if offered and admitted at the former trial it probably would have produced a substantial difference in result. Such evidence must be competent, material, and credible, and not merely cumulative. It must involve something other than the credibility of witnesses who testified at the former trial. It must appear that the unsuccessful party had no knowledge of the néwly discovered evidence at the previous trial and could not have discovered it by the exercise of reasonable diligence.”
In State v. Wycoff (1966), 180 Neb. 799, 146 N. W. 2d 69, we said: “A new trial will not ordinarily be granted for newly discovered evidence which, when produced, will merely impeach or discredit a witness who testified *198at the trial.” If the probable result of' the new evidence would be a different verdict, a new trial should be granted. Such new evidence, therefore, must be of such a character as to render clear and positive that which was before equivocal and uncertain, and be so important to the issues involved as to -indicate that-upon another trial a different result will probably be reached.
The evidence adduced shows that while McGuire does not have a degree from Creighton University, he has taken 135 hours at that university. He achieved passing grades in 129 hours between 1955 and 1960. His general scholarship was average to below average. "Since that time, McGuire has done extensive drug analysis while acting as a chemist and in particular a toxicologist at Luthern Medical Cénter. He was familiar with and conducted the several tests recognized and available to analyze a sample for the. presence'or absence of a con1 trolled substance. The principal tests utilized are known as thin layer chromatography, infrared spectral analysis, gas chromatography, and ultra-violet spectral analysis. He took on-the-job training in courses provided by manufacturers of the equipment necessary to conduct these tests.
Both witnesses for the State and the defense, including a qualified chemist at the Lutheran Medical Center laboratory, testified that McGuire was competent to perform the accepted tests utilizing the instruments and equipment in the Lutheran laboratory. In addition, the evidence is very persuasive from several witnesses that while appropriate academic background is relevant, it is considerably less important in the area of toxicology than the ability and competence to perform the tests. The evidence of McGuire’s background and training is more than adequate to qualify him as an expert witness notwithstanding his admitted lack of academic credentials.
McGuire’s cross-examination at the trial was very limited. The lack of academic credentials, in view of *199his extensive background and training in analysis of controlled substances,' would not have disqualified him as an expert witness. We agree with the trial judge: “It would be sheer speculation to conclude that the newly discovered evidence would have discredited McGuire to the extent that it probably would have produced a different result or that it even ‘might have changed the result’ * *
Mr. McGuire had been working in the laboratory at Lutheran Medical Center for 13 years. He had done extensive drug analysis while working as a chemist and toxicologist, to the extent of some 500 tests per month between 1971 and 1972. We agree with the trial judge, there is no rational basis to conclude that the' discrediting evidence that Mr. McGuire did not have a degree or that his training in various tests was not graduate work would have changed the result. Or, as we phrase it, on this record we cannot say that The new evidence is of so controlling a nature as to probably change the result of the former trial, which is the test we must apply. The trial judge did not abuse his discretion in overruling defendant’s motion for a new trial.
Defendant’s last assignment of error is that the trial court abused its discretion in imposing a clearly excessive sentence. Defendant was sentenced to 10 years confinement- in the State Reformatory for Women. The minimum sentence allowed for the charge of possession of a controlled substance- with intent to deliver is 1 year, and the maximum is 10 years. '§ 28-4,125, R. S. Supp., 1973. Where, as here, the court sets a definite term of years, the minimum sentence becomes the minimum provided by law. § 83-1,105, R. S. Supp., 1972. There is no question the trial judge intended to give defendant the maximum penalty for the offense. Obviously he has not done so.
The sentencing herein was combined with a sentencing on a forgery conviction. The defendant was given the maximum of 10 years on the forgery conviction. This *200again being a sentence for a term of years, the minimum is 1 year. The sentence on the forgery conviction was to be consecutive with the sentence imposed herein. Actually, the defendant received two sentences of 1 to 10 years, to be served consecutively and not concurrently. The net effect is the same as a 2 to 20 year sentence. Defendant will be eligible for parole consideration at the expiration of 2 years.
Viewing the situation in the light of the record, we come to the conclusion that the trial judge did not abuse his discretion. The judgment is affirmed.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 2212572 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:21.469815+00 ===

85 N.Y.2d 956 (1995)
650 N.E.2d 854
626 N.Y.S.2d 1007
The People of the State of New York, Respondent,
v.
Earl Dunn, Appellant.
Court of Appeals of the State of New York.
Argued March 30, 1995.
Decided May 4, 1995.
James D. Licata, Public Defender of Rockland County, New City (Clare McCue Cincotta, Barbara Blanchard and Lois Cappelletti of counsel), for appellant.
Kenneth Gribetz, District Attorney of Rockland County, New City (Lisa B. Cohen and Deborah Wolikow Loewenberg of counsel), for respondent.
Chief Judge KAYE and Judges SIMONS, TITONE, BELLACOSA, SMITH, LEVINE and CIPARICK concur.
*957MEMORANDUM.
The order of the Appellate Division should be affirmed.
Defendant was convicted of the first degree manslaughter and aggravated sexual abuse in the first degree of a fellow inmate at Rockland Psychiatric Center. Following the assault, he was seized by hospital personnel and transferred to the custody of the State Police. While under guard of a hospital security officer  and, as the lower court found, without any conduct on the part of the officer that was likely to elicit a statement  defendant made certain inculpatory statements that the hearing court ruled spontaneous, and therefore admissible. While defendant argued that subsequent statements were involuntary because defendant's mental incapacity made it impossible for him to understand the consequences of a Miranda warning, he did not raise either at the suppression hearing or as a ground for objection to the admission of the evidence at trial his present contention on appeal: that as a result of his mental incapacity, he was incapable of uttering his initial, "spontaneous" statement. Although the Appellate Division considered, in the interests of justice, whether defendant's mental incapacity might render him particularly vulnerable to coercion, that issue is not preserved for us as a question of law.
Order affirmed in a memorandum.

=== CASE 9737943 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:37:49.736533+00 ===

OPINION
RILEY, Judge.
Petitioner-Appellant William Robertson appeals from the denial of his Ind.Post-Conviction Rule 1 Petition for Post-Conviction Relief.
We affirm in part, reverse in part and remand.
ISSUES
Robertson presents eleven issues for our review which we consolidate and rephrase as:
1. Did the trial court exceed its jurisdiction by amending the file-stamped date on the charging information?
2. Did the charging information lack proper approval by the prosecutor?
3. Did the trial court err by denying Robertson's tendered instruction?
4. Did the trial court err by refusing to re-read a preliminary instruction?
5. Did the trial court improperly communicate with the jury during its deliberations?
6. Did the trial court err by failing to hold an in camera hearing regarding the State's motion in limine?
7. Did the prosecutor improperly elicit irrelevant testimony from the confidential informant?
8. Was Robertson's sentence manifestly unreasonable?
9. Did the trial court err by not asking the jury if the tornado that interrupted the trial affected its ability to decide the case?
10. Did Robertson receive ineffective assistance of counsel?
FACTS
On August 17, 1992, after a jury trial, Robertson was convicted of two counts of dealing in cocaine as a Class A felony1 and one count of dealing in cocaine as a Class B felony.2 He was sentenced to two thirty-five-year terms and a ten-year term of imprisonment to be served consecutively. His conviction was affirmed on direct appeal in Robertson v. State (filed September 4, 1991), Ind.App., Cause No. 22A01-9010-CR-398, slip op. 1-7, 577 N.E.2d 625.
Robertson filed his Petition for Post-Conviction Relief on August 17, 1992. After a hearing on May 28, 1998, the court denied Robertson's petition. It is this ruling from which Robertson appeals.
DISCUSSION
In a post-conviction relief proceeding, the petitioner bears the burden of establishing the grounds for relief by a preponderance of the evidence. Babbs v. State (1993), Ind.App., 621 N.E.2d 326, 329, trans. denied. After a denial by the post-conviction court, the petitioner must satisfy the reviewing court that the evidence, without conflict, leads inevitably to a conclusion opposite that of the trial court. Id. In reviewing a denial of post-conviction relief, we neither reweigh the evidence nor judge witness credibility. *1181Joseph v. State (1992), Ind.App., 603 N.E.2d 873, 876.
The State contends that Robertson has waived many of the issues which he now presents to this court because he failed to raise them in his direct appeal. We agree with the State that post-conviction proceedings are not a substitute for a direct appeal and issues which could have been raised on direct appeal may not be raised in a post-conviction proceeding. Rhoton v. State (1991), Ind.App., 575 N.E.2d 1006, 1008, trans. denied; Combs v. State (1989), Ind., 537 N.E.2d 1177, 1179. Generally, allegations of error available but not asserted on direct appeal are waived for purposes of post-conviction relief, Rhoton, 575 N.E.2d at 1008. However, at no point during the post-conviction proceedings did the State raise the defense of waiver, neither did the post-conviction court find waiver, rather, the State responded to and the court based its findings upon the merits of Robertson's argument which we must do as well. Dodson v. State (1987), Ind., 502 N.E.2d 1333, 1335; Richardson v. State (1982), Ind., 439 N.E.2d 610, 612; see Mickens v. State (1991), Ind.App., 579 N.E.2d 615, 616-18 (review of waiver and res judicata defense as they apply to post-conviction proceedings).
I.
Robertson first contends that the trial court exceeded its jurisdiction by amending the file-stamped date on the charging instrument. He argues that the original information misled him "as evidenced by his Motion to Dismiss and caused unfair surprise." Appellant's Brief at 19.
The charging information was file-stamped with a date of September 12, 1989, but 'sworn to' on October 6, 1989. On the morning of Robertson's trial, he motioned to dismiss the charges citing the defective information and the trial court's lack of jurisdiction. In considering the motion, the trial judge stated:
The file stamp was mis-set for September because our filing indicates that it was all filed October 12th which was the Thursday before the October 18th bust.... Thus, apparently, the file stamp was inadvertently set for September. It's changed every morning. The girl must have hit the month change instead of the date change because the original filed with the Court is scratched through and marked October. And all of our computer records indicate filing on October.
(R. at 156-57).3 The trial judge then altered the file stamp on Robertson's copy of the information to read October 12, 1989. In its conclusions of law, the post-conviction court found that the September stamp was an administrative error which had no bearing on conferring jurisdiction upon the court and "correcting the error to reflect the actual filing date was of no consequence or prejudice to" Robertson. (P-CR R. at 115).
An information may not be amended to change the theory of the case or the identity of the offense charged; however, it may be amended at any time to cure a defect if the substantial rights of the defendant are not prejudiced. Wright v. State (1992), Ind., 593 N.E.2d 1192, 1197, cert. denied - U.S. -, 113 S.Ct. 605, 121 L.Ed.2d 540. Although Robertson contends that the amendment to his charging document misled him and caused unfair surprise, he does not elaborate on this contention. The change of date did not create a material variance between the charging information and the evidence adduced at trial See Robinson v. State (1994), Ind.App., 634 N.E.2d 1367, 1372. A material variance, which requires reversal, must mislead the defendant in the preparation of his defense or subject him to the likelihood of another prosecution for the same offense. Id.
Robertson has not shown how his defense would have changed had the file-stamp been initially correct and nothing in the record reflects undue surprise due to the mis-dated information. We note that Robertson's counsel stated to the trial court that he only noticed the erroneous date the weekend before the trial. (R. at 155). In addition, *1182there is no showing that Robertson has been placed in danger of double jeopardy. We see no error here.
IL
Robertson next contends that the charging information was never "approved by" the prosecutor and thus the conviction is void. We do not agree.
I.C. 35-34-1-2(b) provides that an information shall be signed by the prosecuting attorney or the deputy and sworn to or affirmed by the prosecutor or any other person. The purpose of the indorsement "approved by me" signed by the prosecuting attorney was to assure that all eriminal prosecutions were in fact approved by the prosecuting attorney and initiated by the prosecuting attorney who was the officer invested with jurisdiction to act for the State. Brown v. State (1980), Ind.App., 403 N.E.2d 901, 909; see Clark v. State (1990), Ind., 561 N.E.2d 759, 765 (The signature of the prosecuting attorney insures that prosecutions have been investigated and approved by the prosecutors officer, the only office authorized to initiate criminal prosecutions.). In the case at bar, this purpose has been served. The deputy prosecutor's signature as notary to the affiant meets that policy of the law and is in sufficient compliance with the statutory requirement that the information be signed by the prosecuting attorney. As the trial court noted, while it would have been better for the prosecutor to set forth the approval of the information, we will not reverse where the purpose of requiring such a signature is so clearly satisfied.
TIL
Robertson asserts that he was entitled to an instruction on possession of cocaine, an inherently included lesser offense of dealing cocaine.
The determination of the propriety of instructions on lesser included offenses involves two steps: first, we examine the statutes involved and the charging information; and second we examine the evidence to determine whether the facts would support the instruction. Compton v. State (1984), Ind., 465 N.E.2d 711, 713; Lawrence v. State (1978), 268 Ind. 330, 337, 375 N.E.2d 208, 213. Both of these steps must be satisfied before an instruction is proper. Compton, 465 N.E.2d at 713; Roddy v. State (1979), 182 Ind.App. 156, 162, 394 N.E.2d 1098, 1103. Here Robertson has failed to pass the first step. The information in this case shows that Robertson was charged with two counts of dealing in cocaine as a class A felony and one count of dealing in cocaine as a class B felony. The information closely tracks the statute and there is no doubt that the prosecutor was not attempting to seek a conviction on a lesser included offense. As our supreme court stated in Jones v. State (1982), Ind., 438 N.E.2d 972, 975, "the state through its drafting can foreclose as to the defendant, the tactical opportunity to seek a conviction for a lesser offense. The point is that absolute discretion rests in the state to determine the crime[s] with which a defendant will be charged." Thus, notwithstanding that the evidence in this case may have supported an instruction on a lesser offense, Robertson was not entitled to have the instructions given to the jury. To do so would result in the possibility of a compromise verdict. Compton, 465 N.E.2d at 713. We find that the trial court did not err in refusing to instruct the jury on lesser included offenses.
IV.
Robertson contends that the trial court erred when it refused to re-read a preliminary instruction at the close of the case. We do not agree.
Ind.Appellate Rule 8.3(A)(7) provides, in part, that: "When error is predicated on the giving or refusing of any instruction, the instruction shall be set out verbatim in the argument section of the brief with the verbatim objections, if any, made thereto." Robertson has failed to include the tendered instruction in his Brief and has consequently waived any error. See Norris v. State (1986), Ind., 498 N.E.2d 1203, 1206.
Notwithstanding waiver, Robertson argues that Ind.Trial Rule 51(A) demands that the trial court reread preliminary instructions as final instructions where a party requests it and the record demonstrates an *1183evidentiary basis for the instruction. However, Robertson mistakenly applies TR. 51(A) which only pertains to civil proceedings. See TR. 1. Giving Robertson the benefit of the doubt, the analogous rule for criminal proceedings directs the trial court to reread preliminary instructions at the close of a case if the instructions pertain to the issues for trial, the burden of proof, the credibility of witnesses, and the manner of weighing the testimony. See Ind.Crim.Rule 8(F) and (G). The instruction in question does not pertain to these matters and thus, this argument cannot succeed.
v.
Robertson next asserts that the trial court improperly communicated with the jury during its deliberations.
When jurors request additional guidance from the trial court, the proper procedure is for the judge to notify the parties so they may be present in court before the judge communicates with the jury, and the parties should be informed of the judge's proposed response to the jury. Grey v. State (1990), Ind., 553 N.E.2d 1196, 1198, reh'g denied. An inference of prejudice arises from an ex parte communication and this inference creates a rebuttable presumption that error has been committed. Id. Communications between the judge and the deliberating jury in defendant's absence are forbidden; however, such communications do not constitute per se grounds for reversal. Id. at 1199; Marsillett v. State (1986), Ind., 495 N.E.2d 699, 709.
When the trial court judge merely responds to a jury question by denying their request, any inference of prejudice is rebutted and any error is deemed harmless. Grey, 553 N.E.2d at 1199. In this case, the post-conviction court noted that during deliberations, the jury sent a written inquiry to the trial court. The jury asked if they were allowed to recommend leniency regarding sentencing. The judge answered, "No. You cannot make any recommendations." (R. at 1081). Thus, the judge responded to the jury question by denying their request, and the post-conviction court was correct in concluding that the trial court's response was harmless error.4
VIL.
Robertson next contends that the post-conviction court erred when it found that the trial court held an in camera hearing regarding the address of a confidential informant.
Prior to trial, the State filed a motion in limine requesting that Robertson be denied inquiry as to the residence of the confidential informant. At the start of the trial, the judge noted the State's motion, Robertson's counsel stated: "And we have no problem with that," and the trial judge granted the motion. (R. at 151). At the post-conviction proceeding, Robertson complained that the trial court erred by not conducting an in camera hearing before granting the State's motion, and this failure amounted to reversible error. The post-conviction court, in its findings of fact and conclusions of law, found that a hearing on the State's motion was held. In his brief, Robertson argues that the record is "completely devoid of any such hearing and the State has presented no documentary evidence to refute [his] claim." Petitioner's Brief at 26.
We, however, need not decide the propriety of the post-conviction court's findings and conclusions because our review of the record reveals that this issue is not properly before us.
The issue of the disclosure of the confidential informant's residence was the subject of a motion in limine which the trial court granted without objection from Robertson. Without an objection, the trial court had no reason to hold a hearing or inquire further *1184into the matter, thus even assuming that Robertson is correct in his assertion that there was no hearing, we can find no error for its omission. In addition, Robertson has waived this issue for failure to make an offer to prove during the course of trial.
A motion in limine serves as a protective order against prejudicial questions and statements which might arise during trial and the trial court has inherent discretionary power to grant such a motion. Hare v. State (1984), Ind., 467 N.E.2d 7, 13. The pretrial grant of a motion in limine is not a final ruling upon the ultimate admissibility of evidence, rather it is meant to protect against potential prejudicial matters coming before the jury until the trial court has the opportunity to rule upon its admissibility in the context of the trial itself. Id. "As a preliminary ruling, the grant of a motion in limine is not itself reviewable on appeal.... To preserve error, a party, out of the hearing of the jury, must propose to ask a certain question at trial and have the court prohibit it. Failure to offer the excluded material constitutes waiver of the issue." Rohrkaste v. City of Terre Haute (1984), Ind.App., 470 N.E.2d 7318, 741, reh'g denied, trans. denied. In the present case, Robertson did not object to the grant of the motion in limine prior to trial and failed to make an offer to prove during the course of the trial. Consequently, this issue is waived.
VIL.
Robertson next contends that he was placed in grave peril when the State fimprop-erly elicited irrelevant testimony from the confidential informant. During trial, the following testimony was heard:
State: Why do you no longer live in New Albany?
Confidential Informant: Because it would be hazardous to my health to live in New Albany.
State: What do you mean?
Confidential Informant; There would be people that would hurt me or kill me....
State: Who are you afraid of?
Confidential Informant: Every, I'm afraid of the people that aren't in jail yet.
(R. at 440-442). Robertson argues that because he was not in jail yet, "this prejudicial threat testimony placed" him in grave peril. Petitioner's Brief at 29.
Assuming arguendo, that the admission of this testimony was error, not all trial errors compel reversal. Wickizer v. State (1993), Ind., 626 N.E.2d 795, 800. No error in the admission of evidence is grounds for setting aside a conviction unless such erroneous admission appears inconsistent with substantial justice or affects the substantial rights of the parties. Ind.Trial Rule 61. The improper admission of evidence is harmless error when the conviction is supported by such substantial independent evidence of guilt as to satisfy the reviewing court that there is no substantial likelihood that the questioned evidence contributed to the conviction. Jaske v. State (1989), Ind., 539 N.E.2d 14, 22.
To decide if the erroneous admission of prejudicial evidence of extrinsic offenses is harmless, we examine whether the jury's verdict was substantially swayed. Hardin v. State, (1993), Ind., 611 N.E.2d 123, 132.
On direct appeal, we found:
The evidence of Robertson's guilt of each of the three counts is so overwhelming as to convince us that any error created by the reference [to his counsel's affiliations] was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. The police informant who arranged the transactions with the defendant on behalf of the undercover officer testified that on the three occasions charged she observed the defendant deliver to the police officer what appeared to her to be cocaine and witnessed the officer pay the defendant cash for the contraband. The police officer who actually purchased the cocaine from the defendant on each of the charged occasions testified concerning the details of the transactions in the manner consistent with that of the informant. Of course, the State established a chain of custody for the exhibits containing the contraband and offered evidence that the substances delivered were in part cocaine.
*1185Robertson, slip op. at 3, 577 N.E.2d 625. Under these cireumstances and without any demonstration of how the questioned testimony was prejudicial, we are unable to conclude that the jury was substantially swayed or that there was a substantial likelihood that the testimony of which Robertson complains contributed to the conviction. Admission of this testimony was thus harmless error.
VIIL
Robertson contends that his sentence is manifestly unreasonable in light of the decision in Beno v. State (1991), Ind., 581 N.E.2d 922. The post-conviction court determined that Beno did not apply to this case because the trial court did not impose both maximum and consecutive sentences for the convictions. We do not agree.
Robertson received two sentences of thirty-five years, and a ten-year sentence to be served consecutively for three convictions of dealing in cocaine. The charges were based on three separate police controlled buys of cocaine over a four-month period in three different locations initiated and executed by the same confidential informant and police officer.
In Beno, the supreme court held that consecutive sentences were manifestly unreasonable where the state sponsors a series of offenses in a sting operation. Id. at 924. There, the defendant was convicted of selling cocaine to a police informant on two occasions within a four day period. The buys were virtually identical, involving the same drug and the same informant. The trial court enhanced both sentences and ordered them to run consecutively. The supreme court revised the sentence to two enhanced terms of imprisonment to run concurrently. Id.
As in Beno, Robertson sold the same drug to the same police officer, arranged by the same informant, on several cccasions over a relatively short period of time. The controlled crimes were committed as a result of a police sting. See Gregory v. State (1994), Ind., 644 N.E.2d 543, 546; Grimes v. State (1994), Ind.App., 633 N.E.2d 262, 265 (Beno analysis applied to consecutive sentences although the sales were separated by a month and the amount sold increased for the second buy. Both sales were sponsored by the State and were for the same substance.).
Presumably, the police could have set up any number of additional transactions, each time adding an additional count against [the defendant]. While the police may find it necessary to conduct a series of buys, the trial court should be leery of sentencing a defendant to consecutive terms for each count. We hold that on these facts, a sentence of 120 years was inappropriate.
Gregory, 644 N.E.2d at 546. Accordingly, the consecutive sentences were inappropriate in the present case under the Beno analysis and must be reversed.5
IX.
Robertson asserts that the trial court erred by not asking the jury if the tornado that interrupted the trial, affected its ability to decide the case. He also suggests that the judge may have suffered from post traumatic stress after the storm.
Robertson contends that "the trial judge should have, at the very least, conducted a modified Lindsey type voir dire when the jury returned from the basement." Petitioner's Brief at 35; see Lindsey v. State (1973), 260 Ind. 351, 358-59, 295 N.E.2d 819, 821-24. However, Lindsey dealt with a jury which was exposed to improper and prejudicial publicity during the trial Lindsey also contemplated a defense motion to interrogate *1186and admonish the jury, and the denial of such motion to be reversible error, "only if we can say that there has been substantial peril." Id. at 358, 295 N.E.2d at 824. In this case, proceedings were merely interrupted by severe storm warnings, there was no prejudicial publicity. Robertson made no motion to interrogate or admonish the jury, and apart from his assertion, has failed to demonstrate how the trial court's handling of the jury during the severe storm and tornado warning was prejudicial to his case. We agree with the post-conviction court which found that "[the procedure followed by the Trial Court was proper in all respects and no evidence was produced at this hearing to demonstrate that the jury proceedings were tainted in any fashion." (P-CR R. at 117). We find no reversible error here.
X.
Finally, Robertson contends that he received ineffective assistance of trial and appellate counsel.
As a general rule, ineffective assistance of counsel is an issue known and available at the time of the direct appeal. Burris v. State (1992), Ind.App., 590 N.E.2d 576, 578, trans. denied. If trial counsel and appellate counsel are different, as in this case, appellate counsel has the first opportunity to present the issues, and failure to do so will generally be held a waiver of the issue. Id. To avoid waiver, a petitioner may argue that appellate counsel was ineffective in that he failed to raise ineffective assistance of trial counsel. This is the narrow category into which Robertson's ineffective assistance argument must fall.
When reviewing a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel, we initially presume that counsel's representation was within the wide range of reasonable professional assistance. Geans v. State (1993), Ind.App., 623 N.E.2d 435, 437. To determine whether a defendant has received ineffective assistance, we ascertain whether counsel's representation fell below professional norms and whether the substandard performance was so prejudicial that the defendant was deprived of a fair trial Strickland v. Washington (1984), 466 U.S. 668, 104 S.Ct. 2052, 80 L.Ed.2d 674, reh'g denied; Hilliard v. State (1993), Ind.App., 609 N.E.2d 1167, 1169. We look to the totality of the evidence to determine whether the defendant was prejudiced, and ask if there is a reasonable probability that the outcome would have been different, but for counsel's errors. Id.
Robertson first argues that his appellate counsel was ineffective for failing to raise ineffective assistance of trial counsel. He contends that trial counsel's failure to object to the State's motion in limine and the trial court's granting of that motion amounted to ineffective assistance. However, even assuming that trial counsel's inaction amounted to more than isolated poor strategy, Robertson has failed to demonstrate that he was prejudiced by his inability to ask the confidential informant where she lived, or that such information would result in a reasonable probability that the outcome would have been different, but for counsel's errors. We find no error here.
Robertson also argues that his appellate counsel failed to review the record and raise the "significant and obvious issues set forth now." Petitioner's Brief at 39. However, an appellant does not have a constitutional right to have every possible issue raised on appeal. Smith v. State (1985), Ind., 475 N.E.2d 1139, 1144, reh'g denied. Further, as shown in our prior discussion, Robertson's claims of trial errors do not constitute reversible error, thus, his argument regarding ineffective assistance of counsel to raise these errors must likewise fail.
CONCLUSION
The post-conviction court is affirmed as to all matters except the consecutive sentences. This cause is remanded to the post-conviction court with instructions to modify Robertson's sentencing judgment to order that his sentences on Counts I, II, and III be served concurrently, after which the judgment is affirmed in all matters.
SHARPNACK, C.J., concurs.
GARRARD, J., concurs in result with separate opinion.
. See IND.CODE 35-48-4-1(b)(1) (1993).
. See LC. 35-48-4-1(b)(1) (1993).
. The trial court record will be referred to as (R. at __); the record of the post-conviction court will be referred to as (P-CR R. at _).
. In his Reply Brief, Robertson argues:
The State argues that the jury note was harmless, but fails to address the 'implied juror' bias. Could this have been a pre-planned signal between juror Harshey and the judge? Juror Harshey was the wife of the executive director of the Floyd County Community Corrections. The trial judge was the president of the Floyd County Community Corrections during the trial. Both failed to disclose this relationship during voir dire.
Reply Brief at 10. We fail to understand how this statement relates to the propriety of the trial judge answering the jury's note.
. Both Robertson and the State assume that we would need to apply the Beno analysis retroactively. This is incorrect. Robertson's direct appeal was affirmed on September 4, 1991; however, transfer to the supreme court was not denied until March 17, 1992. Beno was decided on November 25, 1991. Inasmuch as Robertson's appeal was currently pending as the new rule was announced, the rule of Beno should have been applied to his case by the post-conviction court. Pirnat v. State (1992), Ind., 600 N.E.2d 1342, 1342; Daniels v. State (1990), Ind., 561 N.E.2d 487, 488. We also note that because Beno was decided during the time that Robertson's appeal was pending before the supreme court, Robertson was not subjected to ineffective assistance of counsel for his counsel's failure to raise this issue.

=== CASE 2212945 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:25.797186+00 ===

6 Ill. App.2d 258 (1955)
127 N.E.2d 252
Henry L. Yung, Appellant,
v.
Pierre J. Peloquin, Individually and as Executor of Estate of Cora M. Drapier (Alias DuPier and Dupiere), Pearl Golab, and Unknown Heirs of Cora M. Drapier (Alias DuPier and Dupiere), Deceased, Appellees.
Gen. No. 46,474.
Illinois Appellate Court  First District, Second Division.
May 17, 1955.
Rehearing denied June 28, 1955.
Released for publication June 30, 1955.
*259 Askow & Stevens, of Chicago, for appellant; Irwin J. Askow, and Richard James Stevens, both of Chicago, of counsel.
Floyd E. Thompson, and Prentice H. Marshall, both of Chicago, for appellee; Johnston, Thompson, Raymond & Mayer, of Chicago, of counsel.
MR. JUSTICE ROBSON delivered the opinion of the court.
Plaintiff, Henry L. Yung, filed a complaint contesting a portion of the last will and testament of Cora M. Drapier, deceased, and asking for a construction of her will that would designate him the sole devisee under the residuary clause of the will. Pierre J. Peloquin, executor under the will, and the sole residuary devisee under the will as finally probated, filed a written motion to dismiss the complaint. The court sustained his motion and dismissed the complaint for want of equity. Plaintiff appealed.
The principal issue raised on the appeal is whether plaintiff was an "interested person" within the meaning of Section 90 of the Probate Act, Ill. Rev. Stat. 1953, ch. 3, par. 242 [Jones Ill. Stats. Ann. 110.339], and therefore entitled to contest the validity of the will, in whole or in part.
The facts as alleged in plaintiff's complaint, briefly summarized, in substance are that Cora M. Drapier (alias DuPier and Dupiere), a widow, died on December 9, 1951, at Englewood Hospital, Chicago, Illinois. She died testate and without known heirs, if any. Her will was executed four days before her death, on December 5. A copy of the will is attached to and made a part of the complaint. The will provides for payment by the executor of expenses. It gives and bequeaths $1,000 "to Pearl Golab, who has been a real and sincere friend in time of need." Pierre J. Peloquin was the testatrix's attorney and he personally prepared *260 the will. It is charged that fraudulently, against the instructions of the testatrix and in breach of his fiduciary duty to her and his fiduciary duty as executor, defendant omitted the name of Henry L. Yung from the third or residuary clause of the will, and fraudulently included the word "fifteen" therein and after execution inserted the name "Pierre J. Peloquin" therein. Plaintiff further alleges that he is the only person who fits the description of the devisee in the residuary clause of the will as originally executed and without the word "fifteen" therein. He then prays that the court strike from the clause of the will the words "Pierre J. Peloquin" and "fifteen," construe the residuary clause then remaining as designating plaintiff the residuary devisee and declare and order distribution of the residue of testatrix's estate accordingly.
The residuary clause of the typewritten will as finally admitted for probate reads as follows:
"I give, devise and bequeath all the rest of my estate, whether real, personal or mixed, and wheresoever situated to my most sincere friend, Pierre J. Peloquin [this name is written in ink and appears above a caret following the comma as an interlineation] forever. This is done in appreciation of and gratitude to him, who has cared for me and my personal well being for the last fifteen years of my life, especially in my last sicknesses, and who has always refused any compensation."
Opposite the interlineation, in the left-hand margin and written in ink appears the annotation "O.K." Neither of these writings, obviously, is testatrix's, when compared with her signature on the instrument.
Defendant contends that the "interest" required under Section 90 of the Probate Act is jurisdictional and must be established before the court may consider the allegations challenging the will; that the court cannot reform the will to produce a description, *261 which will fit the plaintiff; that without the name "Pierre J. Peloquin" and without the word "fifteen," the residuary clause of the will would be void for indefiniteness, and that since plaintiff is not an heir of the testatrix, he further lacks the necessary interest to contest the validity of the will, in whole or in part. This, in substance, is the defendant's theory.
[1-3] The requirements of the Probate Act dealing with will-contest proceedings are jurisdictional; therefore, the requirement that the contestant be an interested person within the meaning of Section 90 is jurisdictional. McQueen v. Connor, 385 Ill. 455; Selden v. Illinois Trust & Savings Bank, 239 Ill. 67; Storrs v. St. Luke's Hospital, 180 Ill. 368; Jele v. Lemberger, 163 Ill. 338; Hunt v. Morris, 266 Ill. App. 18. The right to contest a will is not a vested one. Independently of the statute no such right has ever been recognized by the courts of this State. The right, therefore, can be exercised only in the manner and within the limitations prescribed by the statute. McQueen v. Connor, supra; Kessler v. Martinson, 339 Ill. App. 207.
Plaintiff contends that he has established his interest sufficiently to meet the requirements of the statute. He cites and relies upon the case of Wolf v. Bollinger, 62 Ill. 368. In that case, the question before the court, upon the merits, was which one of the two parties was the devisee under the will. In the Wolf case, the contestant's name, Catharine Bollinger, appeared in the will as the original devisee. Pen lines had been drawn through the name, leaving legible, however, the name of Catharine Bollinger, and written above it appeared the name of Christina Wolf. The will, in its altered form, was admitted to probate. The contestant argued that the alteration had occurred after execution of the will and without the required statutory reattestation. The simple proposition sustained in the case is that, if the insertion of the name *262 of the substituted devisee is invalid, the testamentary disposition will stand as originally executed with the name of the original devisee.
The defendant objects to the applicability of the Wolf case to the facts in the case at bar because, unlike the Wolf case, the residuary clause of the will in the instant case, without the defendant's name, is merely descriptive. It is apparent that the applicability of the principle as enunciated and applied in the Wolf case cannot be denied merely because the plaintiff here must prove his identity or interest under the descriptive indicia by resorting to extrinsic evidence. If plaintiff has made a case in his complaint challenging the validity of the name "Pierre J. Peloquin" and the word "fifteen," and asserting his claim as the intended devisee under the will as originally executed, he has met the demands of the statute as interpreted by the Supreme Court in the Wolf case.
Defendant cites Selden v. Illinois Trust & Savings Bank, 239 Ill. 67, in support of his proposition that, as the court said in the Selden case (at p. 80), "special circumstances ... existed in Wolf v. Bollinger," and had the name of Bollinger been obliterated in the Wolf case, the court would in that case have dismissed the bill for want of interest in the contestant. (Cf. however, Cantway v. Cantway, 315 Ill. 244.) First, the Selden case decided a quite different question. It decided that a legatee may not contest the same will and her interest therein given when she would have been without such interest or any interest in the absence of the will; that such a beneficiary is not an "interested person" within the meaning of the Probate Act. Plaintiff in the instant case, on the other hand, seeks not to defeat the will which allegedly gives him his interest, and in the absence of which he would be without any interest, but he seeks to defeat a purported will engrafted upon the face of the alleged original will. He is, therefore, a person who shows a *263 direct and existing pecuniary interest in the testatrix's estate which has been detrimentally affected by probate of the challenged will, that is, the allegedly invalid portion of the will. Saunders v. Saunders, 310 Ill. 371; Jele v. Lemberger, supra; Selden v. Illinois Trust & Savings Bank, supra.
Second, the identity of the plaintiff is not obliterated from the face of the will in the instant case, and the residuary clause of the will without the name "Pierre J. Peloquin" is not, as defendant contends, void for indefiniteness. The devisee here is described as (1) a male person (2) who has cared for testatrix's person and well-being; (3) for the last fifteen years of her life; (4) especially in her last sicknesses; and (5) who has always refused any compensation. The cases cited by the defendant in support of his contention are inapplicable. In some of the cases the beneficiary is described simply as "my most sincere friend" or "my best friend," without other indicia. Or, again, selection of the putative and unascertained beneficiary is given to the executor to be exercised "as he shall think best." See Early v. Arnold, 119 Va. 500, 89 S.E. 900; Clark v. Campbell, 82 N.H. 281, 133 Atl. 166; Murdock v. Bridges, 91 Me. 124, 39 Atl. 475. Defendant cites but one very early case, Harrington v. Abberton, 115 App. Div. 177, 100 N.Y. Supp. 681, holding void for uncertainty a gift to some person who in the future shall care for the testator during his last illness. Even granting the validity of the ruling of this case, the difference in the number and character of indicia between this case and the case at bar is apparent. Again, this case has not since been followed. See, e.g., In re Utter's Will, 20 N.Y.S.2d 457; and cf. In re DeForest's Estate, 15 N.Y.S.2d 466. Cases in jurisdictions plainly in the majority have been liberal and have upheld the certainty and validity of such and similar bequests. See, e.g., In re Glasgow's Estate, 243 Pa. 613, 90 Atl. 332; In re Reinheimer's Estate, 265 Pa. *264 185, 108 Atl. 412; Allan v. Brown, 61 R.I. 56, 199 Atl. 753; Anderson v. Stone, 281 Mass. 458, 183 N.E. 841; Cox v. Brown, 227 Mo. App. 157, 50 S.W.2d 763; Cansler v. Unknown Heirs of Chairs, 35 Tenn. App. 631, 250 S.W.2d 579; Ray v. Nethery (Mo.), 255 S.W.2d 817; cf. also Baltz v. Muskopf, 34 Ill. App. 625. And see, generally, 38 A.L.R. 775 et seq. In the case at bar the devise is made to a specific person who has already gratified the wishes of the testatrix and who, further, is described by numerous indicia.
[4] Moreover, under the circumstances before us, where acts of fraud and undue influence are charged, a court should not adopt a view so narrow that it would preclude a party claiming injury after a reasonable showing, from establishing his claim by competent evidence at a hearing on the merits. If plaintiff's charge of undue influence and fraud be taken as true, the court would be warranted in disregarding the word "fifteen" in the will. A sufficient number of indicia remain to ascertain the intended devisee under the residuary clause. This would be the case if the word "fifteen" were a misnomer or misdescription, and therefore false. See, e.g., Norton v. Jordan, 360 Ill. 419, and cases cited at 429 and 430; Cahill v. Michael, 381 Ill. 395, 400. If false because included fraudulently and by the exercise of undue influence leaving unaffected the remaining language of the will, this conclusion possesses even greater merit.
In the instant case it is clear from the facts alleged in the complaint that a fiduciary relation existed between the testatrix and the defendant. Defendant has received a substantial benefit under her will as probated. He personally prepared the will. It is apparent that defendant knew the testatrix some fifteen years. During the course of some, if not all, of those years the close fiduciary relation of attorney and client existed. Testatrix died four days after she executed the will. She was apparently gravely ill when she *265 signed it. Her signature is scrawled and not readily identifiable. It is not unreasonable to infer that she was well along in years at the time. This last is stated in plaintiff's brief and is not denied by the defendant in his brief. These facts and not unreasonable inferences were sufficient to show that testatrix reposed trust and confidence in the defendant and that he was the dominant and she the dependent party. The plaintiff's complaint alleges sufficient facts which if proven would establish a prima facie case that the will was the product of undue influence. Weston v. Teufel, 213 Ill. 291; Tidholm v. Tidholm, 391 Ill. 19.
We conclude that the averments in plaintiff's complaint show that he has an interest in what is charged to be the real will and he should be allowed a hearing on the merits. The decree of the trial court sustaining defendant's motion to dismiss the complaint is reversed and the cause remanded with directions that defendant be ordered to answer the complaint and for such further proceedings as are not inconsistent with our opinion.
Decree reversed and cause remanded with directions.
McCORMICK, P.J. and SCHWARTZ, J., concur.