=== CASE 9737908 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:36:49.749796+00 ===

SUNDBY, J.
(dissenting). "If 'hard cases make bad law,' unusual cases surely have the potential to make *313even worse law." Department of the Air Force v. Rose, 425 U.S. 352, 382 (1976) (Burger, C.J., dissenting). This is an unusual case: a public employee breaches his duty of confidentiality, voluntarily quits,1 sues, and recovers $80,665.87, including $20,000 for mental anguish and $25,000 punitive damages. This result is not only bad law, it offends common sense. I therefore dissent.
I disagree with the majority in three respects. First, I do not agree that Barnhill's disclosure of the survey questions was protected speech. Second, I do not agree that Barnhill's interest in disclosing the survey questions outweighed the Wisconsin Survey Research Laboratory's interest in maintaining the confidentiality of those questions. Finally, I conclude that the majority failed to apply the "clearly-established law" standard to the individual defendants' qualified immunity defense.
Because it is so clear that the individual defendants, who were Barnhill's superiors2 and are alleged to have discharged Barnhill, are immune from liability and that immunity disposes of the case,31 restrict my discussion primarily to that issue.4 It will be necessary, however, to *314discuss the first amendment issue because whether the defendants are entitled to qualified immunity depends on how well Barnhill's first amendment rights were established, if in fact his speech was protected by the first amendment.
HH
At the outset, it is necessary to identify Barnhill's speech which he claims was protected. The law as to certain speech may be clearly established while the law as to other speech may not. The jury responded "yes" to the question: "Was Mr. Barnhill discharged because he disclosed materials concerning the shopping mall survey to the newspaper(s)?" The materials Barnhill disclosed concerning the shopping mall survey were the survey questions. Barnhill could not disclose the survey results because he didn't know the results. Barnhill disclosed the survey questions to reporters to support his thesis that the survey was slanted so as to elicit responses supporting the position of shopping mall operators in pending litigation.
The jury was not asked whether Barnhill was discharged because of the content of his speech criticizing the university for conducting surveys for inappropriate *315purposes and inappropriate clients.5 Barnhill states that the first amendment issue is: "Did the interests of the Wisconsin Survey Research Center [sic] ... in keeping a survey schedule confidential outweigh the interests of [Barnhill] in disclosing the text of the survey questions to newspapers while the survey was still underway?"
Thus, we are presented with a much narrower issue than that decided by the circuit court and the majority. The circuit court concluded that Barnhill's speech "was an attempt to bring to light potential wrongdoing on the part of defendants." The majority states: "Barnhill exercised his right of free speech to comment about the rela*316tionship between the state university and private business." Maj. op. at 296-97.
Both courts applied the "clearly-established" standard at a level of genérality that nullifies the defense of qualified immunity. "The Supreme Court has warned that in determining whether the law was clearly established, a court should be careful not to test the rule of law at such a level of generality as to render unavailable the defense of qualified immunity." Melton v. City of Oklahoma City, 879 F.2d 706, 729 n.37 (10th Cir. 1989), citing Anderson v. Creighton, 483 U.S. 635, 639 (1987).
The courts should have tested the "clearly-established" rule of law against the facts of this case. The test in this case is: Was Barnhill's first amendment speech interest in disclosing confidential information acquired by him in the course of his employment so clearly established that the individual defendants knew or should have known that they would violate his constitutional rights if they discharged him for breaching his duty of confidentiality?
N — i
A.
The general contours of the defense of qualified immunity are by now well sculpted. In Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 457 U.S. 800, 818 (1982), the Court held that "government officials performing discretionary functions generally are shielded from liability for civil damages insofar as their conduct does not violate clearly established statutory or constitutional rights of which a reasonable person would have known." Put another way, a claim for qualified immunity would be defeated only if an official" 'knew or reasonably should have known that the action he took within his sphere of official responsi*317bility would violate the constitutional rights of the [plaintiff]' . . . (emphasis added)." Id. at 815 (quoting Wood v. Strickland, 420 U.S. 308, 322 (1975)).
Since Harlow, the Court has more specifically shaped the contours of the qualified immunity defense. In Malley v. Briggs, 475 U.S. 335, 341 (1986) the Court said that qualified immunity protects "all but the plainly incompetent or those who knowingly violate the law." In Mitchell v. Forsyth, 472 U.S. 511, 528 (1985) the Court held that public officials are immune unless "the law clearly proscribed the actions" they took. In Anderson v. Creighton, 483 U.S. 635, 639-40 (1987), the Court comprehensively explained the application of-the Harlow standard:
[W]hether an official protected by qualified immunity may be held personally liable for an allegedly unlawful official action generally turns on the "objective legal reasonableness" of the action assessed in light of the legal rules that were "clearly established" at the time it was taken.
The operation of this standard, however, depends substantially upon the level of generality at which the relevant "legal rule" is to be identified. For example, the right to due process of law is quite clearly established by the Due Process Clause, and thus there is a sense in which any action that violates that Clause (no matter how unclear it may be that the particular action is a violation) violates a clearly established right. Much the same could be said of any other constitutional or statutory violation. But if the test of "clearly established law" were to be applied at this level of generality, it would bear no relationship to the "objective legal reasonableness" that is the touchstone of Harlow. Plaintiffs would be able to convert the rule of qualified immunity that our cases plainly establish into a rule of virtually unqualified *318liability simply by alleging violation of extremely abstract rights. Harlow would be transformed from a guarantee of immunity into a rule of pleading. Such an approach, in sum, would destroy "the balance that our cases strike .between the interests in vindication of citizens' constitutional rights and in public officials' effective performance of their duties," by making it impossible for officials "reasonably [to] anticipate when their conduct may give rise to liability for damages." It should not be surprising, therefore, that our cases establish that the right the official is alleged to have violated must have been "clearly established" in a more particularized, and hence more relevant, sense: The contours of the right must be sufficiently clear that a reasonable official would understand that what he is doing violates that right. This is not to say that an official action is protected by qualified immunity unless the very action in question has previously been held unlawful, but it is to say that in the light of pre-existing law the unlawfulness must be apparent.
Anderson, 483 U.S. at 639-40 (citations omitted; emphasis added).
B.
The seventh circuit court of appeals has applied the Harlow standard, as explained in Anderson, in several cases:6 Greenberg v. Kmetko, 840 F.2d 467 (7th Cir. 1988); Rakovich v. Wade, 850 F.2d 1180 (7th Cir. 1988) (en banc), cert. denied, 488 U.S. 968 (1988); Cleveland-*319Perdue v. Brutsche, 881 F.2d 427 (7th Cir. 1989), cert. denied, 59 U.S.L.W. 3326 (U.S. Oct. 30, 1990) (No. 89-1167).
In Greenberg, the court held that merely stating that a social worker had the right to be free from retaliation for exercise of his first amendment rights, stated the legal principle at issue in overly abstract terms. The court remanded the case to the district court for reconsideration in light of Anderson.
In Rakovich a member of a Wisconsin city's civil service commission alleged that the police chief and police officers initiated an investigation of his activities in retaliation for his criticism and past disagreements with the police department and individual officers. The court, en banc, held that the officers were qualifiedly immune because their conduct did not violate plaintiffs clearly-established rights. Applying the principles of Anderson, the court said:
The factual circumstances of the alleged violation need not be "identical" to prior holdings in order to find an officer entitled to qualified immunity. LeClair v. Heart, 800 F.2d 692, 696 (7th Cir. 1986) (citing People of Three Mile Island v. Nuclear Regulatory Commissioners, 747 F.2d 139, 148 (3d Cir. 1984) (no qualified immunity if the defendant violated "a clearly established and well litigated general proposition in which the case at hand merely represents a new factual wrinkle")). Nonetheless, ”[c]losely analogous cases, those decided before the defendants acted or failed to act, are required to find that a constitutional right is clearly established." Powers v. Lightner, 820 F.2d 818, 821 (7th Cir. 1987) (divided panel) (citing Lojuk v. Johnson, 770 F.2d 619, 628 (7th Cir. 1985) ("While cases involving the exact fact pattern at bar are unnecessary, case law in a closely analogous area is crucial to permit us to *320conclude that reasonably diligent government officials would have known of the case law, related it to the situation at hand, and molded their conduct accordingly.") However, this does not mean that only binding precedent will clearly establish a right.
Therefore, "[i]n the absence of binding precedent, a court should look to whatever deci-sional law is available to ascertain whether the law is clearly established under Harlow." A review of these cases should focus only on rights clearly established in their respective contexts . . .. Lojuk, 770 F.2d at 628.
Powers, 820 F.2d at 821.
'This means that . . . public officials are entitled to immunity unless it has been authoritatively decided that certain conduct is forbidden.'
Rakovich, 850 F.2d at 1209-1210 (citations omitted).
Cleveland-Perdue is pertinent because there, as here, there was no controlling precedent. The mother of a deceased inmate brought an action against prison officials to recover for inadequate medical treatment of the inmate, alleging that the prison officials violated the inmate's eighth amendment right to be free from cruel and unusual punishment. The court said:
[Q]ur independent research has revealed no decision by this court recognizing that a failure to remedy systemic deficiencies in health care services at a prison violated the eighth amendment prior to 1983 . . .. The presence of a controlling precedent is not, however, a sine qua non of a finding that a particular right has been clearly established within the meaning of Harlow. In the absence of a controlling precedent, we look to all relevant caselaw in an effort to determine whether at the time of the alleged acts a suffi*321cient consensus had been reached indicating that the official's conduct was unlawful. To state the proposition in another way, we seek to determine whether there was such a clear trend in the caselaw that we can say with fair assurance that the recognition of the right by a controlling precedent was merely a question of time. This approach makes eminent sense for it precludes an official from escaping liability for unlawful conduct due to the fortuity that a court in a particular jurisdiction had not yet had the opportunity to address the issue.
Cleveland-Perdue, 881 F.2d at 431 (citations omitted).
After reviewing the relevant case law, the court concluded that the prison officials were not qualifiedly immune because there was a clear consensus that a prison official's failure to remedy systemic deficiencies in medical services akin to those alleged constituted deliberate indifference to the inmate's medical needs, and violated his eighth amendment rights. Id.
See also Colaizzi v. Walker, 812 F.2d 304, 308 (7th Cir. 1987) ("[T]he test for immunity should be whether the law was clear in relation to the specific facts confronting the public official when he acted"), and Green v. Carlson, 826 F.2d 647, 649 (7th Cir. 1987) (district court erred in not considering specific facts of case).
C.
Under Anderson, we may not examine the individual defendants' defense of qualified immunity abstractly and solely in terms of general first amendnient rights. We must review the facts and determine whether, in the light of pre-existing law, the unlawfulness of Barnhill's discharge was apparent or should have been apparent to the individual defendants. The appropriate level of generality at which we must apply the Harlow standard is *322the disclosure by a public employee of confidential information imparted to the employee during his or her employment. Neither the circuit court nor the majority has applied the Harlow standard at the appropriate level of generality.
In my research of pre-existing law, I did not expect to find a "spotted cow" case, i.e., one in which a public employee was discharged for disclosing a survey schedule. I was not disappointed. Nor did I find "closely analogous" cases from which I could conclude with fair assurance that the recognition of a public employee's first amendment right to disclose confidential information imparted to the employee by the public employer was merely a matter of time. Without a "clear trend" in the case law recognizing such first amendment rights, Sharp and Lee could not have "known"7 that they would violate Barnhill's first amendment rights if they discharged him for disclosing the confidential survey schedule.
There is, however, sufficient case law and authority from which the individual defendants could have con-*323eluded that they could discharge Barnhill for disclosing confidential information without violating his constitutional rights, including his first amendment rights. There was also statutory authority in the form of Wisconsin's "whistleblower" laws from which Sharp and Lee could reasonably have concluded that they could discharge Barnhill for violating his duty of confidentiality.
(1)
In Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507 (1980),8 the Court held that an ex-CIA agent's publication of a book about the CIA without the CIA's prior review and approval, was a breach of the agent's fiduciary obligation arising from his employment agreement. As an express condition of his employment, Snepp had executed an agreement with the CIA promising that he would "not . . . publish . . . any information or material relating to the Agency, its activities or intelligence activities generally, either during or after the term of [his] employment . . . without specific prior approval by the Agency." Id. at 508. His promise was an integral part of his undertaking "not to disclose any classified information relating to the Agency without proper authorization." Id. Upon the eve of his departure from the agency, Snepp also executed a "termination secrecy agreement," which reaffirmed his obligation.
The government brought action to enforce Snepp's agreement. Snepp claimed that his agreement was unenforceable as a prior restraint on protected speech. The Court rejected his claim, finding that the agreement that Snepp signed was a reasonable means for protecting the *324government's vital interests. Snepp, 444 U.S. at 509 nn. 3b, 4b.
I recognize that there is a vast difference between national security interests and WSRL's interest in preserving the confidentiality of its survey schedule. The difference, however, is one of degree, not of kind. This is evident from the cases cited by the Court where it had made clear that, even in the absence of an express agreement, the government may protect substantial government interests, other than national security interests, by imposing reasonable restrictions on employee activities that in other contexts might be protected by the first amendment. Id., citing CSC v. Letter Carriers, 413 U.S. 548 (1973) (provision of Hatch Act forbidding federal employees from "takfing] an active part in political management or in political campaigns" constitutional); Brown v. Glines, 444 U.S. 348 (1980) (air force regulations requiring commander's approved for serviceman's circulation of petitions on base, not violative of first amendment); Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1 (1976) (provisions of Federal Election Campaign Act imposing ceilings on political contributions did not violate first amendment speech and association rights); Greer v. Spock, 424 U.S. 828 (1976) (military post regulations prohibiting political speeches and barring distribution or posting of any publication without prior written approved not constitutionally invalid on their face); and Cole v. Richardson, 405 U.S. 676 (1972) (state's statutory loyalty oath constitutionally permissible under first etnd fourteenth amendments).
Applicable is the following statement of the Court: "Undisputed evidence in this case shows that a CIA agent's violation of his obligation to submit writings about the Agency for prepublication review impairs the CIA's ability to perform its statutory duties." Snepp, 444 *325U.S. at 512. Barnhill's violation of his obligation to keep the survey schedule confidential, at least during the survey, materially impaired WSRL's ability to produce an untainted survey.
The Snepp court made clear that it did not consider that Snepp's fiduciary obligation was limited to "classified" information. The Court noted that Justice Stevens, in his dissent, conceded that, even in the absence of a written contract, an employee has the fiduciary obligation to protect confidential information obtained during the course of his employment. The Court said:
In this case, [Justice Stevens] seems to think that the common law would not treat information as "confidential" unless it were "classified." We have thought that the common-law obligation was considerably more expansive. See, e.g., Restatement (Second) of Agency secs. 396(c), 400 and Comment c, 404, and Comments b, d (1958); 5A Scott, Trusts sec. 505 (3d ed. (1967).
Id. at 515 n. 11 (citation omitted). Therefore, Barnhill's claim that he did not understand that his pledge of confidentiality extended to the survey schedule introduces an irrelevant consideration.9 Barnhill owed a common-*326law duty of confidentiality to WSRL, explained as follows in the Restatement (Second) of Agency:
Unless otherwise agreed, an agent is subject to a duty to the principal not to use or to communicate information confidentially given him by the principal or acquired by him during the course of or on account of his agency or in violation of his duties as agent ... to the injury of the principal. . ..
Restatement (Second) of Agency sec. 395 (1958).
Comment a. to sec. 395 states, "The agent. . . has a duty not to use information acquired by him as agent ... for any purpose likely to cause his principal harm or to interfere with his business . . .." The only exception is that the agent is privileged to reveal information confidentially acquired in the protection of a superior interest of himself or of a third person. Comment f. states:
An agent is privileged to reveal information confidentially acquired by him in the course of his agency in the protection of a superior interest of himself or of a third person. Thus, if the confidential information is to the effect that the principal is committing or is about to commit a crime, the agent is under no duty not to reveal it. . ..
*327(2)
In Wisconsin, the public employee-agent's privilege to reveal confidential information has been expanded by the "whistleblower" statutes, subch. III. ch. 230 and sec. 895.65.10 Sec. 10, 1983 Wis. Act 409, effective May 11, 1984. These statutes prohibit government employer retaliation against a government employee for lawfully disclosing "information" in the exercise of his or her rights under the first amendment to the U.S. , Constitution or art. I, sec. 3, of the Wisconsin Constitution.
"Information," under each statute, sec. 230.80(5), Stats., and sec. 895.65(l)(d), Stats., is defined to mean "information gained by the employe which the employe reasonably believes demonstrates: 1: A violation of any state or federal law, rule or regulation. 2. Mismanagement or abuse of authority in state [or local (sec. 230.80(5))] government, a substantial waste of public funds or a danger to public health and safety."
"Mismanagement" is defined in sec. 230.80(7), Stats., to mean "a pattern of incompetent management actions which are wrongful, negligent or arbitrary and capricious and which adversely affect the efficient accomplishment of an agency function. 'Mismanagement' does not mean the mere failure to act in accordance with a particular opinion regarding management techniques."
"Substantial waste of public funds" means "an unnecessary expenditure of a substantial amount of money or a series of unnecessary expenditures of smaller amounts of money." Sec. 230.80(9), Stats.
*328In view of these statutes, the individual defendants cannot claim that the law in Wisconsin in 1985, preventing them from discharging an employee for disclosing "information," as defined in secs. 230.80(5) and 895.65(1) (d), Stats., was not clearly established. However, the survey questions disclosed by Barnhill were clearly not "information" as defined in the "whistleblower" statutes. We need not consider whether Barnhill's criticisms that the university should not be engaged in this kind of research or that the survey was biased constituted "information" as defined in these statutes. Barnhill has limited the issue to his first amendment right to disclose the survey schedule.11
D.
The Wisconsin legislature could not, of course, by narrowly defining "information," permit government employers to discipline public employees for the exercise of their first amendment rights under the U.S. Constitution. Even though Barnhill's criticisms of the university and the survey itself did not constitute "information" under Wisconsin's whistleblower statutes, they would, in the proper context, constitute protected speech. However, there was no case law support in 1985 for the proposition that such criticisms were protected as "whistleblowing."
Therefore, the inquiry narrows sharply. The question is whether the individual defendants should have *329known from analogous cases that the first amendment prevented them from imposing and enforcing a duty of confidentiality upon interviewer-employees. I conclude that the interests which Barnhill sought to further in disclosing the survey schedule were not sufficient to accord him a privilege to reveal the information confidentially acquired by him in the course of his employment, at least during the progress of the survey. Others may differ with my conclusion in this respect, but I see no room for the conclusion that the individual defendants knew or should have known that they would abridge Barnhill's first amendment rights if they discharged him for violating his duty of confidentiality.
The majority relies on one case to conclude that "existing caselaw was close enough to have warned Sharp and Lee in 1985 that discharge of Barnhill for his speech activity would be unlawful." Maj. op. at 306. The reason they should have been warned, the majority concludes, is that Hanneman v. Breier, 528 F.2d 750 (7th Cir. 1976) established that a public employee cannot be discharged for speech relating to á matter of public concern when his or her speech publicizes once-confidential information which has been previously disclosed. Maj. op. at 307. The majority states: "A search of the law would have discovered the Hanneman decision, and whether or not Sharp and Lee knew of it is immaterial to our analysis." Id.
Thus, the majority concludes that one decision, which I will show is inapposite, established the law so clearly that the unlawfulness of Sharp's and Lee's action should have been apparent to them. One decision may be enough to alert public officials to the constitutional *330rights of public employees. However, Hanneman v. Breier is not Harlow v. Fitzgerald or Perry v. Sindermann,. 408 U.S. 593 (1972); it is not a case which has commanded public attention and comment. The majority imposes on the public official, untrained in the law, a task which frequently daunts the most conscientious and skilled legal practitioner or judge. The public official's only responsibility is to keep abreast of the law affecting public employee's constitutional rights as it develops, and to conform his or her conduct to that law when it is "clearly established."
We must be wary both of using hindsight to make an untidy body of case law seem clear and directive at the time the public official was called on to act, and of imagining that public officials have the training and experience in extracting legal rules from case law that appellate judges have.
Colaizzi v. Walker, 812 F.2d 304, 308 (7th Cir. 1987).
(2)
In any event, had Sharp and Lee known where to look and had they discovered Hanneman, they would have discovered a case which has no application to the situation presented to them. In Hanneman, a front-page story in the Milwaukee Journal disclosed that an internal investigation into the political activity of Milwaukee Professional Policeman's Protective Association officers was under way. The leak of this story to the press was not attributed to MPPPA. The day after publication, MPPPA members, on its behalf, distributed to the mayor, the city council, the city's labor negotiator, and the state labor board, a letter which confirmed that MPPPA officers had been questioned by agents of the city in connection with their political activities. This *331letter prompted a departmental investigation and resulted in charges being brought against these members for breaching the confidentiality of the department's internal affairs, in violation of a department rule.
The Hanneman court concluded that the confidentiality regulation was "clearly valid on its face. A public employer has a legitimate interest in preserving confidentiality in the conduct of its internal affairs." Hanne-man, 528 F.2d at 754. The court held, however, that by the time the officers' letter appeared, the police chiefs ability to conduct his internal investigation in private had already been destroyed by the newspaper article disclosing the existence of the investigation and the persons and subjects involved. Id. Thus, the court held that once the matter was placed in the public eye, the officers had a legitimate interest, protected by the first amendment, in bringing any improper anti-union conduct by the chief of police in connection with the investigation to the attention of government officials outside the police department.
Unlike Hanneman, here there was no public disclosure of the survey's existence, the survey questions or the survey results. Lee was informed by a Capital Times reporter that the newspaper had the text of the survey questions. However, the Capital Times did not publish a story about the survey. On the same day, Lee issued a memorandum to WSRL field staff informing them that "[a] very serious violation of confidentiality has occurred at the Lab." Lee warned staff that the person or persons who had made the survey schedule available to the Capital Times had violated the oath of confidentiality they were committed to as Lab employees. The majority is forced to assume that Barnhill was aware of this memo*332randum.12 The disclosures which he made to the Milwaukee Journal and The Daily Cardinal were made after Lee issued the memorandum to WSRL field staff. Lee and Sharp knew only that there was a breach of confidentiality which had the potential to destroy or adversely affect the survey. Lee's memorandum was an attempt at damage control. The memorandum warned WSRL employees, including Barnhill, that revealing the survey schedule was a breach of the employee's oath of confidentiality.
Thus, the situation facing Sharp and Lee was completely different from that facing the Milwaukee Police Department. In Hanneman, the damage had been done. It was appropriate for the police officers to then participate in the public debate which followed the disclosure of the intra-department investigation. In contrast, Sharp and Lee faced only a potential breach of confidentiality, depending on what action the Capital Times took. As reasonably competent public officials, they would not have learned from Hanneman that they could not enforce against Barnhill the laboratory's confidentiality rule, which was made plain to all members of the WSRL field staff, including Barnhill, prior to the disclosures to the Milwaukee Journal and to The Daily Cardinal.13
*333Hanneman recognizes the validity of a public employer's regulation which prohibits employees from disclosing the confidential business of the employer. Hanneman permits a first-amendment exception to such a rule only in the case where enforcing the rule becomes meaningless through prior public disclosure of the public employer's business. Hanneman has no application here except to affirm the validity of public employment rules of confidentiality.
I would reverse the judgment and direct the circuit court to enter judgment in favor of the individual defendants on their defense of qualified immunity.
The jury's finding that Barnhill was discharged is unsup-. portable. He clearly quit. The defendants, however, do not attack that finding. For purposes of my analysis, therefore, I assume Sharp and Lee discharged Barnhill.
Professor Harry Sharp is the director of the Wisconsin Survey Research Laboratory. Robert Lee was WSRL's field director.
The circuit court held that the Board of Regents is immune from liability on a 42 U.S.C. sec. 1983 claim. Barnhill did not appeal that holding.
Where the public official defendant alleges the affirmative defense of qualified immunity, that issue should be decided prior to trial, if possible. "Unless the plaintiff's allegations state a claim of violation of clearly established law, a defendant pleading qualified immunity is entitled to dismissal before the commencement of discovery." Mitchell v. Forsyth, 472 U.S. 511, 526 (1985) *314(emphasis added). The defendant's entitlement to qualified immunity is "an immunity from suit rather than a mere defense to liability; and like an absolute immunity, it is effectively lost if a case is erroneously permitted to go to trial." Id. (emphasis in original). One of the pernicious effects of erroneously permitting a case to go to trial is that the focus may shift, as it did here, from whether the law was "clearly established" when the defendant acted, to a hindsight determination of whether the plaintiffs interest outweighed the government's interest.
In his letter of November 27, 1984, to the field director, Barnhill wrote:
I feel compelled to explain why I believe this is an inappropriate study for the university to be undertaking . . .. The issue [free speech in shopping malls] is a legal question and will appropriately be decided by the courts. The university should not be lending its name and reputation to one party in this dispute. Would the survey look the same if the ACLU had designed the questionnaire? Clearly a bias has been introduced by our client that may be used in a partisan way that may not be in the public interest. . ..
His letter was provided to several newspapers which quoted from it..
The Daily Cardinal article of February 7, 1985 quotes Barn-hill as accusing the university of allowing its reputation to be used "to legitimatize this unconstitutional policy by doing 'research' that masquerades public relations propaganda behind the cloak of objective science." The Milwaukee Journal article of January 27, 1985 reported Barnhill as saying that the shopping mall study was biased "simply because it was being paid for by representatives of the shopping center industry." Barnhill reportedly criticized the survey as "not scientific" and "not in the public interest." He was quoted as saying, "It seemed to me [the survey's] purpose was not so much to measure public opinion as to mold public opinion."
These cases were decided after Barnhill's supposed discharge. However, I do not cite them for the proposition that Barnhill's first amendment rights were not clearly established at that time. I cite them to explain how the Harlow standard, as elaborated in Anderson, is to be applied.
Barnhill argues that because Sharp and Lee consulted university counsel who advised caution, they "knew" that they would violate his first amendment rights if they discharged him. I reject that argument as against public policy. Investigating the state of the law would be punished, and ignorance rewarded. "Where an official could be expected to know that his conduct would violate statutory or constitutional rights, he should be made to hesitate . . .." Mitchell v. Forsyth, 472 U.S. at 524 (quoting Harlow, 457 U.S. at 819 (emphasis added in Mitchell)). In any event, the defendants' subjective beliefs are irrelevant. See Egger v. Phillips, 710 F.2d 292, 314 (7th Cir. 1983), cert. denied, 464 U.S. 918 (1983). ”[H]indsight-based reasoning on immunity issues is precisely what Harlow rejected. The decisive fact is not that Mitchell's position turned out to be incorrect, but that the question was open at the time he acted." Mitchell, 472 U.S. at 535.
See discussion of this case in Annotation, Public Employee's Right of Free Speech Under Federal Constitution's First Amendment — Supreme Court Cases, 97 L. Ed. 2d 903, 926.
In addition to being irrelevant, Barnhill's claim that he did not know that his pledge extended to the survey schedule is disingenuous. Barnhill cannot seriously argue that his pledge of confidentiality extended to the survey results but not to the survey questions. Barnhill was not a neophyte in survey research. On his employment application he stated that he had done extensive employment survey work. His pledge and the explanatory manual clearly and unambiguously imposed a duty of confidentiality upon Barnhill which extended to all information obtained by him in the course of conducting surveys on behalf of WSRL. The pledge read in part as follows: "I, -, as an interviewer for the Wisconsin Survey Research Laboratory, promise that I will main*326tain professional ethical standards of confidentiality while performing my duties. This means all information obtained during the course of conducting this research will be held in strict confidence." (Emphasis added.)
The Manual for Telephone Interviewers explained that, "The confidentiality pledge serves two purposes. The first and primary purpose is that it indicates to the Laboratory, you, the interviewer, understand your responsibility to keep all information you gather while performing your duties for WSRL confidential, and that you agree [emphasis in original] to this commitment." (Emphasis added.)
The circuit court held that Barnhill's state-law claim under sec. 895.65, Stats., was barred because he failed to give notice of his claim as required by sec. 893.82(2), Stats.
I conclude that the only possible "whistleblowing" was Barnhill's expressed belief that the survey was biased. This, however, is no more than a difference of opinion regarding management techniques which would not constitute information within the meaning of secs. 230.80(5) and 895.65, Stats. See sec. 230.80(7).
BarnhiH's testimony was conflicting. The circuit court did not resolve the conflict by making a finding of fact. We cannot make findings of fact. Wurtz v. Fleischman, 97 Wis. 2d 100, 107 n.3, 293 N.W.2d 155, 159 (1980).
As the seventh circuit court of appeals has pointed out, the defendants in Hanneman did not show that the police officers were privy to confidential information that was not accessible to the ordinary citizen. Conner v. Reinhard, 847 F.2d 384, 390 (7th Cir. 1988), cert. denied, 488 U.S. 856 (1988). Thus, Hanneman involved a circumstance markedly different from that presented here.

=== CASE 2212279 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:17.958864+00 ===

272 Cal. App. 2d 80 (1969)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
ROBERT MANUEL RODRIGUEZ, Defendant and Appellant.
Crim. No. 15050.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Four.
Apr. 18, 1969.
Albert D. Silverman, under appointment by the Court of Appeal, for Defendant and Appellant.
Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, William E. James, Assistant Attorney General, and Megan Wagner, Deputy Attorney General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
DUNN, J.
By information appellant was charged with five felonies: four counts of armed robbery in violation of Penal Code, section 211, and one count of assault with a deadly weapon with intent to commit murder in violation of Penal Code, section 217. The crimes were committed on different days within a three-week period in November, 1966, except that the robbery charged in count IV and the assault charged in count V were committed on the same day, though upon different victims. At his arraignment, January 23, 1967, appellant pled "not guilty" and "not guilty by reason of insanity", and the trial court appointed two alienists  [fn. 1] to: (1) examine *82 appellant as to present sanity; (2) as to sanity at time of commission of the offenses; (3) as to whether appellant was mentally ill within the meaning of Welfare and Institutions Code, section 5551; and (4) as to whether appellant could develop specific intent to commit the offenses charged.
On March 23, 1967, the court found appellant to be presently insane, suspended the criminal proceedings and ordered him committed to Atascadero State Hospital until certified to be sane (Pen. Code,  1368, 1370, 1372). Three months later, he was certified to be sane and was returned to Los Angeles for further criminal proceedings. On August 30, 1967, his guilt trial began before a jury which found appellant guilty on all four counts of robbery and that he was armed at the time, fixing them in the first degree. Appellant was found not guilty on the fifth count of assault.
In September 1967 plaintiff's sanity trial (Pen. Code,  1026) took place before the same jury and he was adjudged to be sane at the time he committed the robberies. Under Penal Code, section 1203.03, he was referred to a diagnostic facility of the Department of Corrections and was accepted there. Following the statutory 90-day period of confinement, appellant was returned to court for sentencing, receiving concurrent sentences on the four convictions. He appeals from such judgment, raising four points.
I. Did The Trial Court Err In Not Ordering A Hearing On Appellant's Present Sanity Prior to Judgment And Sentencing?
[1] At the termination of the sanity phase of appellant's bifurcated trial, and after the trial judge set a date for probation and sentencing, appellant's trial counsel stated to the court: "It would seem appropriate, perhaps, to have a psychiatrist appointed to examine him [appellant] as to his condition now to aid in the sentencing of this defendant." (Italics added.) The court replied: "I think I would wait until the probation report was supplied to the Court because we do have the fact that this defendant was previously examined by various doctors in connection with various questions to be answered and, of course, their statements can be obtained by the probation department at the time set for the probation hearing and sentencing. ..." In his brief, appellant chooses *83 to construe trial counsel's statement as a request "that a psychiatrist be appointed to examine ... appellant as to his present condition," and argues that "for purposes of the appeal this request is being interpreted as a motion for a hearing on the question of the appellant's present sanity prior to judgment" (pursuant to Pen. Code,  1367 and 1368).  [fn. 2] After making the quoted statement appellant's counsel never brought up the matter again. At no time before judgment did appellant make a motion pursuant to Penal Code, section 1368 to have the court determine his present sanity and such a motion was never denied, there being none to rule on. In like manner, no motion against pronouncement of judgment was made pursuant to Penal Code, sections 1191, 1201.
Respondent correctly points out that, "Even assuming that appellant's counsel's request could be interpreted as a motion pursuant to Penal Code section 1368, there was nothing before the trial court to indicate that appellant was insane during the trial or at the time of judgment." During the trial appellant called four doctors to testify in his behalf. Not one of the doctors testified to appellant's mental condition at the time of trial, but only at times months beforehand, and a careful reading of the reporter's transcript fails to indicate appellant manifested symptoms during trial which should have raised in the court's mind any doubt of appellant's present sanity. Furthermore a certification of the sanity of appellant had been received from the Superintendent of Atascadero State Hospital shortly before the trial began.
Appellant relies on People v. Pennington (1967) 66 Cal. 2d 508 [58 Cal. Rptr. 374, 426 P.2d 942] and contends that it reached a new interpretation of Penal Code, section 1368, saying in his brief, "... if a defendant has presented sufficient evidence at his trial he is entitled to a hearing on present sanity as a matter of right under the due process clause." Appellant correctly recites the holding of the Pennington case but ignores its facts which clearly distinguish it from our case. In Pennington, the record disclosed that the defendant exhibited clear signs of mental instability during the proceedings and his attorney moved to suspend trial on that account *84 and to conduct a hearing pursuant to Penal Code, section 1368. In support of his motion counsel produced the affidavit of a clinical psychologist who had examined defendant and concluded he was then insane. A hearing was held and the same expert testified to his opinion that defendant was incapable of understanding the proceedings and of assisting counsel in his defense. No contrary testimony was introduced.
The facts of the present case do not fit within the framework of Pennington. (People v. Hoxie (1967) 252 Cal. App. 2d 901, 917-918 [62 Cal. Rptr. 37].)
II. Did The Trial Court Subject Appellant To Multiple Punishment As Prohibited By Penal Code Section 654?
As noted, the jury found appellant guilty of four first degree robberies, also finding he was armed with a pistol at the time each was committed. Based upon the verdicts, the court entered a judgment reciting these jury findings  [fn. 3] and ordered appellant to be imprisoned "for the term prescribed by law," the sentences on counts 1, 2, 3 and 4 to run concurrently.
Relying upon People v. Sparks (1967) 257 Cal. App. 2d 306, 311-312 [64 Cal. Rptr. 682] and In re Shull (1944) 23 Cal. 2d 745 [146 P.2d 417], appellant objects to the judgment as imposing double punishment for the same acts, prohibited by Penal Code, section 654. In their Respondent's Brief the prosecution first conceded the point. However, in a supplement, they reverse their position, pointing to the holding in People v. Tarpley (1968) 267 Cal. App. 2d 852 [73 Cal. Rptr. 643]. We have carefully reviewed all authorities cited and have additionally reviewed People v. Davis (1968) 268 Cal. App. 2d 23, 27 [73 Cal. Rptr. 653]. In that case is a recital that our Supreme Court reaffirmed its earlier position as announced In re Shull, supra, and People v. Ford (1964) 60 Cal. 2d 772, 794 [36 Cal. Rptr. 620, 388 P.2d 892]. (See: Supreme Court minutes of November 13, 1968 found in 69 A.C. No. 16, at p. 4 of "Minutes." Also see: People v. Sesser (1969) 269 Cal. App. 2d 707, 711-713 [75 Cal. Rptr. 297].)
Whatever merit there may be in the reasoning of the court as announced in Tarpley we must comply with the Supreme Court's ruling as announced in People v. Davis. The judgment must be corrected by striking therefrom the finding that defendant was armed at the time he committed the acts alleged in counts 1, 2, 3 and 4 of the information. *85
III. Was The Evidence Insufficient To Sustain The Jury's Verdicts Of "Guilty"?
[2a] Pointing out that conviction of robbery requires the prosecution to prove specific intent, appellant urges us to find from the evidence, as a matter of law, that he had no such intent. In this respect, he relies upon claimed evidence of diminished capacity under the so-called Wells-Gorshen rule. (People v. Wells (1949) 33 Cal. 2d 330, 346-347 [202 P.2d 53]; People v. Gorshen (1959) 51 Cal. 2d 716, 727-728 [336 P.2d 492].)
Penal Code section 20 requires a "unity of act and intent" to constitute a crime. Though the statutory definitions of robbery and first degree robbery (Pen. Code,  211, 211a) fail to include any specific intent it has been held that a specific intent permanently to deprive another of his property is a necessary element of the crime (People v. Butler (1967) 65 Cal. 2d 569, 572-573 [55 Cal. Rptr. 511, 421 P.2d 703]; People v. Ford (1964) 60 Cal. 2d 772, 792-793 [36 Cal. Rptr. 620, 388 P.2d 892]).
There is a question as to whether or not the principle of diminished capacity is available to negate specific intent or applies at all in other than homicide cases. (Generally discussing this, see:people v. Hoxie, supra, 252 Cal.App.2d pp. 911-916; People v. Glover (1967) 257 Cal. App. 2d 502, 505-507 [65 Cal. Rptr. 219]; People v. Moore (1968) 257 Cal. App. 2d 740, 745-753 [65 Cal. Rptr. 450]; People v. Caylor (1968) 259 Cal. App. 2d 191, 202-206 [66 Cal. Rptr. 448]; Guttmacher and Weihofen, Psychiatry and the Law, pp. 424-433 [W. W. Norton & Co., Inc., publishers, 1952]; Comment, 27 So. Cal.L.Rev. 181 [1954]; Weihofen and Overholser, Mental Disorder Affecting the Degree of a Crime, 56 Yale L.J. 959 [1947].) However, we need not attack that problem.
It is appellant's contention that the evidence establishes, without dispute and conclusively, that his capacity to form the specific intent was so diminished as to require a finding by the trial court, and this court, as a matter of law that such intent was absent. The evidence is not subject to this interpretation. Appellant introduced at the trial testimony of four medical doctors, three of whom specialized in psychiatry, the fourth being a general practitioner. Only one of these, Dr. Deering, had examined appellant to determine if he was capable of forming a specific intent to steal and his testimony was far from conclusive. It will be recalled the crimes occurred in November 1966. The doctor examined the appellant once, on *86 February 27, 1967. At this examination he found appellant then to be in such mental condition as to lead him to conclude he was "not able to form specific intent." Though he had been advised of the type of crimes committed he knew nothing of their circumstances. When such circumstances were related to him in hypothetical questioning at trial he stated it would appear appellant "had the capacity to form intent."
Beyond this, and without reciting the details, there was evidence describing the manner in which each crime of robbery was committed.penal Code section 21 provides, in part, "The intent or intention is manifested by the circumstances connected with the offense ...." And specific intent to rob may be inferred from evidence of the circumstances (People v. Jackson (1963) 222 Cal. App. 2d 296, 298 [35 Cal. Rptr. 38]; People v. Gilbert (1963) 214 Cal. App. 2d 566 [29 Cal. Rptr. 640]).
Even if the testimony of Dr. Deering had been clear and explicit on the point, and even though no contrary opinion evidence was introduced by the prosecution, the trial court was not thereby required to accept as gospel the opinion of the expert. (Pen. Code,  1127b.) [3] If there is any evidence, be it opinion evidence or otherwise, that would justify a finding that the specific intent implicit in a verdict of guilt was present, an appellate court may not set it aside. [2b] Such finding is amply supported by the evidence in this case.
IV. Did The Trial Court Improperly Instruct The Jury So As To Commit Prejudicial Error?
[4] Appellant confuses in his brief the defense of insanity and the doctrine of diminished capacity. He argues both in the same breath, claiming jury instructions on the points were improper.
Penal Code section 1016 specifies the pleas available to a defendant and while the plea "not guilty by reason of insanity" is among them, there is no mention of diminished capacity. Evidence of diminished capacity is admissible under a plea of "not guilty," which is tantamount to a general denial. Statutory authority therefor is found in Penal Code, section 1020. Thus, in a criminal case, the prosecution must prove all elements of the crime charged beyond a reasonable doubt (Pen. Code,  1096). In attempting to offset or rebut such evidence under his general denial, a defendant may offer any evidence legally relevant for that purpose. In contrast, the defense of insanity is an affirmative one and the burden of establishing it rests upon the defendant, whose burden is to *87 establish insanity by a preponderance of the evidence. (Evid. Code,  522, 115; People v. Daugherty (1953) 40 Cal. 2d 876, 898 [256 P.2d 911]).
Using CALJIC instruction No. 73-B (revised), the court properly defined for the jury the elements of diminished capacity, also instructing the jury concerning the burden upon the prosecution to establish all elements of its case beyond a reasonable doubt. Regarding diminished capacity, no burden at all was placed upon appellant, and correctly so. Appellant argues that diminished capacity is like a plea of insanity, and that the court should have instructed the jury to the effect that appellant must establish his diminished capacity only by the preponderance of evidence. As previously noted, appellant confuses the two principles.
In his brief, appellant states, "The Court also erred in failing to instruct the jury re the presumption concerning insanity." Such claim is incorrect, however, as the record shows the court read to the jury CALJIC instruction No. 73 (revised), omitting therefrom only the last sentence of the first paragraph. That instruction concludes by saying, "For the purposes of the issues now on trial, you must assume that the defendant was sane at the time of his alleged conduct which, it is charged, constituted the crime described in the information." This is a correct statement of the rule.  [fn. 4]
In his brief appellant further states, "When there is proof that a defendant was afflicted with a permanent insanity prior to the commission of the crime charged, the presumption of sanity is dispelled and there arises a presumption that his insanity continued to exist until the time of commission." Appellant makes no reference to the record and we cannot tell if he is referring to the guilt trial or the sanity trial. The record discloses, as noted, that at the guilt trial the court properly instructed the jury regarding the presumption of sanity.
At the sanity trial, the court properly gave the jury CALJIC instruction No. 801 (1967 revision) which placed on appellant the burden of proving his insanity, but only by a preponderance of evidence. No instruction was given and, it should be noted, none was requested by appellant to the effect *88 that there existed a presumption of insanity. Relying upon People v. Glover (1967) 257 Cal. App. 2d 502 [65 Cal. Rptr. 219] and People v. Wolff (1964) 61 Cal. 2d 795 [40 Cal. Rptr. 271, 394 P.2d 959] appellant claims this latter is a correct legal principle. We do not agree that such instruction should have been given (if requested) or, if given, that it would correctly instruct a jury. The principle formerly was stated in CALJIC No. 808 but in the 1967 revision thereof the editorial committee notes it has "... withdrawn its approval of this instruction. ..." It rests such withdrawal upon People v. Wolff, supra, one of the cases relied upon by appellant. And indeed, we conclude Wolff does not support appellant's position (see the opinion at pp. 816-818 of 61 Cal.2d). In Glover, supra, the trial court modified old CALJIC No. 808 and the modified instruction was given partial approval by the upper court. However, in light of Wolff, and of the record in the present case, we fail to find any error on the part of the trial court.
The judgment is modified by striking from the judgment the finding that appellant was armed; in all other respects it is affirmed.
Jefferson, Acting P. J., and Kingsley, J., concurred.
Evidence Code, section 730 states: "When it appears to the court, at any time before or during the trial of an action, that expert evidence ... may be required by the court or by any party to the action, the court ... may appoint one or more experts to investigate, to render a report ... and to testify ... relative to the fact or matter as to which such expert evidence ... may be required. ..."
Penal Code, section 1368. "If at any time during the pendency of an action and prior to judgment a doubt arises as to the sanity of the defendant, the court must order the question as to his sanity to be determined by a trial. ..."
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. The court's minute order cited Penal Code, section 1027 and Evidence Code, section 730.penal Code, section 1027 reads: "When a defendant pleads not guilty by reason of insanity the court must ... appoint two ... psychiatrists to examine the defendant and investigate his sanity. ..."
[fn. 2]  2. Penal Code, section 1367. "A person cannot be tried, adjudged to punishment, or punished for a public offense, while he is insane."
[fn. 3]  3. "... which the jury found to be Robbery of the first degree and that defendant was armed as alleged."
[fn. 4]  4. Penal Code, section 1026 reads in part, "When a defendant pleads not guilty by reason of insanity, and also joins with it another plea or pleas, he shall first be tried as if he had entered such other plea or pleas only, and in such trial he shall be conclusively presumed to have been sane at the time the offense is alleged to have been committed." And see: People v. Wells, supra, 33 Cal.2d, p. 350.

=== CASE 9737883 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:36:26.021264+00 ===

STATON, Judge,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent. The plain language of the contract at issue reveals that Smart intended to preclude Grider from competing against Smart anywhere in the United States. By means of the blue pencil doctrine, the Majority interprets this unreasonable geographical limitation as including only Indiana. To do so impermissibly rewrites the parties' contract. It is well settled that this court may not use the guise of interpretation to create a reasonable restriction from an otherwise unreasonable one; doing so subjects the parties to an agreement that they did not make. Licocci v. Cardinal Associates, Inc. (1983), Ind., 445 N.E.2d 556, 561, reh. denied.
As the Majority states, our courts have created the blue peneil doctrine so that those reasonable contract terms that are clearly divisible from any unreasonable terms may be enforced, thus giving effect to the parties' intentions. Op. at 83-84, citing Seach v. Richards, Dieterle & Co. (1982), Ind.App., 439 N.E.2d 208, 215. However, the plain language of the instant contract indicates that Smart, a corporation doing business on a nationwide basis, intended to eliminate Gri-der from competing with it anywhere it does business, ie. nationwide. The fact that the limitation imposed by Smart is unreasonable under Indiana law does nothing to change Smart's intention in imposing it.
By redrafting the contract provision at issue, the Majority is assuming the needs and requirements of the parties as they entered into the agreement. For example, Smart's Indiana representatives may be based in metropolitan areas bordering other states, such as Hammond or Gary, and would thus very likely serve clients in Ilinois and Michigan. The same would hold true for a sales representative in South Bend, Fort Wayne, Richmond or Evansville Smart's intent to preclude Grider from competing on a nationwide basis, and not just in Indiana, may have been a poorly-drafted attempt to avoid this very problem. However, the role of this court is not to second-guess such considerations, which are exelusively within the province of the contracting parties. By striking the geographical limitation expressed in the contract and creating a legally reasonable limitation where one does not exist, the Majority in effect has become a party to the contract. See IAicocci, supra.
*86The non-compete provision at issue contains an unreasonable geographical restriction that cannot be stricken without altering the essence of the original agreement. The trial court correctly determined that the provision is unenforceable, and its decision should be affirmed. For this reason, I dissent.

=== CASE 9737884 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:36:27.316247+00 ===

Sullivan, J.
On remand from the Supreme Court for consideration as on leave granted, 432 Mich 930 (1989), plaintiff appeals from an opinion and order of the Workers’ Compensation Appeal Board denying disability compensation. We reverse and remand.
Plaintiff, an hourly employee of defendant, was struck by an automobile while crossing a public street on his way to work. Defendant provided parking for its employees in a lot situated on the south side of an east-west street. The street dead-ends at defendant’s plant. The salaried employees’ parking area was immediately to the east of defendant’s plant. The hourly employees’ parking area was, in turn, located immediately to the east of the salaried employees’ parking area. On the morning of February 8, 1980, plaintiff parked his car in the hourly employees’ parking area. He then left the lot intending to walk to the plant along a sidewalk on the opposite (north) side of the street from the parking area. As noted, plaintiff was struck while crossing the street.
*514The appeal board concluded that plaintiffs injury did not occur in the course of his employment because plaintiff left defendant’s "protected zone” when he crossed the street and because defendant did not control the route plaintiff traveled to work. We disagree.
The general rule is that injuries suffered by an employee while going to or coming from work are not compensable. Bush v Parmenter, Forsythe, Rude & Dethmers, 413 Mich 444, 451; 320 NW2d 858 (1982); Thomas v Staff Builders Health Care, 168 Mich App 127, 129; 424 NW2d 13 (1988), lv den 430 Mich 886 (1988). This general rule is supplemented by MCL 418.301(3); MSA 17.237(301) (3) [formerly MCL 418.301(2); MSA 17.237(301X2)], which provides in relevant part:
An employee going to or from his or her work, while on the premises where the employee’s work is to be performed, and within a reasonable time before and after his working hours, is presumed to be in the course of his or her employment.
This provision, when read literally, requires that the injury occur on the employer’s premises to give rise to the presumption. Upton v General Motors Corp, 124 Mich App 61, 65; 333 NW2d 384 (1983), lv den 417 Mich 1100.12 (1983). Nevertheless, cases decided by this Court in the 1960s and 1970s expanded the meaning of "premises” to encompass areas outside the employer’s actual property. Upton, supra; Fischer v Lincoln Tool & Die Co, 37 Mich App 198, 202; 194 NW2d 476 (1971), lv den 387 Mich 755 (1972).
When plaintiff’s accident occurred, he was within the zone, environments and hazards of his labor and, therefore, was presumed to be in the course of his employment under the coming-and-*515going provision at issue, MCL 418.301(3); MSA 17.237(301)(3). In discussing a coming-and-going provision virtually identical to the one at issue in this case, our Supreme Court in Lasiewicki v Tusco Products Co, 372 Mich 125, 131; 125 NW2d 479 (1963), quoted a pertinent "important principle” from Hills v Blair, 182 Mich 20, 27; 148 NW 243 (1914), an early case in which the Court construed the language "arising out of and in the course of employment” relative to place of injury:
"In applying the general rule that the period of going to and returning from work is not covered by the act, it is held that the employment is not limited by the exact time when the workman reaches the scene of his labor and begins it, nor when he ceases, but includes a reasonable time, space, and opportunity before and after, while he is at or near his place of employment. One of the tests sometimes applied is whether the workman is still on the premises of his employer. This, while often a helpful consideration, is by no means conclusive. A workman might be on the premises of another than his employer, or in a public place, and yet be so close to the scene of his labor, within its zone, environments, and hazards, as to be in effect at the place and under the protection of the act.” (Emphasis supplied.)
Quoted in Hills v Blair, supra, as authority for the proposition above stated, is [one] of the earlier authorities from English compensation law, a progenitor of the Michigan statute. In Hoskins v Lancaster, 3 BWCC 476, 480, it was held (26 TLR 612):
"It is not a sufficient test that the workman should be on the premises of the employer; but it may be sufficient that he is in such a state of proximity as may be treated as a reasonable margin in point of space.”
Relying in part on the language quoted above, a *516panel of this Court later held that an employee injured while crossing a highway on his way from his employer’s factory to an employer-leased parking lot for employees fell within the language of the pertinent coming-and-going provision. Jean v Chrysler Corp, 2 Mich App 564; 140 NW2d 756 (1966). Reaching the employee parking lot after his shift was over, with no unwarranted lapse of time, was a "necessary adjunct of the [employee’s] employment.” Id., p 570. Jean was good law then. It is good law today. Also see Adair v Metropolitan Building Co, 38 Mich App 393; 196 NW2d 335 (1972).
Nor does the case of McClure v General Motors Corp (On Rehearing), 408 Mich 191; 289 NW2d 631 (1980), reh den 408 Mich 1109 (1980), compel a different result. In McClure, the question was whether injuries suffered off the employer’s premises at lunch hour were compensable. A majority of the Supreme Court declined to extend the workers’ compensation act to injuries suffered any place in which the employee may be during the work day. A plurality opinion, warning against expansion of workers’ compensation coverage by judicial decision, held that, although it may have been a "circumstance” of the plaintiffs’ employment that they had been injured off-premises during lunch hour, the Legislature has not yet seen fit to provide compensation for off-premises activity of a personal character. Id., p 207. Although plaintiff here had another route to defendant’s plant which would not require him to cross the street, we do not believe that he was engaged in an activity of a personal character when he was crossing the street.
Panels of this Court have been reluctant to extend the meaning of the word "premises” in MCL 418.301(3); MSA 17.237(301X3). See, e.g., *517Denny v Kostadinovski, 117 Mich App 517; 324 NW2d 19 (1981). Although we understand that reluctance, we do not believe that we should mount a retreat from established law. While we should not be enslaved to precedent, it would be well to remember what was written in Mahnich v Southern Steamship Co, 321 US 96, 113; 64 S Ct 455; 88 L Ed 561 (1944):
The tendency to disregard precedents . . . has become so strong [as] ... to shake confidence in the consistency of decision and leave the courts below on an uncharted sea of doubt . . . without any confidence that what was said yesterday will hold good tomorrow.
Accordingly, we reverse the appeal board’s conclusion that plaintiffs injury did not occur in the course of his employment. This case is remanded to the appeal board to resolve the two-member board’s split over whether plaintiff was disabled. MCL 418.261(2); MSA 17.237(261X2).
Reversed and remanded. We do not retain jurisdiction.
Reilly, P.J., concurred.

=== CASE 9737885 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:36:27.322716+00 ===

MacKenzie, J.
(dissenting.) I would affirm the decision of the Workers’ Compensation Appeal Board.
As noted by the majority, the general rule is that injuries suffered by an employee while going to or coming from work are not compensable. Bush v Parmenter, Forsythe, Rude & Dethmers, 413 Mich 444, 451; 320 NW2d 858 (1982); Thomas v Staff Builders Health Care, 168 Mich App 127, 129; 424 NW2d 13 (1988), lv den 430 Mich 886 (1988). MCL 418.301(3); MSA 17.237(301)(3) [formerly MCL 418.301(2); MSA 17.237(301X2)] creates *518an exception to this general rule when the employee’s injury occurs on the employer’s "premises”:
An employee going to or from his or her work, while on the premises where the employee’s work is to be performed, and within a reasonable time before and after his working hours, is presumed to be in the course of his or her employment. [Emphasis added.]
While earlier cases relied on by the majority expanded the meaning of "premises” to encompass areas outside the employer’s actual property, since McClure v General Motors Corp (On Rehearing), 408 Mich 191; 289 NW2d 631 (1980), this Court has been reluctant to extend the meaning of the word "premises” in MCL 418.301(3); MSA 17.237(301)(3) to include off-premises areas of injury such as that involved here. I am of the opinion that these post -McClure cases should control the disposition of this case.
In Tedford v Stouffer’s Northland Inn, 106 Mich App 493; 308 NW2d 254 (1981), lv den 412 Mich 928 (1982), the plaintiff had alighted from a bus and was walking to work across a parking lot that was not part of the defendant’s premises when she fell and was injured. The appeal board applied the "zone, environments and hazards” test of Fischer v Lincoln Tool & Die Co, 37 Mich App 198; 194 NW2d 476 (1971), lv den 387 Mich 755 (1972), and granted compensation. This Court reversed, noting that the premises rule is in the nature of a limitation and quoting McClure’s warning against judicial dilution of legislative limitations on compensation. Tedford, supra at 500-502. This Court held that, because the defendant had no control over plaintiff’s route or the condition of the parking lot where she fell, there was no logical justification for *519expanding the premises exception to the general rule of no compensation. Id. at 503.
Likewise, in Denny v Kostadinovski, 117 Mich App 517; 324 NW2d 19 (1981), the plaintiff slipped and fell in a public alley while on her way home from work. Id. at 518. The plaintiff was injured at a point ten to twenty feet from her workplace. Id. This Court cited the leading pre-McClure cases but distinguished them on the ground that the plaintiff was not crossing between areas controlled by the defendants nor was the alleyway controlled by the defendants. Id. at 521. The Denny Court concluded that the "zone, environments and hazards” test only applies to particular situations "where the employer has held out to employees designated parking areas and adjacent unowned property to be traveled over.” Id. at 521. The plaintiff’s injuries thus did not occur in the course of her employment, and the award of compensation was reversed. Id.
In Beneteau v Detroit Free Press, 117 Mich App 253; 323 NW2d 498 (1982), the plaintiff was struck by a car in a public street while walking from a parking structure to her workplace. Id. at 254. There was no claim that defendant owned or controlled the parking structure, that the street was anything other than a public road, or that the defendant had control over the route which the plaintiff traveled. Id. at 259. This Court concluded on the basis of Tedford that the plaintiff was not within the "zone, environments and hazards” of her work at the time of injury. Id.
Finally, in Upton v General Motors Corp, 124 Mich App 61; 333 NW2d 384 (1983), lv den 417 Mich 1100.12 (1983), the plaintiff was injured when his automobile was struck by another as he turned into the driveway of his workplace. Id. at 63. This Court held that McClure placed no limita*520tion on compensation for injuries arising out of on-premises lunchtime injuries. Id. at 67. The defendant argued that McClure created an absurd result by awarding compensation merely because the plaintiff’s automobile was struck in the driveway of the defendant’s plant, rather than the public street, where, under McClure, the injury would not be compensable. Id. This Court noted:
Although it may be arbitrary to rule that an employee injured within the employer’s gate during lunchtime sustains a compensable injury while another employee, also on his lunch break and injured several feet away but outside the employer’s premises, sustains a non-compensable injury, that is the result dictated by McClure and earlier case law. As Justice Levin observed: "A line must be drawn at some point.” [124 Mich App 67.]
In this case, although plaintiff was traveling from one part of defendant’s premises to another, defendant did not create a necessity that plaintiff involuntarily encounter traffic risks; there was evidence that plaintiff had two alternative routes available to him which did not involve crossing a public street. Defendant did not own or control the street where plaintiff was injured. There is no evidence that defendant had any control over the route plaintiff chose to take. In light of the McClure plurality’s unwillingness to further expand the premises exception, the McClure concurrence’s suggestion that an employee must be on the premises to qualify for workers’ compensation coverage, and the plain language of MCL 418.301(3); MSA 17.237(301X3), I would conclude that the appeal board did not err in determining that plaintiff was not entitled to compensation and would accordingly affirm.

=== CASE 9737886 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:36:27.890742+00 ===

OPINION
STATON, Judge.
Catherine L. (Carpenter) Bright ("Bright") appeals from the trial court's judgment of damages against her and in favor of Ronald E. Kuehl, Jr. ("Kuehl"). In her appeal, Bright raises four issues for our review which we consolidate into two and restate as follows:
I. Whether the trial court erred in determining that Kuehl was entitled to equitable relief arising out of his cohabitation with Bright.
II. Whether the trial court erred in awarding Kuehl punitive damages.
We reverse and remand.
Bright and Kuehl met in April 1990 and soon thereafter became engaged. In August 1990, Bright moved into Kuehl's residence and the couple lived together until April 1991. During this eight month period, Bright did secretarial work through a temporary employment agency. Kuehl worked as an engineering technician until he was laid off in February 1991. After being laid off, Kuch] collected $95.00 per week in unemployment and did occasional construction work *313and substitute teaching. After Kuehl was laid off, Bright worked a second job as a waitress.
During their cohabitation, all bills were paid and all checks were drawn from Kuehl's checking account. Bright deposited her paychecks into Kuekhl's account. Kuehl balanced the checkbook monthly. Bright signed checks drawn on the account and used credit cards held in Kuehl's name. With these checks, Bright bought household items and clothing, and paid credit card bills The parties also traded in Bright's vehicle and acquired a 1990 Grand Prix which was titled in both their names.
Throughout their cohabitation, Bright and Kuehl had a tumultuous relationship which culminated in a mutual protective order in which both parties were restrained from abusing and threatening each other,. As a result, the couple separated and Bright could not enter Kuehl's residence to retrieve any of her belongings. Bright did subsequently return with a police officer and obtained two boxes of clothing. Kuehl retained all of the household items acquired by either party during the cohabitation including the Grand Prix which he continues to make payments.
Kuehl then filed suit against Bright seeking damages arising from Bright's alleged unauthorized use and control of his credit cards and checkbook, Bright's destruction of his personal property, medical expenses incurred as a result of Bright's physical attacks, and Bright's excessive use of the phone. Kueh] sought $14,000 in compensatory damages plus treble damages, punitive damages, and attorney fees. Bright counterclaimed seeking compensatory and punitive damages based upon Kuehl's unjust envrichment as a result of his retention of the personal property, and for pain and suffering resulting from Kuehl's abusive conduct.
Following a bench trial, the court awarded a judgment in favor of Kuehl of $28,270.39 consisting of $8,270.39 compensatory damages and $20,000 punitive damages.1 The court awarded Bright $5,759 in damages on her counterclaim.2 Thus, the net judgment in favor of Kuchl was $22,511.39.
As a basis for the judgment, the trial court found:
[Nlotwithstanding the lack of express contract between Ronald and Cathy, a contract can be implied from this relationship generally and also her tipped measure of control, financially, psychologically, and physically over Ronald, with consequence, and therefrom his entitlement to something in return. On the financial side, for example, her expenditures to her benefit far outweighed her contribution, to his detriment. Unjust enrichment and equitable considerations seem to flow naturally and logically therefrom in Ronald's favor, also rendering some entitlement to Cathy.
Record, p. 26. ,
Bright now appeals the judgment.
We note initially that a general judgment will be affirmed upon any legal theory consistent with the evidence, and the court of review neither reweighs the evidence nor rejudges the credibility of the witnesses. Jones v. Jones (1994), Ind.App., 641 N.E.2d 98, 101. When reviewing a general judgment, we presume that the trial court correctly followed the law. Id. The presumption that the trial court correctly followed the law is one of the strongest presumptions applicable to our consideration of a case on appeal. Id.
I.
Damages Arising Out of Cohabitation
Bright contends that the trial court's decision is contrary to law because there is no cause of action in Indiana which allows for recovery of funds expended during a cohabi*314tation arrangement in contemplation of marriage absent fraud, deceit or a contract.3
This case presents an issue of first impression in Indiana: whether a party is entitled to relief based upon contributions during eohabitation without subsequent marriage absent an express agreement.
Our analysis begins with Glasgo v. Glasgo (1980), Ind.App., 410 N.E.2d 1325, trans. de-mied. There, a former wife sued her former husband for one-half of the assets accumulated during their period of cohabitation after their divoree. The trial court awarded the former wife a share of the property acquired by the parties during their cohabitation. On appeal, the former husband argued that the cause of action presented an unenforceable claim in Indiana. He contended that claims by nonmarried cohabitants were against pub-lie policy in Indiana because common law marriages were prohibited by statute.4 Id. at 1327.
In affirming the trial court's decision, this court addressed the propriety of an equitable claim for relief in instances where couples live together without marrying. The court expressly stated that granting the petitioner relief was not against the public policy of this state and did not in any way impinge upon the legislature's prohibition of common law marriages. Id. The court concluded:
To apply the traditional rationale denying recovery to one party in cases where contracts are held to be void simply because illegal sexual relations are posited as consideration for the bargain is unfair, unjust, and unduly harsh. Such unnecessary results probably do more to discredit the legal system in the eyes of the those who learn of the facts of the case than to strengthen the institution of marriage or the moral fiber of our society. To deny recovery to one party in such a relationship is in essence to unjustly enrich the other.5
Id.
However, the G¥lasgo court noted that cohabitation does not automatically give rise to the presumed intention of shared property rights between the parties and "[rJlecovery for parties seeking relief would be based only upon legally viable contractual and/or equitable grounds which the parties could establish according to their own particular cireum-stances.4 Id. at 1331-1332.
In Chestnut v. Chestnut (1986), Ind.App., 499 N.E.2d 783, this court approved the rationale in Glasgo in affirming the trial court's *315decision to include the wife's contributions during premarital cohabitation in the distribution of marital property upon dissolution. The court noted that it would be against public policy to ignore the wife's contributions during the period prior to marriage since she and her partner eventually married. Id. at 787.
Other jurisdictions have similarly adopted this right to relief and have held that unmarried couples may raise equitable claims such an implied contract and unjust enrichment following the termination of their relationships where one of the parties attempts to retain an unreasonable amount of the property acquired through the efforts of both. See eg., the landmark decision of Marvin v. Marvin (1976), 18 Cal.3d 660, 134 Cal.Rptr. 315, 557 P.2d 106 (1976) and also; Boland v. Catalano (1987), 202 Conn. 333, 521 A.2d 142; Mason v. Rostad (1984), D.C.App., 476 A.2d 662; Estate of Eriksen (1983), Mn., 337 N.W.2d 671; Hay v. Hay (1984), 100 Nev. 196, 678 P.2d 672; Collins v. Davis (1984), 68 N.C.App. 588, 315 S.E.2d 759, aff'd by 312 N.C. 324, 321 S.E.2d 892; Knauer v. Knauer (1983), 233 Pa.Super. 206, 470 A.2d 553; Watts v. Watts (1987), 137 Wis.2d 506, 405 N.W.2d 308, review denied.
As such, we determine that a party who cohabitates with another without subsequent marriage is entitled to relief upon a showing of an express contract or a viable equitable theory such as an implied contract or unjust enrichment.
Thus, we must now examine whether the trial court properly awarded Kuchl relief based upon an implied contract and unjust enrichment, and whether there was sufficient evidence to support the judgment.6
Our test for sufficiency of the evi-denee requires that we neither weigh the evidence nor resolve questions of credibility. We look only to the evidence of probative value and the reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom which support the verdict. Martin v. Roberts (1984), Ind., 464 N.E.2d 896.
The trial court based its decision upon the notion of implied contract, unjust enrichment, and equitable considerations. The trial court determined a contract can be implied from the relationship based upon Bright's control over Kuchl and the fact that her expenditures for her own benefit outweighed her contribution, and thus entitled Kuehl to relief.
To recover under the theory of implied contract, the plaintiff is usually required to establish that the defendant impliedly or expressly requested the benefits conferred. Biggerstaff v. Vanderburgh Humane Society, Inc. (1983), Ind.App., 453 N.E.2d 363, 364. Any benefit, commonly the subject of pecuniary compensation, which one, not intending it as a gift, confers upon another who accepts it, is an adequate foundation for a legally implied or created promise to render back its value. Cole v. Cole (1988), Ind. App., 517 N.E.2d 1248, 1250.
Unlike in Glasgo and Chestnut where the petitioners' sought their share in the assets accumulated during the cohabitation, here Kuehl seeks damages for Bright's alleged misuse of his funds and injuries sustained during the course of the cohabitation.
Our review of the record reveals Bright and Kuch! commingled their funds upon deposit into Kuehl's checking account. The record indicates that Bright regularly used Kuehl's checking account for various payments of expenses. The record does not indicate that Kuehl attempted to prevent Bright's actions until the relationship soured. The record does not support the notion that Kuehl provided these monies to Bright with the expectation that she would return the amount of money she spent on expenses during the course of their cohabitation or that Bright impliedly or expressly requested these benefits.
As such, we determine, based upon the rationale in Glasgo, that these particular circumstances do not establish that Kuehl is entitled to relief based upon a theory of implied contract. We therefore reject the trial court's reliance upon an implied contract theory to award Kuehl relief,
*316Bright also contends that the trial court erred in applying the doctrine of unjust enrichment. To prevail on a claim for unjust enrichment, a plaintiff must establish that a measurable benefit has been conferred on the defendant under such cireumstances that the defendant's retention of the benefit without payment would be unjust.7 Bayh v. Sonnenburg (1991), Ind., 573 N.E.2d 398, 408, reh. denied, cert. denied, 502 U.S. 1094, 112 S.Ct. 1170, 117 L.Ed.2d 415. Principles of equity prohibit unjust enrichment of a party who accepts the unrequested benefits another provides despite having the opportunity to decline those benefits Olsson v. Moore (1992), Ind.App., 590 N.E.2d 160, 163, reh. denied.
Here, Bright and Kuehl moved in together and shared their expenses. They commingled their funds and essentially handled their finances together. Although Kuehl contributed a greater amount financially, we cannot conclude that Bright was unjustly enriched by her actions in light of the fact that Kuehl retained much of the assets acquired during the cohabitation. While we acknowledge that unjust enrichment is a remedy available to a party who has cohabitated with another, we do not agree with the trial court that Kuehl made a showing that Bright was unjustly enriched. We therefore conclude that the trial court's reliance upon unjust enrichment to afford Kuehl relief was inappropriate.
In sum, we conclude that the civeum-stances before us do not afford Kuehl relief based upon any equitable theory, and we reverse the trial court's judgment of compensatory damages in his favor.
IL
Punitive Damages
Bright contends that the trial court erred in awarding Kuehl punitive damages.8 Punitive damages may be awarded only if there is clear and convincing evidence that the defendant acted with malice, fraud, gross negligence, or oppressiveness which was not the result of a mistake of fact or law, honest error or judgment, over-zealousness, mere negligence, or other human failing. We will affirm an award of punitive damages if, considering only the probative evidence and the reasonable inferences supporting it, a trier of fact could reasonably find such damages were proven by clear and convincing evidence. Erie Insurance Co. v. Hickman (1993), Ind., 622 N.E.2d 515, 520-521.
The purpose of punitive damages is to punish the wrongdoer and thereby deter others from engaging in similar conduct. Archem, Inc. v. Simo (1990), Ind.App., 549 N.E.2d 1054, 1061, trans. denied, cert. dismissed, 498 U.S. 1076, 111 S.Ct. 944, 112 L.Ed.2d 1032. There are two primary factors which should be properly considered in reviewing an award of punitive damages: (1) the nature of the tort and the extent of the actual damages sustained; and (2) the economic wealth of the defendant. Id.
*317A party must establish actual ~ damages before he may recover punitive damages and the grant of affirmative equitable relief will also support a punitive damage award. Grimes v. Jones (1991), Ind.App., 567 N.E.2d 858, 859, trans. denied. However, the rule allowing punitive damages to be supported by affirmative equitable relief must be strictly construed. Id.
Because we determine that Kuehl was not entitled to compensatory damages because of his failure to make a showing on his claims for equitable relief, his judgment for punitive damages cannot stand. Sullivan v. American Cas. Co. of Reading, PA (1992), Ind., 605 N.E.2d 134, 140; Grimes, supra, at 859-860.
Notwithstanding our reversal of compensatory damages, we note that punitive damages are awarded upon a showing of intentional conduct which focuses on the defendant's state of mind. Peterson v. Culver Educational Foundation (1980), Ind.App., 402 N.E.2d 448, 458, reh. denied. As indicated supra, the record shows that the parties impliedly agreed to share living expenses during their cohabitation as exhibited by Kuehl's decision to turn over his credit cards and checkbook for Bright's use. Moreover, the record indicates that Kuehl and Bright planned to marry and that Bright had purchased a wedding ring for Kuehl. Such circumstances do not show that Bright moved in with Kuehl in an attempt to intentionally defraud him or to maliciously exhaust his assets.
As such, we conclude that the evidence does not clearly and convincingly show that Bright acted in a manner warranting the imposition of punitive damages. Accordingly, we reverse the trial court's award of punitive damages in Kuehl's favor.
Reversed and remanded with instructions to the trial court to vacate the judgments of compensatory and punitive damages in Kuehl's favor.
FRIEDLANDER, J., concurs.
GARRARD, J., dissents and files separate opinion.
. The trial court itemized the compensatory damages as: $1786.00 for Bright's checks, $4623.05 for payment of charge accounts, $1511.34 for reimbursement of vehicle damages, $100.00 for medical expenses, and $250.00 for a Video Cassette Recorder.
. The trial court itemized Bright's damages as: $2,800.00 for equity in Bright's car, $840.00 for General Motors discount, and $2,119.00 for value of converted personal property.
. We note that Kueh] failed to cite any authority or present any cogent argument in his appellee's brief. Generally, a party waives any allegation of error if the party fails to provide any citation to authority or statutes. Ind.Appellate Rule 8.3(A)(7); Captain & Co., Inc. v. Stenberg (1987), Ind.App., 505 N.E.2d 88, 95, trans. denied. Such is akin to failure to file a brief, and subjects the appellee to reversal upon the appellant's showing of prima facie error. Cf. Hacker v. Holland (1991), Ind.App., 575 N.E.2d 675, 676, trans. denied. Nevertheless, we are not bound by this lesser standard and we choose to address this appeal on the merits.
. See Ind.Code 31-7-6-1 (formerly LC. 31-1-7-1).
. In Glasgo, the court analyzed extensively the decision of Hewitt v. Hewitt, (1979) 77 Ill.2d 49, 31 Ill.Dec. 827, 394 N.E.2d 1204. In Hewitt, the Illinois Supreme Court determined that individual claims of unmarried cohabitants to jointly accumulated property based upon a theory of implied contract contradicted the public policy of the state. The court explained that the issue rested upon whether it was appropriate for the court to grant a legal status to a private arrangement substituting for the institution of marriage sanctioned by the State. Id. 31 Ill.Dec. at 832, 394 N.E.2d at 1209. The court opined: "[wle cannot confidently say that the judicial recognition of property rights between unmarried cohabitants will not make that alternative to marriage more attractive by allowing parties to engage in such relationships with greater security." Id. Based upon that rationale, the court determined that the claim of the petitioner, a woman who lived with the defendant for fifteen years during which three children were born to the relationship, was unenforceable as it contravened public policy implicit in the statutory scheme of the Ilinois Marriage and Dissolution of Marriage Act, disfavoring the grant of mutually enforceable property rights to knowingly unmarried cohabitants. Id. 31 Ill.Dec. at 834, 394 N.E.2d at 1211.
This court determined that the results reached by the court in Hewitt were unduly harsh and unnecessary stating ""we are not convinced that the impact of the recognition of relationships such as the Hewitts' or the Glasgos' upon our society and the institution of marriage to be of greater importance than the rights of the immediate parties." Glasgo, supra, at 1329-30.
. We note that Bright raises sufficiency of the evidence as the fourth issue in her brief.
. We note that unjust enrichment, quantum meruit, contract implied-in-law, constructive contract, and quasi-contract are merely legal fictions invented by the common law courts in order to permit recovery where in fact there is no contract, but where circumstances are such that under the law of natural and immutable justice there should be a recovery as though there had been a promise. Bayh, infra, at 408 (citing Clark v. Peoples Sav. & Loan Ass'n (1943), 221 Ind. 168, 171, 46 N.E.2d 681, 682).
. Bright also argues that the trial court was prevented from awarding Kuehl punitive damages because he only requested treble damages in his complaint. Attached to his appellee brief, Kuch! annexed a copy of his amended complaint which specifically prayed for relief of punitive damages. In her reply brief, Bright erroneously states that the "record of proceedings contains a verbatim presentation of the case" and that the record does not indicate that the issue of punitive damages was ever properly submitted to the trial court. Appellant's Reply Br. at 4. However, we note that parts of the record which are not transmitted to the court on appeal shall nevertheless be a part of the record on appeal for all purposes. Ind.Appellate Rule 7.2(B); Lowry v. Lowry (1992), Ind.App., 590 N.E.2d 612, 618, n. 2, trans. denied. Thus, the amended complaint alleging punitive damages is part of the record and the issue was properly submitted to the trial court. As such, we determine that Bright's contention that the trial court improperly awarded Kuchl punitive damages on the grounds that he only specifically plead treble damages is without merit.

=== CASE 9737888 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:36:28.612783+00 ===

OXBERGER, Chief Judge.
Susan Oakes and Tim Moleski were married in 1984. They have one child, Sean Moleski born in November 1984.
Tim is a mechanical engineer and has earned over $35,000 per year for several years. Susan was a full-time homemaker during much of the marriage; she is now employed as an office manager for a fledgling business enterprise, earning about $1,000 per month. She has a college degree in textiles and clothing merchandising.
The district court placed the parties’ child in joint legal custody and in Susan’s primary physical care. The district court characterized both Susan and Tim as good parents, but concluded that Susan is “marginally to be preferred as the primary caretaker;” the court noted that Susan has been the primary caretaker in the past and that the child has flourished under her care. The court concluded that Tim should also have extensive contact with the child and extensive child care responsibilities; the court declined to characterize Tim’s periods of care as visitation, and the court commented that “the decree attempts to maximize the amount of time that [Tim] will have with the child, consistent with giving the child a definite home to which he can become attached.” Susan in her brief asks us to affirm the trial court in all respects.
The court directed Tim to pay Susan child support of $500 per month for ten months per year. The support obligation is to be suspended during the months of June and July, when Tim will have the child in his care. The child support award is subject to “cost of living” increases keyed to the Consumer Price Index.
*732The court directed Tim to pay Susan $27,152 as a division of marital assets. The assets in question were primarily retirement accounts and investment accounts; the payment to Susan was to be effectuated by a division of some of these accounts. (The parties had stipulated to the disposition of their nonfinancial assets, including their house; the court adopted the provisions of the stipulation, and none of those provisions is controverted in this appeal.)
Finally, the court directed Tim to contribute $3,000 toward Susan’s trial attorney’s fees.
Tim has appealed from the dissolution decree. Tim contends the parties’ child should be transferred from Susan’s primary care to his primary care. Tim further contends the awards to Susan of property and attorney’s fees are excessive. Tim argues that Susan’s cash property award should be reduced to $20,001, and that her award of trial attorney’s fees should be reduced to $2,000.
Susan requests attorney’s fees on appeal.
I.
Tim contends that the district court erred in awarding Susan primary physical care of Sean.
Our review in this matter is de novo. In re Marriage of Bowen, 219 N.W.2d 683, 687 (Iowa 1974); Iowa R.App.P. 14(f)(15). In child custody cases, the best interests of the child is the first and governing consideration. The factors the court considers in awarding custody are enumerated in Iowa Code section 598.-41(3) and in In re Marriage of Weidner, 338 N.W.2d 351, 356 (Iowa 1983) and In re Marriage of Winter, 223 N.W.2d 165, 166-67 (Iowa 1974). All factors bear on the “first and governing consideration,” the court’s determination of what will be in the long-term best interests of the child. In re Marriage of Vrban, 359 N.W.2d 420, 424 (Iowa 1984). The critical issue in determining the best interests of the child is which parent will do better in raising the child; gender is irrelevant and neither parent should have a greater burden than the other in attempting to gain custody in a dissolution proceeding. In re Marriage of Ullerich, 367 N.W.2d 297, 299 (Iowa App.1985).
Tim accuses Susan of drug abuse, financial irresponsibility and involvement with a man who would be a negative influence on his child.
Susan admitted using drugs on a casual basis, however, she wisely has discontinued this practice. Susan has admitted that using drugs was a mistake. There is no evidence which suggests that her denial is anything other than correct. Regarding financial irresponsibility, there is not enough evidence to support Tim’s position. The evidence shows typical financial problems besetting young married couples. We find the financial difficulties were derived from these basic facts far more than from the irresponsibility of the petitioner.
Tim further claims that Susan’s current boyfriend would be a negative role model for Sean. There is testimony that revealed both Susan and Jim have been mindful of the effect on Sean of Jim remaining overnight at Susan’s while Sean is present. Tim failed to present any evidence that shows any detrimental effect on Sean due to Susan and Jim’s relationship. Jim acknowledges numerous affairs with married women and that he was a very heavy drinker for a substantial period of time. Jim claims that these problems no longer exist.
Susan has been the child’s primary caretaker and the child has flourished. We find Susan’s bond to the child is warmer and more emotional than that of Tim. Susan is, no doubt, the child’s primary psychological parent. We affirm the district court.
II.
The trial court awarded Susan $32,-868. Susan possessed $5,716 of marital assets at the time of dissolution. At the time of separation this asset was valued at $5,245. The trial court concluded that Susan was entitled to a net value of $27,152 from the net increase in the marital assets which occurred following the parties’ marriage and before the date of trial.
*733The parties disagree as to the division of the premarital assets and the property accumulated after the date of separation. Tim asserts the district court erred in awarding Susan $32,868 in the property settlement.
The court in In re Marriage of Webb, 426 N.W.2d 402, 405 (Iowa 1988) stated the division of property is based upon each marital partners right to a just and equitable share of property accumulated during the marriage as a result of their joint efforts. The partners in the marriage are entitled to a just and equitable share of the property accumulated through their joint effort. In re Marriage of Havran, 406 N.W.2d 450, 452 (Iowa App.1987).
Tim contends the trial court erroneously divided his Merrill Lynch IRA in the property division. This IRA was valued at $2,012 on the date of marriage and accrued to $4,530 by the date of separation. Tim claims it would not be just and equitable to divide between Tim and Susan any of the property accumulated after the separation of the parties, as these assets were not jointly accumulated by the parties.
In In re Marriage of Muelhaupt, 439 N.W.2d 656, 661 (Iowa 1989), the Iowa Supreme Court held the net worth of the parties at the time of trial is relevant in adjusting their property rights in a dissolution. In Muelhaupt, the husband argued that stock he purchased after the parties separation should not be considered a marital asset. The court concluded that because the wife “contributed little to this asset” she was only entitled to approximately sixteen per cent of the fair market value of the stock. Id.
Susan claims the Muelhaupt holding can be distinguished from the case at bar due to the nature of the assets. In Muelhaupt the assets were stocks, whereas the assets involved in this case are funds accrued in retirement funds. We believe these differences are insignificant in determining the appropriate distribution of the assets. Based upon our review of the record in this case, we conclude that Susan did not contribute to the growth of these assets from the time of separation. Consequently, we hold these assets should not be divided between Tim and Susan in the property distribution.
Tim maintains the property division should include an adjustment for approximately $8,000 he spent for various marital expenses from his premarital assets. Tim has currently transferred $14,756 of joint marital assets to Susan. As previously noted, Susan possessed marital assets which were valued at $5,716 at the time of trial. We believe the transfer of the $14,-756 of joint marital assets plus the $5,716 Susan had in her possession at the time of trial, totaling $20,472, to be fair and equitable. Consequently, we modify the trial court’s property award and award Susan a net value of $20,472 from the net increase in the marital assets which occurred following the parties’ marriage and before the date of trial.
III.
Tim asserts the district court erred in awarding Susan $500 per month of child support, notwithstanding the fact that appellant should have been awarded primary physical care of Sean and therefore he should not be required to pay any child support to Susan.
The Iowa Supreme Court on September 29, 1989, entered on order presenting uniform child support guidelines pursuant to Federal Family Support Act of 1988, Pub.L. No. 100-485. We find that the guidelines should apply to all cases pending on appeal as of September 29, 1989. The guidelines provide “the court shall not vary from the amount of child support which would result from application of the guidelines without a written finding that the guidelines would be unjust or inappropriate.” We remand this case to the trial court to conduct a hearing and enter an appropriate order pursuant to the guidelines. Pending said hearing on remand, we order child support be paid as ordered by the original trial court decree. We direct the trial court to order the child support for a twelve-month year. Susan’s expenses for child care are only slightly reduced during *734the child s absence. This court does not retain jurisdiction.
IV.
Tim asserts the district court erred in awarding Susan $3,000 in attorney fees, as the evidence submitted at the trial shows the court should have awarded Susan $2,000 of reasonable attorney fees.
Iowa trial courts have considerable discretion in awarding attorney fees. In re Marriage of Giles, 338 N.W.2d 544, 546 (Iowa App.1983). To overturn an award, the complaining party must show the trial court abused its discretion. Id. Awards of attorney fees must be for fair and reasonable amounts, In re Marriage of Willcoxson, 250 N.W.2d 425, 427 (Iowa 1977), and based on the parties’ respective abilities to pay. In re Marriage of Lattig, 318 N.W.2d 811, 817 (Iowa App.1982).
In the present case, Tim has greater earnings and earning capacity than does Susan, thus the award of attorney fees is fair to the parties. Consequently, we affirm the trial courts award of $3,000 for attorney fees.
Susan also requested attorney fees on appeal. We are to consider the needs of the party making the request, the ability of the other party to pay, and whether the party making the request was obligated to defend the trial court’s decision on appeal. In re Marriage of Castle, 312 N.W.2d 147, 150 (Iowa App.1981). In the present case, Tim has income far in excess of Susan. Further, he has significant premarital assets. Finally, Susan has been required to defend the trial court’s decree on appeal. We award Susan attorney fees in the amount of $1,000 and tax court costs to Tim.
Except as modified and remanded with directions herein, we otherwise affirm the trial court.
AFFIRMED IN PART, MODIFIED IN PART, AND REMANDED WITH DIRECTIONS.
All Judges concur except HABHAB, J., who concurs in part and dissents in part.

=== CASE 9737890 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:36:29.91215+00 ===

OPINION
RUCKER, Judge.
Defendant-Appellant Wayne D. Caley, Jr. appeals his conviction of one count of Child Molesting as a Class C felony (sexual intercourse)1 and one count of Child Molesting as a Class D felony (fondling).2 He raises several issues for our review which we consolidate and rephrase as: 1) whether the trial court properly excluded testimony of the vie-tim's alleged past sexual conduct; 2) whether the trial court erred in admitting certain photographic exhibits into evidence; and 3) whether the trial court erred in admitting the victim's prior consistent statement into evidence.
We affirm.
The facts3 most favorable to the judgment reveal that the victim, fourteen-year-old J.K., resided with her mother, and her step-father, Defendant Wayne D. Caley, Jr. (Caley). Between July 1990, and June 1991, Caley engaged J.K. in sexual intercourse and fondled her breasts. In August 1992, J.K. informed family friends that she had been molested by Caley. Caley was thereafter arrested, charged, and following a jury trial, convicted of two amended counts of child molesting. This appeal ensued in due course.
L.
Caley first challenges the trial court's application of the rape shield statute to exclude certain evidence concerning J.K.'s alleged prior sexual activity. Both prior to and during trial, Caley offered to prove that J.K. and Caley's eighteen-year-old son had engaged in sexual relations and that Caley's son rather than Caley was the perpetrator of the molestation. Following a hearing, the court ruled that the evidence was inadmissible pursuant to the rape shield statute. According to Caley, the evidence was admissible under an exception to the rape shield statute, and thus the court's ruling erroneously precluded him from impeaching J.K.'s credibility through cross-examination.
Evidence of the sexual history of an alleged victim of a sexual offense is generally inadmissible in the trial of the alleged offender. Ind.Code § 35-37-4-4; Kelly v. State (1992), Ind.App., 586 N.E.2d 927, 929, trans. denied.4 One exception to this general prohibition is where a specific instance of sexual activity shows that some person other than the defendant committed the act upon which the prosecution is founded. I.C. § 35-37-4-4(b)(2). Such evidence may be introduced only if the judge determines that it is material to a fact at issue in the case and that its inflammatory or prejudicial nature does not *56outweigh its probative value. I.C. § 35-37-4-4(b); Kielblock v. State (1994), Ind.App., 627 N.E.2d 816, 819, trans. denied. Further, if the identification of the assailant is not at issue, evidence of the victim's past sexual conduct is not admissible under I.C. § 35-37-4-4(b)(2). Posey v. State (1993), Ind. App., 624 N.E.2d 515, 519. DeMotte v. State (1990), Ind.App., 555 N.E.2d 1336, 1340-41, trans. denied.
For at least two reasons, the trial court correctly excluded Caley's proffered evidence. First, the evidence Caley presents is not of a specific instance of sexual activity which shows that some person other than Caley committed the acts of molestation. See I.C. § 85-37-4-4(b)(2). Rather, Caley merely alleges the existence of an ongoing sexual relationship between J.K. and his son and further admits that the proscribed evidence was intended "to explain the prosecuting witness' considerable sexual experience," Appellant's Brief at 27-28. Second, even if the evidence Caley presents had complied with the statutory requirements for the exception, the identity of J.K.'s molester was not at issue. See Posey, 624 N.E.2d at 519. Here, the victim consistently and unequivocally named Caley as the perpetrator of the acts of molestation and specifically testified regarding the times, places, and cireum-stances of the molestation. Accordingly, the trial court properly excluded evidence of J.K.'s alleged past sexual activity under the rape shield statute.
IL.
Caley next contends the trial court erred in admitting into evidence, over his objection, State's Exhibits 2, 3, and 4, consisting of three photographs of partially-clad adult women. According to Caley, the photographs were irrelevant and served only to inflame the passions of the jury and to prejudice them against him.
The admission of photographs is within the sound discretion of the trial court and the court's ruling will not be disturbed absent an abuse of that discretion. Marshall v. State (1993), Ind., 621 N.E.2d 308, 316. Photographs are admissible if they are relevant to any material issue in the case; that is, if they tend to prove or disprove a material fact or shed any light on the guilt or innocence of the accused. McCord v. State (1993), Ind., 622 N.E.2d 504, 511, reh'g denied; Jenkins v. State (1993), Ind., 627 N.E.2d 789, 798, cert. denied (1994), - U.S. -, 115 S.Ct. 64, 130 L.Ed.2d 21; see also Evid.R. 401. Even assuming that the photographs at issue here were irrelevant and therefore inadmissible, Caley's argument must nonetheless fail because Caley opened the door to their admission.
The record shows that during the State's case in chief Caley cross examined the victim, J.K. In so doing he introduced into evidence Defendant's Exhibit "B" which was a letter written by the victim and given to the victim's mother. The letter included the following:
Mom did you see all the pictures of Wayne's other women. Well, if you didn't at least you saw three of them, one of them was dated "91" do you understand what I'm saying? He's been messing around on you....
Record at 210. Prior to Caley's introduction of the letter into evidence, the State had merely shown the pictures referenced therein to three witnesses, including J.K. However, none of the witnesses commented on the contents of the pictures and the State did not initially move to introduce them into evidence. Only after Caley introduced the letter into evidence, did the State then move to introduce the photographs into evidence. A defendant may open the door to otherwise inadmissible evidence by injecting an issue into the trial himself. Jones v. State (1992), Ind.App., 605 N.E.2d 193; Kelly v. State (1990), Ind.App., 555 N.E.2d 1341 trans. denied. Because Caley injected into the trial the issue of the photographs, he may not now complain that the trial court erred by admitting them into evidence. He opened the door on this issue. The trial court did not err.
IIL
Caley last asserts that the trial court erred in overruling his hearsay objection to the introduction of J.K.'s prior consistent statement as substantive evidence. According to *57Caley, the statement given by J.K. to Officer Kent Farthing corroborated J.K.'s in-court testimony and thus impermissibly bolstered her credibility. The State counters that the statement was properly admitted because it was offered to rebut an express or implied charge by Caley that the victim resented Caley's harsh disciplinary measures and sought revenge against him.
In Modesitt v. State (1991), Ind., 578 N.E.2d 649, our supreme court adopted Federal Rule of Evidence 801(d)(1) governing the admissibility of prior statements as substantive evidence. Pursuant to Modesitt, certain statements made out of court by witnesses who testify at trial and are subject to cross-examination concerning the statements are admissible, under certain cireumstances. One such cireumstance is present when the statement is consistent with the declarant's trial testimony and is offered to rebut an express or implied charge against the declarant of recent fabrication or improper influence or motive, and the statement is made before the motive to fabricate arose. Evans v. State (1994), Ind., 643 N.E.2d 877, 882-83; Craig v. State (1994), Ind., 630 N.E.2d 207, 209, reh'g denied. Here, J.K.'s statement to Officer Farthing was consistent with her in-court testimony and she was subject to cross-examination concerning the statement. However, although the statement was offered by the State for the purpose of rebutting Caley's express or implied charge against J.K. of recent fabrication or improper influence or motive, the statement was not made before the alleged motive to fabricate arose. Rather, J.K.'s allegedly vengeful motive would have existed prior to the time that she tendered her statement to Officer Farthing. Inasmuch as the statement did not comply with all foundational requirements for the admission of a prior consistent statement, the trial court erred in admitting the statement into evidence.
Nonetheless, an error in the admission of hearsay warrants remedial action on appeal only if such error caused prejudice to the defendant's substantial rights. Hall v. State (1994), Ind.App., 634 N.E.2d 837, 843. Here, the contents of the statement neither explained nor elaborated upon the testimony already adduced at trial and were merely cumulative of the victim's earlier trial testimony. The admission of cumulative evidence is not prejudicial and by itself is not grounds for reversal. Tyson v. State (1993), Ind.App., 619 N.E.2d 276, 291, trans denied. We cannot say that Caley's substantial rights were harmed or that the jury's verdict was substantially swayed by the admission of the hearsay evidence. Thus, any error by the trial court was harmless.
Judgment affirmed.
SHARPNACK, C.J., concurs.
KIRSCH, J., concurs in part and dissents in part with separate opinion.
. Ind.Code § 35-42-4-3(c), amended by P.L. 79-1994 § 12. Now see LC. § 35-42-4-9(a).
. Ind.Code § 35-42-4-3(d), amended by P.L. 79-1994, § 15. Now see LC. 35-42-4-9(b).
. We observe that the statement of facts contained in Caley's brief consists of a summary of each witness's trial testimony. We have repeatedly stated that the appellate rules contemplate a narrative statement of the facts; a witness by witness summary of testimony is not a statement of facts within the meaning of Ind.Appellate Rule 8.3(A)(5). Hoover v. State (1991), Ind.App., 582 N.E.2d 403, adopted, (1992), Ind., 589 N.E.2d 243.
. See also Ind.Evidence Rule 412.

=== CASE 9737891 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:36:29.916338+00 ===

KIRSCH, Judge,
concurring in part and dissenting in part.
I concur with the majority's holding that the trial court properly excluded evidence of the prosecuting witness' alleged past sexual activity pursuant to our rape shield statute. I concur also with the majority's holdings that the admission into evidence of the vie-tim's prior consistent statement was error. It is from the majority's conclusions that the introduction of thé three photographs was not error and the admission of the prior statement was harmless that I respectfully dissent.
The three photographs at issue serve no purpose other than to prejudice the jury against the defendant. The prosecutor's comments in response to the defendant's relevancy objection are telling:
"First of all, counsel himself first raised this by introducing ... defendant's exhibit 'B' into evidence. A letter in which these three photographs were specifically referenced. He raised that part. And second of all, the information I believe is relevant to the question of what the defendant would have us believe about himself."
Record at 292. (Emphasis supplied). In actuality, the prosecutor first identified the three exhibits during the direct examination of the prosecuting witness, Record at 196, before the introduction of the letter to which the prosecutor refers. Record at 209-10. The prosecutor then had the photographs *58identified by four other witnesses without reference to the letter. Record at 217, 225, 290, 306. Finally, we have the prosecutor's own statement that the information is relevant to the defendant's character.
Similarly, the introduction of the prosecuting witness' written statement-a statement which was neither verified, nor dated-served no purpose other than to allow the prosecutor to repeat the testimony of such witness on rebuttal. It was this very "drumbeat of repetition" that our supreme court condemned in Modesitt v. State (1991), Ind., 578 N.E.2d 649, 653.
Child sexual abuse cases, such as that now before us, present unique challenges to the prosecution, the defense and the courts. Such cases inevitably turn upon the fact finder's determination of credibility of the prosecuting witness and of the defendant. The present case is no different. The jury chose to believe the prosecuting witness after the defendant's character was improperly impeached through prejudicial and irrelevant photographs and the witness' testimony was improperly bolstered by the introduction of the witness' prior consistent statement.
I would reverse the judgment of the trial court and remand for a new trial.

=== CASE 2212342 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:18.710331+00 ===

650 N.E.2d 58 (1995)
Howard D. COATES, Appellant-Defendant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee-Plaintiff.
No. 82A01-9408-CR-249.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, First District.
April 28, 1995.
Transfer Denied July 3, 1995.
*59 Jeffery L. Lantz, Jon Aarstad, Evansville, for appellant.
Pamela Carter, Atty. Gen., Preston W. Black, Deputy Atty. Gen., Indianapolis, for appellee.
OPINION
NAJAM, Judge.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
Howard D. Coates appeals from his conviction for operating a motor vehicle after having been adjudged an habitual traffic offender, a Class D felony. We affirm.
ISSUES
Coates presents three issues on appeal, which we consolidate and restate as:
1. Whether the trial court erred when it admitted evidence obtained in an investigatory stop of Coates' vehicle because police lacked a reasonable suspicion that Coates was driving with a suspended license.
2. Whether the trial court erred when it admitted into evidence certain copies of Coates' Bureau of Motor Vehicles driving records.
FACTS
On December 19, 1993, at approximately 4:00 p.m., Carolyn Presley reported to Evansville police a domestic violence disturbance at her residence. When Officers Brett Hilsmeyer and Donald Thompson arrived at Presley's apartment, she stated that she had an argument with Coates, who had been residing with Presley and her children on and off for about five years. Presley also informed police that Coates had left the residence before police arrived, that he was driving a late-model pick-up truck with distinctive features, and that Coates' driver's license was suspended.
Thereafter, Officers Hilsmeyer and Thompson left Presley's residence and resumed their regular patrol. At about 7:50 p.m. that same day, the officers observed a pick-up traveling in Evansville which matched the description given by Presley. Although they did not witness any moving violations, the officers pulled their patrol car behind the truck and activated the flashing lights. Once the truck stopped in a nearby parking lot, Officers Hilsmeyer and Thompson approached the truck and asked the driver for his driver's license and vehicle registration. The driver of the vehicle was *60 Coates. Coates stated that his license was suspended. The police then verified Coates' information, and learned that he was an habitual traffic offender and that his driver's license had been suspended from February 10, 1993, until February 9, 2003. Coates was placed under arrest.
Coates was charged with operating a motor vehicle after having been adjudged an habitual traffic offender, a Class D felony. Coates filed a motion to suppress and requested that the trial court suppress "the evidence and statements obtained after the December 19, 1993, stop... ." Record at 17-18. After a hearing, the trial court denied Coates' motion. Following a jury trial, Coates was convicted as charged and sentenced to three years imprisonment.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
Issue One: Investigatory Stop
Coates first contends the trial court erred when it admitted his statement to police that he had a suspended license and other evidence obtained after the investigatory stop. Specifically, Coates asserts that the arresting officers' reliance on "the unconfirmed report of a lay person" that Coates' license was suspended gave police "neither probable cause to arrest [him] nor an articulable suspicion to justify an investigatory stop." Brief of Appellant at 4-5. We disagree.
First, Coates has failed to preserve this issue for appellate review. In his motion to suppress filed before trial, Coates asserted that the investigatory stop was invalid. His motion was denied after a hearing. However, during his jury trial, Coates did not object to the admission of any evidence on the grounds that the investigatory stop was invalid. "Denial of a pretrial motion to suppress is not a final ruling; to preserve error, objection must be made when the evidence is introduced at trial." Helton v. State (1989), Ind., 539 N.E.2d 956, 957. This is because the error occurs with admission of the evidence. Id. Since Coates failed to object at trial, this issue has been waived.
Even absent waiver, Coates is not entitled to relief. Under appropriate circumstances, the police may stop a vehicle to investigate briefly the possibility of criminal activity, without having probable cause to make an arrest. State v. Nesius (1990), Ind. App., 548 N.E.2d 1201, 1203. In order to justify an investigatory stop, the police officer must be able to point to specific and articulable facts which, when considered together with the rational inferences drawn from those facts, create a reasonable suspicion of criminal conduct on the part of the vehicle's occupants. Id. The grounds for this suspicion must be based on the totality of the circumstances. Id.
We addressed a similar issue in State v. Smith (1994), Ind. App., 638 N.E.2d 1353. There, the arresting officer heard a police dispatch broadcast concerning a potential drunk driver which was based on a 911 call and on citizens band radio reports from a number of truck drivers. Id. at 1354. The dispatcher reported the license plate number, and make, model and color of the pick-up truck that had been observed by the callers. Id. Subsequently, a police officer observed a pickup with the same characteristics and a license plate number matching the one identified in the dispatch. Id. He then pulled over the truck and arrested the defendant, Smith, for drunk driving. Id.
Smith filed a motion to suppress. The trial court granted the motion and found that the officer's stop of the vehicle was illegal because "no police officer had personally observed any violation of traffic laws or impaired driving." Id. at 1355. On appeal, we reversed and held "[a]s a matter of law, that the specific and articulable facts possessed by Officer Jones gave him a reasonable suspicion that Smith's pickup was being operated by an impaired driver sufficient to sustain the legality of the investigatory stop." Id. at 1356. In other words, the fact that no traffic violations had occurred during the arresting officer's personal observations of the vehicle prior to the stop was not dispositive. A citizen's report to the dispatcher was adequate to provide the arresting officer with a "reasonable suspicion." See id.
The same reasoning applies here. Coates' girlfriend, Presley, informed Officers Hilsmeyer and Thompson that Coates had *61 left her residence, that his driver's license was suspended and that he was driving a distinctive pick-up truck. A few hours later, the officers observed a vehicle matching Presley's description of Coates' pick-up. Although they did not observe any moving violations, the officers stopped the vehicle and Coates was driving. Coates then admitted that his driver's license was, in fact, suspended.
We agree with the State that, "the specific and articulable facts possessed by the officers gave them a reasonable suspicion that Coates was operating a vehicle while his license was suspended sufficient to sustain the legality of the investigatory stop." Brief of Appellee at 7-8. Thus, we hold that the trial court did not err when it admitted Coates' statement to police made during the investigatory stop of his vehicle and any evidence obtained thereafter.
Issue Two: Admission of Driving Records
Coates next contends the trial court erred when it admitted into evidence copies of several documents obtained from the Bureau of Motor Vehicles ("BMV"), which were proffered by the State collectively as Exhibit 1. We disagree.
Exhibit 1 was offered into evidence pursuant to Trial Rule 44(A) and Evidence Rule 902 during the direct examination of Officer Hilsmeyer. The first document was a computer printout which provided:
I, Gilbert L. Holmes, Commissioner of the Indiana Bureau of Motor Vehicles and custodian of the Records therein, hereby certify that the attached is a full, true and complete copy of the record as it appears in the files of the Indiana Bureau of Motor Vehicles.
In testimony whereof, I and my duly authorized representative execute this certification and affix the seal of the Indiana Bureau of Motor Vehicles this eight [sic] day of March, 1994.
Record at 223. The stamped signature of "Gilbert L. Holmes, Commissioner" appeared beneath the certification. Then, directly below Holmes' stamped signature were the computer-generated initials "DCM." Record at 223.
Following the certification, pages 2, 3 and 4 consisted of a computer printout of Coates' "Indiana Official Driver Record." Record at 223. Page 5 was entitled "Certification of Notice Mailed" and also bore the handwritten initials of "DCM," a Certification Clerk. Record at 223. Further, pages 6 and 7 included copies of two letters entitled "Habitual Traffic Violator Notice of Suspension," and stated that Coates was an habitual traffic violator and that his driving privileges had been suspended for a ten-year period effective February 10, 1993. Record at 223. The letters were identical except for Coates' address. Pages 8 and 9 consisted of copies of a traffic citation showing that on October 28, 1992, Coates' driver's license had been suspended for one year. Finally, pages 10 and 11 of Exhibit 1 included two "Indiana Abstract of Court Record[s]," which indicated that Coates had been convicted of Operating While Intoxicated on April 4, 1986, and on April 23, 1987. Record at 223.
A. Authentication
Coates first asserts that the BMV documents in Exhibit 1 were not properly authenticated as required under Trial Rule 44(A)(1) because on the certification, Holmes' signature appeared as a stamp and DCM's initials were computer-generated. However, Coates has again failed to preserve this particular issue for appellate review. A party must object to an exhibit when it is offered and before it is admitted into evidence. Hartman v. State (1993), Ind. App., 615 N.E.2d 455, 459-60. The objection "must be full and comprehensive in pointing out the particular reason for the objection." Matter of Estate of Palamara (1987), Ind. App., 513 N.E.2d 1223, 1231; See Ind.Evidence Rule 103(a)(1).
Coates objected to admission of Exhibit 1 at the time it was initially offered on the grounds that (1) the included documents were hearsay and (2) the Certification of Notice Mailed should have been certified by the official who signed the two letters mailed to him, rather than by "DCM." The trial court admitted Exhibit 1 over Coates' objection. Some time later, after the redirect examination of Officer Thompson, Coates "expanded" his objection and asked the court *62 to reconsider admission of Exhibit 1 on the basis that the general certification by Holmes and DCM was improper. We agree with the State that Coates' contention that the certification was improper has been waived because he failed to make a timely objection on that ground prior to the trial court's admission of Exhibit 1.
Notwithstanding waiver, Coates' assertion has no merit. It is well-settled that the validity of a signature to a certification statement does not depend on it being executed "with pen and ink or any other specific instrument." Johnson v. State (1993), Ind., 622 N.E.2d 172, 174 (quoting James v. State (1985), Ind. App., 475 N.E.2d 1164, 1166). In Johnson, the supreme court considered the stamped signature of the Clerk of the Montgomery Circuit Court and held:
`[A] signing or subscribing may legally be done by another for the party to such an instrument, if done at his request, and ... it may be done with pen and ink, pencil, stamp, stencil, typewriter or type....'
Id. (citation omitted). Thus, in the present case, Holmes' signature stamp on page 1 of the exhibit was adequate.[1]
Likewise, the certification by DCM on Holmes' behalf, on the document entitled "Certification of Notice Mailed," was adequate. The letters "DCM" were handwritten in pen on that document. "When a person intends for the mark or name to represent his signature on a document, it meets the requirements of the law. Moreover, in certain instances, initials may constitute a legal signature." Brewer v. State (1993), Ind., 605 N.E.2d 181, 183. We hold that the BMV documents were properly authenticated under Trial Rule 44(A)(1). The trial court did not err.
B. Hearsay
Finally, Coates asserts that the BMV documents admitted as Exhibit 1 constituted inadmissible hearsay under Evidence Rules 802 and 803(8)(c).[2] Again, we disagree.
At trial, the State offered Exhibit 1 pursuant to Evidence Rule 902(1), as an exception to Rule 802. Rule 902(1) provides that "Domestic Public Documents" are self-authenticating when properly certified by a government official "in the manner provided by Trial Rule 44(A)(1)." As the State asserts, and as we have already determined, the BMV documents were properly authenticated.
Contrary to the State's argument at trial, Rule 902(1) does not in itself provide an exception to the hearsay rule. While self-authentication of a document under Rule 902(1) relieves the proponent from submitting foundational testimony as to authenticity it does not, unlike Indiana law before adoption of the Rules of Evidence,[3] guarantee admissibility. See 13A R. MILLER, INDIANA PRACTICE § 902.100, at 71 *63 (1995); G. WEISSENBERGER, Indiana Evidence 1995 Courtroom Manual § 902, at 240. Under the new rules, other issues such as hearsay must still be addressed when considering admissibility. See R. MILLER, at 72; G. WEISSENBERGER, at 240. In this regard, Coates is correct.
Nevertheless, on these facts, the trial court properly admitted Exhibit 1 over Coates' Rule 803(8)(c) objection. Before adoption of the Rules of Evidence, our courts consistently held that properly certified BMV records fell within the common law "official records exception" to the hearsay rule and, thus, were admissible. See Cruite v. State (1994), Ind., 641 N.E.2d 1264, 1265-66; Collins v. State (1991), Ind., 567 N.E.2d 798, 800; Mogle v. State (1984), Ind. App., 471 N.E.2d 1146, 1151; Warner v. State (1980), Ind. App., 406 N.E.2d 971, 973. Although according to one commentator, "Rule 803(8) is far more specific, and demands a far different analysis, than earlier Indiana law," we discern no reason why the BMV records in the present case should not be treated as public records admissible under Evidence Rule 803(8). 13 R. MILLER, INDIANA PRACTICE § 803.108, at 653 (1995); see State v. Morin (1991), Me., 598 A.2d 170, 172 (computer printout of driving record admissible under Maine Evidence Rule 803(8), which is substantially similar to Indiana rule).
The hearsay exception for public records "is based on the assumption that public officials perform their duties properly without motive or interest other than to submit accurate and fair reports." 13 R. MILLER, at 652; see Bradford Trust Co. v. Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner and Smith, Inc. (2d Cir.1986), 805 F.2d 49, 54. Consistent with that rationale, Rule 803(8) establishes a hearsay exception for three types of "records, reports, statements, or data compilations in any form, of a public office or agency... ." The first part of the rule provides an exception for records which set forth an agency's "regularly conducted and regularly recorded activities," while the second part provides an exception for "matters observed pursuant to duty imposed by law and as to which there was a duty to report... ." Ind.Evidence Rule 803(8).
Contrary to the "matters observed" provision of Rule 803(8), the exception for an agency's "regularly conducted and regularly recorded activities" does not require a statutory obligation to make the record. See 13 R. MILLER, at 655. Here, although the BMV is under a statutory duty to maintain records such as Coates' Official Driving Record and the Notice of Suspension mailed to him, we do not believe those records constitute "observations."[4]See IND. CODE § 9-14-3-7; see also Collins, 567 N.E.2d at 800. Rather, the BMV documents admitted as Exhibit 1 are a compilation of the BMV's "regularly conducted and regularly recorded activities" and, thus, fall within that hearsay exception in Rule 803(8). The judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
Affirmed.
ROBERTSON and HOFFMAN, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Contrary to Coates' contention on appeal, it is of no moment that in James we cited a statute which has since then been repealed and that in Johnson our supreme court cited James. The holding in James did not rely on and was not limited to former Indiana Code § 9-4-13-7.
[2]  Indiana Rule of Evidence 803 provides:
The following are not excluded by the hearsay rule, even though the declarant is available as a witness....
(8) Public Records and Reports. Unless the sources of information or other circumstances indicate lack of trustworthiness, records, reports, statements, or data compilations in any form, of a public office or agency, setting forth its regularly conducted and regularly recorded activities, or matters observed pursuant to duty imposed by law and as to which there was a duty to report, or factual findings resulting from an investigation made pursuant to authority granted by law. The following are not within this exception to the hearsay rule: (a) investigative reports by police and other law enforcement personnel, except when offered by an accused in a criminal case; (b) investigative reports prepared by or for a government, a public office, or an agency when offered by it in a case in which it is a party; (c) factual findings offered by the government in criminal cases; and (d) factual findings resulting from special investigation of a particular complaint, case, or incident, except when offered by an accused in a criminal case.
(Emphases added). Viewing Coates' assertion on appeal in light of his objection at trial, we interpret his argument to mean that the BMV documents in Exhibit 1 were specifically excluded from the exception to the hearsay rule in 803(8) by the limitation in section (c) of that rule.
[3]  See, e.g., Wright v. State (1977), 266 Ind. 327, 340, 363 N.E.2d 1221, 1228.
[4]  Contra Kindel v. State (1995), Ind. App., 649 N.E.2d 117, 119 (determination of habitual violator in BMV record based exclusively upon "matters observed pursuant to a duty imposed by law" and, thus, admissible under that hearsay exception in Evidence Rule 803(8)).

=== CASE 2212345 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:18.741956+00 ===

650 N.E.2d 245 (1995)
272 Ill.App.3d 132
208 Ill.Dec. 788
SADDLE SIGNS, INC., Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
James C. ADRIAN, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 3-94-0549.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Third District.
May 8, 1995.
*246 Anthony J. Nasharr III, Gregorio Nasharr, Chicago, for James C. Adrian.
James T. Bradley, James T. Bradley Associates, Joliet, for Saddle Signs, Inc.
Presiding Justice STOUDER delivered the opinion of the court:
Defendant, James C. Adrian, appeals from a judgement issued by the circuit court of Will county denying defendant's motion to dismiss plaintiff's first amended complaint. We hold there is no jurisdiction to hear this appeal.
Plaintiff, Saddle Signs, Inc., filed a breach of contract action against defendant. Plaintiff's complaint essentially alleged that the parties entered into an advertising display agreement and after several months defendant had owed plaintiff $3,700.00 under the terms of that agreement. Consequently, the parties terminated the contract and plaintiff commenced this lawsuit.
Defendant alleged he was not personally liable under the agreement because he signed it in his capacity as president of Saddle Club Inc. Consequently, defendant filed a motion for judgment on the pleadings or dismissal of plaintiff's complaint. The trial court denied this motion and granted defendant leave to file a motion for summary judgement. On December 16, 1993, plaintiff filed his first amended complaint. Defendant did not file a motion for summary judgment. However, he did file a motion to dismiss plaintiff's first amended complaint pursuant to section 2-619 of the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure (Code) (735 ILCS 5/2-619 (West 1992).) Not to be outdone, plaintiff filed his own motion entitled "Plaintiff's Cross Motion for Partial Summary Judgment on Liability" on May 25, 1994. On June 14, 1994, the trial court denied defendant's motion to dismiss as well as plaintiff's motion for summary judgment and set the case for trial. However, on the same day, plaintiff filed a motion for voluntary non-suit pursuant to section 2-1009 of the Code (735 ILCS 5/2-1009 (West 1992)) for the purpose of refiling his claim with a jury demand. The trial court granted plaintiff's motion. Defendant then filed his notice of appeal.
In his statement of jurisdiction, defendant states:
"Jurisdiction of this appeal to the Appellate Court of the Third Judicial District is based on the entry of an Order denying Defendant's Motion to Dismiss First Amended Complaint [sic] and the subsequent voluntary dismissal of the cause by Plaintiff, Saddle Signs, for the purpose of Plaintiff filing a new case against Defendants with a jury demand in accordance with Illinois Supreme Court Rule 303." Neither party has objected to the jurisdiction of this court. However, we have determined to consider the issue on our own motion.
A reviewing court must inquire into its jurisdiction and must decline to proceed in the cause where jurisdiction is lacking. (City Wide Carpet Inc. v. John (1980), 83 Ill. App.3d 538, 39 Ill.Dec. 81, 404 N.E.2d 465.) The parties cannot, either by failing to raise the question or by consent, confer jurisdiction to review an order if in fact the order *247 appealed from is not appealable. Liberty National Bank of Chicago v. City of Chicago (1951), 342 Ill.App. 328, 96 N.E.2d 663.
Defendant, in reality, is claiming jurisdiction pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 301. (Official Reports Advance Sheet No. 26 December 22, 1993, R. 301, eff. February 1, 1994.) However, subject to statutory exceptions, this rule only confers jurisdiction to review final judgements. (Maple Investment & Development Corp. v. Skore (1976), 38 Ill.App.3d 654, 348 N.E.2d 498.) A final judgement, for the purposes of determining whether the trial court judgement is appealable, is one which fixes, determines, and disposes of the parties' rights regarding litigation on some definite, separate part of litigation. Madison Mutual Insurance Co. v. Universal Underwriters Group (1993), 251 Ill.App.3d 13, 190 Ill.Dec. 401, 621 N.E.2d 270.
Applying these rules to the trial court's denial of defendant's 2-619 motion, we conclude this court has no jurisdiction to hear the appeal. However, the troubling issue presented by this case is whether a plaintiff's voluntary dismissal makes an otherwise nonappealable judgement appealable. In other words, whether we may consider the trial court's denial of defendant's motion to dismiss pursuant to section 2-619 of the Code simply because the trial court granted plaintiff's voluntary dismissal. We believe the voluntary dismissal did not confer jurisdiction.
First, we note the denial of a motion to dismiss is not a final and appealable judgement. (People v. American National Bank & Trust Co. (1965), 32 Ill.2d 115, 203 N.E.2d 897.) Furthermore, the denial of defendant's motion to dismiss does not fall within the purview of any of the Supreme Court Rules concerning interlocutory appeals. Consequently, the only possible jurisdictional basis from which this appeal may be heard is through section 2-1009 of the Code.
Plaintiff is generally entitled to voluntarily dismiss his case at any time before trial or hearing begins. (Riblet Products Corp. v. Starr National (1993), 242 Ill.App.3d 988, 183 Ill.Dec. 215, 611 N.E.2d 68; But see Gibellina v. Handley (1989), 127 Ill.2d 122, 129 Ill.Dec. 93, 535 N.E.2d 858 (a trial court may hear and decide a motion which has been filed prior to a section 2-1009 motion when that motion, if favorably ruled on by the court, could result in a final disposition of the case.) Plaintiffs' motivations for utilizing this rule are irrelevant. (Estate of Jackson v. Smith (1987), 183 Ill.App.3d 663, 133 Ill. Dec. 679, 541 N.E.2d 1117.) Furthermore, plaintiffs' absolute right to voluntary dismissal without prejudice is not affected by any hardship to the defendant. (Kendle v. Village of Downers Grove (1987), 156 Ill.App.3d 545, 109 Ill.Dec. 62, 509 N.E.2d 723.) Finally, we note the most common uses for this rule are to enable plaintiffs to correct technical errors in their pleadings. (Kern v. Peabody Coal Co. (1987), 151 Ill.App.3d 807, 104 Ill.Dec. 662, 502 N.E.2d 1322) (plaintiff who waives his right to jury trial by failing to file a timely jury demand has an absolute right to voluntarily dismiss his case without prejudice and refile with a jury demand.)
Notwithstanding the seemingly simple use of this important procedural device, the uses and effects of voluntary dismissals have traditionally caused great concern in our courts. (Cardenas v. Village of Oak Brook (1989), 178 Ill.App.3d 605, 127 Ill.Dec. 865, 533 N.E.2d 947.) Section 2-1009 has exerted significant trepidation throughout its long and storied history. Nevertheless, we must begin our analysis with Kahle v. John Deere Co (1984), 104 Ill.2d 302, 84 Ill.Dec. 650, 472 N.E.2d 787. In Kahle, our Supreme Court held that a voluntary dismissal was a final and appealable order. (Kahle, 104 Ill.2d 302, 84 Ill.Dec. 650, 472 N.E.2d 787.) However, defendants alone were given the right to appeal a trial court's decision to grant a voluntary dismissal. The court's rationale was straightforward. Plaintiffs could not appeal because they had an absolute right to refile their case within one year of a voluntary dismissal. Thus, following the logic of Flores v. Dugan (1982), 91 Ill.2d 108, 61 Ill.Dec. 783, 435 N.E.2d 480, plaintiffs were and are protected from prejudice. However, defendants, unlike plaintiffs, have no recourse to address potential prejudices associated *248 with voluntary dismissals. Specifically, the court reasoned:
"if there is no review of the case, no court will be able to determine whether the trial court correctly decided that a trial or hearing had not begun and therefore correctly entered an order dismissing the case without prejudice." Kahle 104 Ill.2d at 306, 84 Ill.Dec. at 652, 472 N.E.2d at 789. Consequently, in order to remedy these potentially prejudicial results, the court granted defendants the ability to argue the substantive merits of the voluntary dismissal on appeal. Kahle did not go so far as to make voluntary dismissals the jurisdictional basis from which nonappealable judgements could be appealed. Rather, the Court made it abundantly clear that the only proper subject on appeal was the propriety of granting a voluntary dismissal.
In O'Connell v. St. Francis Hospital (1986), 112 Ill.2d 273, 97 Ill.Dec. 449, 492 N.E.2d 1322, the court extended the Kahle rationale to address yet another concern associated with the granting of a 2-1009 motion. In O'Connell the supreme court held where a plaintiff relies on sections 2-1009 and 13-217 (735 ILCS 5/13-217 (West 1992)) in response to a pending Rule 103(b) (Official Reports Advance Sheet No. 26 December 22, 1993, R. 103(b), eff. February 1, 1994) motion, the Rule 103(b) motion must be heard on its merits prior to a ruling on plaintiff's motion to dismiss under section 2-1009. O'Connell 112 Ill.2d at 283, 97 Ill.Dec. at 454, 492 N.E.2d at 1327.
This holding is important for two reasons. First, it acknowledges and furthers the legitimate goal of a fair and expeditious judiciary. Second, it implicitly extends the Kahle reasoning to yet another situation where a defendant may be potentially prejudiced through a plaintiff's use of a voluntary dismissal. Specifically, where plaintiffs fail to exercise due diligence in their service of process defendant's may move for a dismissal with prejudice. (But see, Gibellina, 127 Ill.2d 122, 129 Ill.Dec. 93, 535 N.E.2d 858 (O'Connell should be read and applied narrowly).) Consequently, the court's holding recognizes and addresses yet another potential prejudice against defendants. See also Catlett v. Novak (1987), 116 Ill.2d 63, 106 Ill.Dec. 786, 506 N.E.2d 586.
Finally, in Gibellina, 127 Ill.2d 122, 129 Ill.Dec. 93, 535 N.E.2d 858, the supreme court once again considered the extent to which defendants are prejudiced by plaintiffs' use of voluntary dismissals. Gibellina involved the appealability of orders granting summary judgment on behalf of defendants while denying motions for summary judgement on behalf of plaintiffs.
First, the supreme court stated these cases were representative of the many ways in which plaintiffs utilize the voluntary dismissal statute in potentially abusive and innocuous ways. (Gibellina, 127 Ill.2d at 130, 129 Ill.Dec. at 97, 535 N.E.2d at 862.) It noted that plaintiffs' use of section 2-1009 as a sword in order to avoid potentially adverse rulings or decisions on the merits rather than to correct procedural or technical defects has caused a severe strain on our judiciary. (Gibellina (1989), 127 Ill.2d at 137, 129 Ill.Dec. at 100, 535 N.E.2d at 865.) However, the court declined an invitation to alter our statutory scheme and follow the Federal Rule pertaining to voluntary dismissals. Rather, to address the misuse, it prospectively modified the standards applicable to voluntary dismissals. Specifically, the supreme court held that trial courts could hear and decide motions filed prior to a section 2-1009 motion when the motions, if favorably ruled on by the court, could result in a final disposition of the case. (Gibellina (1989), 127 Ill.2d at 138, 129 Ill.Dec. at 101, 535 N.E.2d at 866.) However the court neither explicitly mentioned nor implicitly condoned the appealability of the underlying judgements.
At this point we must briefly pause and note that Kahle, O'Connell, and Gibellina involved factual situations different in kind from that presented here today. In this case, we have a defendant taking advantage of plaintiff's proper use of section 2-1009 in order to ask this court to review an otherwise nonappealable judgement. Nevertheless, implicit in each case is a concern over the manner in which a voluntary dismissal is used as well as the effect its use has on the judiciary. This is a concern that we share today. Accordingly, we look to and adopt *249 the reasoning outlined in these cases. Based on this reasoning, we refuse to extend jurisdiction to hear the substantive merits of the trial court's denial of defendant's 2-619 motion. However, before we continue, we must once again pause and examine two other recent cases.
In Edward E. Gillen Co. v. Lake Forest (1991), 221 Ill.App.3d 5, 163 Ill.Dec. 585, 581 N.E.2d 739, plaintiff filed an amended complaint against the City of Lake Forest (Lake Forest) and Valders Stone and Marbel Inc. (Valders) on August 31, 1989. Plaintiff then, voluntarily dismissed without prejudice all claims against Valders on February 15, 1990. Counts IV through IX were directed against Lake Forest. Count IX was dismissed for failing to state a cause of action. Then, the court granted Lake Forest's motion forjudgement on the pleadings as to damages. The judgement did not contain Supreme Court Rule 304(a) (Official Reports Advance Sheet No. 26 December 22, 1993, R. 304(a), eff. February 1, 1994.) language. The trial court then granted plaintiff's motion to voluntarily dismiss the remainder of his cause of action against Lake Forest. Following the voluntary dismissal, plaintiff appealed both the trial court's dismissal of count IX of his amended complaint and the judgement on the pleadings in favor of Lake Forest.
On appeal, Lake Forest argued the appellate court lacked jurisdiction. The court disagreed. Plaintiff was not appealing the voluntary dismissal, but rather the underlying judgements dismissing count IX of his amended complaint and granting judgement on the pleadings in favor of the defendant. The court reasoned the voluntary dismissal disposed of all matters pending before the trial court concerning plaintiff's cause of action. Consequently, the previous judgements entered in the case became final and appealable at that time. (Gillen, 221 Ill. App.3d at 10, 163 Ill.Dec. at 588, 581 N.E.2d at 742.) Therefore, once the trial court granted plaintiff's motion to voluntarily dismiss his case, the jurisdictional basis to hear the otherwise nonappealable judgements was established.
The appellate court employed somewhat similar reasoning in Kleiman v. Northwestern Memorial Hospital (1993), 253 Ill.App.3d 47, 192 Ill.Dec. 324, 625 N.E.2d 284. Kleiman involved a medical malpractice action which the physician (one of the defendants) moved to dismiss for lack of timely proper service. The motion to dismiss with prejudice was granted as to the adult plaintiffs and without prejudice as to the minor plaintiffs. Discovery continued. Then, approximately two years after the dismissal, the trial court granted plaintiff's motion for a voluntary nonsuit pursuant to section 2-1009 of the Code. Plaintiff, appealed the judgement granting the physician's motion to dismiss. The physician moved to dismiss, arguing the appellate court lacked jurisdiction. Prior to hearing the appeal, plaintiff refiled his four count complaint.
The court looked to Reagan v. Baird (1985), 140 Ill.App.3d 58, 94 Ill.Dec. 151, 487 N.E.2d 1028, Howard v. Druckemiller (1992), 238 Ill.App.3d 937, 183 Ill.Dec. 148, 611 N.E.2d 1, and Gillen, 221 Ill.App.3d 5, 163 Ill.Dec. 585, 581 N.E.2d 739. In Howard, the court held that voluntary dismissals constitute final, appealable judgements supporting plaintiffs' appeals when trial courts make prejudicial rulings on a portion of a case before the balance of the case is dismissed without prejudice to refiling. Likewise, in Reagan, the court noted that a judgement, such as a voluntary dismissal, is final and appealable where it is entered "with prejudice" as to at least some of the parties or claims.
After this analysis, the Kleiman court reasoned that once plaintiffs voluntarily dismissed the remaining defendants, the order of dismissal with prejudice as to the adult plaintiffs could be the subject of an appeal without requisite 304(a) language. (Kleiman, 253 Ill.App.3d at 53, 192 Ill.Dec. at 328, 625 N.E.2d at 288.) However, the court held that it did not have jurisdiction to hear the minor plaintiff's appeal since the dismissal was entered without prejudice and he was not precluded from refiling his claim. Finally, because plaintiffs chose to refile their claim, hearing the appeal would violate the policy of avoiding piece-meal appeals. Accordingly, while the underlying dismissal became a final judgement due to the voluntary *250 dismissal, it transformed once again into a non-final judgement once the adult plaintiffs refiled their case. Kleiman, 253 Ill.App.3d at 53, 192 Ill.Dec. at 329, 625 N.E.2d at 289.
At this point, we note our research has not yielded any further cases which directly affect the issue involved in this case. Specifically, we have not found any cases in which a voluntary dismissal has been the jurisdictional basis from which this court has heard the substantive merits of a trial court's denial of a motion to dismiss. Furthermore, we acknowledge that while the cases we have outlined do not directly resolve the issue presented before us today, they do, nonetheless, illustrate a serious trend with the use and effect of voluntary dismissals. Consequently, we believe they are essential in our analysis.
Gillen, Kleiman, Reagan, and Howard all involve appeals from judgements which were granted in favor of the moving party. They did not involve a situation, as we have here, in which a trial court heard and denied a potentially dispositive motion. Simply put, the appeals stemmed from prejudicial rulings and the courts made special note of this fact. However, there was no such prejudicial ruling in the case before us. In the present case, the trial court denied defendant's 2-619 motion. This prejudiced no one, nor is there any assertion that the granting of plaintiffs voluntary dismissal somehow affected defendant's rights in the case. While we concede plaintiff's proper use of the voluntary dismissal may have created some hardship for the defendant, this fact alone is not now, nor has it ever been sufficient to establish jurisdiction.
It is the issue of potential prejudice which has been paramount throughout the history of voluntary dismissals. Defendants were originally given the right to appeal the granting of voluntary dismissals because of their susceptibility to potential prejudice. Potential prejudice in Kahle concerned the propriety of the dismissal with respect to a trial court's legal determination of whether a trial or hearing had not yet begun. (Kahle 104 Ill.2d at 306, 472 N.E.2d at 789.) Furthermore, on every occasion in which the supreme court has revisited the rule, the central focus continued to be the elimination of potential prejudice. The supreme court has never mentioned, either expressly or implicitly that a trial court's denial of a motion to dismiss is a proper subject for review simply because a plaintiff chose to exercise his right to voluntarily dismiss his case. The reason is simple. Defendants are not prejudiced simply because a trial court denies their motion to dismiss. This is especially true where plaintiffs properly used a section 2-1009 motion in order to refile their case with a jury demand. Therefore, we simply are not in a position to arbitrarily create jurisdiction where none exists. Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
SLATER and HOLDRIDGE, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9737892 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:36:34.455891+00 ===

SABERS, Justice.
The State appeals a magistrate court order dismissing a charge of manslaughter in the second degree against Michael K. Olsen.
Facts.
About 5:00 p.m. on May 24, 1989, Olsen was driving a tractor west on Highway 46, approximately one mile east of the Beres-ford city limits. Visibility was good as it was a clear, sunny day. Olsen entered the highway from a field where he had been working and was travelling between five and fifteen miles per hour. After travel-ling approximately one-half mile on the highway, Olsen pulled over to the side of the road to allow a car that was following him to pass. A second vehicle, driven by Lloyd Saugstad, was a short distance farther back.
Shortly after pulling over to the side of the road, Olsen turned left toward a gravel road leading to his parents’ home. As he was crossing the eastbound lane of the highway, the front of the tractor was struck by a car travelling east in that lane. The collision resulted in the immediate death of the driver of the eastbound vehicle. When Saugstad approached the accident scene, Olsen ran from the tractor saying “I didn’t see it.” After rescue personnel arrived, Olsen was taken to the Beres-ford clinic and treated for shock.
The State filed a complaint against Olsen on May 30, 1989, charging him with one count of manslaughter in the second degree. A preliminary hearing was held on July 27, 1989. At the hearing, Saugstad testified that he saw the eastbound vehicle coming and knew that a crash was imminent when Olsen turned his tractor. The South Dakota highway patrol trooper who investigated the accident testified that he interviewed Olsen the evening of the accident. Olsen told the trooper that before attempting to make his turn he looked both behind and forward, but did not see the approaching vehicle.
Following the presentation of the State’s case at the preliminary hearing, Olsen moved to dismiss the complaint against him. The magistrate granted Olsen’s motion and dismissed the manslaughter charge because “the factual situation fails to meet the burden to sustain a charge of felony manslaughter.” The State petitioned this court for permission to appeal the intermediate order of the magistrate court. ' We granted the petition, but deny the relief sought.
*476
Standard of review.
A preliminary hearing is held to determine whether “from the evidence it appears that there is probable cause to believe that an offense has been committed and that the defendant committed it.” SDCL 23A-4-6. The State bears the burden of introducing evidence tending to show that probable cause exists. State v. Oakie, 311 N.W.2d 45 (S.D.1981). The State satisfies its burden when “there is sufficient evidence to justify further inquiry by a trial.” State v. Lohnes, 432 N.W.2d 77, 82 (S.D.1988). The evidence justifies further inquiry when the State has established “a prima facie case against the defendant from which the trier of fact could conclude the defendant was guilty of the offense as charged.” State v. Anderson, 612 P.2d 778, 783 (Utah 1980). In other words, the State must introduce evidence that, if true, will establish each element of the crime charged.
If the State fails to establish probable cause, then the committing magistrate shall dismiss the complaint. SDCL 23A-4-7. The magistrate’s determination regarding the existence of probable cause shall not be disturbed upon review unless a clear abuse of discretion is demonstrated. People v. Doss, 406 Mich. 90, 276 N.W.2d 9 (1979); accord People v. Paille, 383 Mich. 621, 178 N.W.2d 465 (1970); State v. Mitchell, 104 Idaho 493, 660 P.2d 1336 (1983), cert. denied, 461 U.S. 934, 103 S.Ct. 2101, 77 L.Ed.2d 308 (1983). While the reviewing court may not agree with the magistrate’s decision, it may not substitute its judgment for that of the magistrate, except in a case of a clear abuse of discretion. Doss, supra; Paille, supra.
Recklessness requires a conscious disregard of a risk.
SDCL 22-16-20 treats “[a]ny reckless killing” as manslaughter in the second degree.1 The definition of “reckless” for the purpose of this statute is set forth in SDCL 22-1-2(1)(d). State v. Martin, 449 N.W.2d 29 (S.D.1989). That definition states:
The words “reckless, recklessly” and all derivatives thereof, import a conscious and unjustifiable disregard of a substantial risk that the offender’s conduct may cause a certain result or may be of a certain nature. A person is reckless with respect to circumstances when he consciously and unjustifiably disregards a substantial risk that such circumstances may exist[.]
In other words, for someone’s conduct to be deemed reckless, they must consciously disregard a substantial risk. Consequently, someone cannot be reckless if they are unaware of the risk their behavior creates as they cannot disregard that risk if they are unaware of it. As the North Dakota Supreme Court has stated: “In order that conduct be considered reckless it must create a high degree of risk of which the actor is actually aware.” State v. Anderson, 336 N.W.2d 634, 637 (N.D.1983) (emphasis added).
Recklessness requires more than ordinary negligent conduct. Evidence of carelessness, inadvertence or other similar behavior is insufficient to sustain a conviction where reckless conduct is required. See People v. Buffington, 61 Misc.2d 429, 304 N.Y.S.2d 746 (1969), rev’d on other grounds, 35 A.D.2d 1063, 316 N.Y.S.2d 481 (1970). The difference between reckless behavior and negligent behavior is primarily measured by the state of mind of the individual. As explained in 1 C. Torcia, Wharton’s Criminal Law § 27 at 140 (1978):
The difference between the terms “recklessly” and “negligently”, as usually defined, is one of kind, rather than of degree. Each actor creates a risk of harm. The reckless actor is aware of the risk and disregards it; the negligent actor is *477not aware of the risk but should have been aware of it.
(Emphasis in original). The same idea is expressed in Treiman, Recklessness and the Model Penal Code, 9 Am.J.Crim.L. 281, 351 (1981):
It is the concept of conscious disregard that distinguishes recklessness from negligence. The negligent actor fails to perceive a risk that he ought to perceive. The reckless actor perceives or is conscious of the risk, but disregards it.
Consequently, outwardly identical actions by two people may be reckless behavior for one, but only negligent behavior for the other.
Although it is not always possible for the State to directly establish that a defendant was aware of a risk, it can be done indirectly through the defendant’s conduct. Awareness can be established if the defendant acts in a manner that indicates a reckless disregard for the safety of others. However, the operation of a motor vehicle in violation of the law is not in and of itself sufficient to constitute reckless conduct, even if a person is killed as a result thereof. See State v. Wallin, 195 N.W.2d 95 (Iowa 1972); State v. Kellison, 233 Iowa 1274, 11 N.W.2d 371 (1943); Commonwealth v. Clowser, 212 Pa.Super. 208, 239 A.2d 870 (1968). As explained in Commonwealth v. Kaulback, 256 Pa.Super. 13, 389 A.2d 152, 154-155 (1978), the evidence must show more than a mere violation of the law before criminal responsibility for a death will arise:
[N]ot every violation of law or unlawful act in the operation of a motor vehicle will render the operator criminally responsible for deaths which may result. Such an operator, to be criminally responsible, must evidence a disregard of human life or an indifference to the consequences of his acts. This is based on the sound principle that there must be found from the evidence some degree of culpable behavior or reckless disregard for the safety of others before a conviction may be sustained.
Criminal responsibility for death resulting from the operation of a motor vehicle in violation of the law will result only if the violation is done in such a manner as to evidence a reckless disregard for the safety of others. Mere carelessness or inadvertence or thoughtless omission is insufficient. Buffington, supra.
In the present case, the State has failed to introduce evidence of Olsen’s conduct that would rise above the level of negligence. Nothing in the evidence of Olsen’s behavior suggests that he was in any way aware of the risk he was creating when he turned his tractor towards the gravel road. Although it appears he did not properly yield the right-of-way,2 as the court explained in Clowser, supra: “We are of the opinion that a mere failure to yield the right-of-way is not such evidence of culpable or criminal negligence as will support the charge of involuntary manslaughter.” Id. 239 A.2d at 873 (quoting Commonwealth v. Humphrey, 14 Law.L.J. 145 (1955)). The State has failed to offer evidence indicating that Olsen’s failure to yield the right-of-way was done in such a manner as to suggest a reckless disregard for the safety of others. While the State need not introduce evidence that Olsen could foresee a death resulting from his conduct, the State must introduce evidence that would allow a trier of fact to conclude that Olsen was aware of the dangerous nature of his conduct. Since the State has failed to introduce such evidence, we cannot say that the magistrate court abused its discretion in dismissing the complaint against Olsen. SDCL 23A-4-7.3 As indicated above, the magistrate’s determination regarding the existence of probable cause shall not be disturbed on appeal un*478less a clear abuse of discretion4 is demonstrated. Doss, supra; Paille, supra.
MORGAN, J., concurs.
HENDERSON, J., concurs with a writing.
WUEST, J., concurs specially.
MILLER, C.J., concurs in result without a writing.
. SDCL 22-16-20 provides:
Any reckless killing of one human being by the act or procurement of another which, under the provisions of this chapter, is neither murder nor manslaughter in the first degree, nor excusable nor justifiable homicide, is manslaughter in the second degree. Manslaughter in the second degree is a Class 4 felony.
. When the driver of a vehicle is making a left turn at an intersection, SDCL 32-26-19 requires the driver to yield the right-of-way to oncoming traffic. In addition, SDCL 32-26-6 requires that a vehicle remain in a single traffic lane unless the driver determines it is safe to do otherwise.
. SDCL 23A-4-7 provides in part that "[t]he discharge of a defendant does not preclude a prosecuting attorney from instituting a subsequent prosecution for the same offense.”
. In this case, the magistrate did not choose between conflicting facts, but merely determined that the facts, as presented by the State, did not establish each element of the crime charged. It is settled law that such a decision is within the magistrate’s discretion:
[I]f the inference that the accused committed a felony is so weak that drawing it still does not establish a plausible account of probable guilt, it is within the discretion of the magistrate to decline to find probable cause to bind him over for trial.
State v. Dunn, 121 Wis.2d 389, 359 N.W.2d 151, 155 (1984) (quoting from State’s brief) (emphasis added). The inference that Olsen consciously disregarded a substantial risk because it was a clear day and somebody else was able to see the decedent's vehicle is too weak to establish a plausible account of probable guilt.

=== CASE 9737893 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:36:34.460211+00 ===

HENDERSON, Justice
(concurring).
Commonplace it is to have appeals by the State of South Dakota briefed and argued by the Attorney General’s office; however, this ease was briefed and then argued by the State’s Attorney of Union County at the State Capitol.
In his argument, the State’s Attorney lamented that lacking a manslaughter conviction “all we can do is to go careless driving” and “get a fine out of him.” The implication was clear (and he so argued): South Dakota should have some law on the books to prosecute an offender whose criminal acts fall between “manslaughter” and “careless driving” — if “reckless driving” does not fit the facts. His brief reflects that only a $65.00 fine for careless driving would ensue herein if a manslaughter charge is dismissed, expressing further that this is not good public policy.
Mr. State’s Attorney expressed in argument that he “wanted the law changed”— referring to the statutory scheme.
If indeed, it was the decisional law of this state which Mr. State's Attorney now wants changed, I would rebuff such argument, also. Historically, this Court has demanded a showing of conduct far more egregious than this set of facts to establish a manslaughter conviction via reckless driving. Under SDCL 22-l-2(l)(d) there must be a “conscious and unjustifiable disregard of a substantial risk that the offender’s conduct may cause a certain result or may be of a certain nature.” Under this set of facts, such a mental state does not exist. We have no excessive speed nor drinking of intoxicants involved. Olsen was not using a controlled substance. Olsen’s speed, through testimony, was estimated being between 5 and 15 miles per hour. No testimony regarding the speed of decedent’s automobile was presented. Such absence or lack of proof does not militate well for the State’s proof. It weakens the State’s case greatly, in my opinion. This accident happened on a country road with a young farm boy operating a tractor, in low gear, pulling a disk. The point of impact suggests that Olsen was over V2, if not %, through his left-handed turn towards his parents’ farmstead. An eyewitness to the accident, one Lloyd Saugstad, saw the decedent’s car come over a hill. He opined that a collision was imminent. He further expressed that the accident took place “in a matter of seconds.” Saugstad further testified, that as he watched the car approach, “he’ll surely slow up now.” Repeatedly, Olsen who was stunned and went into shock requiring hospitalization, cried out: “I didn’t see it, I didn’t see.” Obviously he did not for, if he had, he would not have made the ill fated turn. And so, for this mistake of judgment (not seeing the approaching vehicle) must he/should he be prosecuted for a state penitentiary offense? I think not.
Is this a case, factually, akin to State v. Bennett, 326 N.W.2d 720 (S.D.1980) (alcohol and excessive speed)? No. Or does it mirror the factual scenario in State v. Siedschlaw, 304 N.W.2d 102 (S.D.1981) (a wild, high speed chase through a busy, heavily trafficked municipality)? No. Can *479one urge that it resembles State v. Martin, 449 N.W.2d 29 (S.D.1989) (wherein a stalled, abandoned garbage truck was left in the busy traffic lane of an interstate highway, without lights during late night hours)? No. The above cited cases were instances where this Court interpreted second degree manslaughter in the context of a vehicular death occurring on a highway or heavily trafficked street. We should stand by our decisional law.
Error of judgment Olsen apparently made by failing to yield. One may describe it as a thoughtless omission. But if “negligent” or “careless” driving or a thoughtless omission spawns manslaughter prosecutions in this state, the courts will be flooded with these types of prosecutions. If there is a vacuum in the law, i.e., a blind spot between manslaughter and careless driving, our Legislators, at the State Capitol, should fill the gap. It’s not our job.
In my opinion, this young man’s mistake of judgment instills or creates less outrage than a punishment which might flow from further prosecution. Therefore, the Forces of Law, in this instance the Criminal Law, is duty-bound to give way to the ordinary feelings of mankind and to, also, a practical application of the Law itself.
No clear abuse of discretion existing on the part of the Law Trained Magistrate, I would affirm his decision. State v. Oakie, 311 N.W.2d 45 (S.D.1981). A jury should not deliberate upon a felony charge if the elements of the crime are not before the court, regardless of the hierarchial category of that particular court.

=== CASE 9737911 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:36:50.403243+00 ===

SHINN, P. J.
Appeal from a judgment for defendants following the sustaining of their demurrer to plaintiffs’ second amended complaint.
Plaintiffs brought an action which they labeled as one for declaratory relief and breach of contract. The complaint alleged that plaintiffs and defendant King “orally agreed to a joint venture purchase” of certain real property for the purpose of erecting and operating a “bowling, restaurant and bar business enterprise”; "without the knowledge and consent of plaintiffs, King entered into an agreement to purchase the property; defendants Edwhite Building Company and Ebern Building Company acquired King’s right to purchase the property and also acquired all the stock of defendant corporation Kingpin Lanes, Inc., which had acquired a liquor license in connection with the enterprise; defendants Firks and Alexander represented to plaintiffs that one Edmunds, or his company, had put up money for the purchase of the property and had advanced other money but wished to withdraw “subject to certain rights in defendant King and reimbursement for all moneys expended and advanced”; they, Firks and Alexander, could obtain extraordinary financing and desired “operating partners”; plaintiffs and said defendants agreed they would become joint venturers in the enterprise to acquire the interests of the other defendants and share jointly the costs and obligations of the enterprise; two corporations were to be formed, one to acquire the property and the other to lease it from the former; defendants would obtain the financing and with plaintiffs would share equally in the “required cash investment”; 45 shares of the stock in each corporation would be issued to defendants and an equal number to plaintiffs, plus an additional “override” of 10 shares of special nonvoting stock.
The crucial question and the one that is discussed in the briefs is whether the facts alleged in the complaint are sufficient to show that the parties entered into an enforceable agreement.
It is clear from the allegations of the complaint that neither plaintiffs nor defendants understood or intended this alleged oral agreement to be anything more than a preliminary step toward the negotiation of an agreement which would be reduced to writing and adequate to express the agreement *431of the parties with respect to acquisition of the property, the financing, erection and operation of facilities, and the rights and duties of the respective parties in the enterprise. There was merely an agreement to endeavor to agree upon the terms and conditions of a written contract. This understanding is disclosed by additional allegations of the complaint, viz.: “The said parties orally agreed to and did retain defendant Firks ’ attorney, Raymond C. Sandler, to render the necessary legal services to acquire the said real property and to create the necessary entities, and on July 5, 1960, plaintiff Reich on behalf of himself and plaintiff Levy wrote to Attorney Sandler and to defendant Firks as follows:”1
It was further alleged: “Neither the defendant Firks nor the defendant Alexander objected to said memorandum letter *432of July, 5, 1960; on the contrary, Attorney Sandler on behalf of said defendants and on July 13, 1960, proceeded to implement the said memorandum letter by the following memorandum addressed to the defendant Edmunds, copy to plaintiff Reich, as follows:”2
A further allegation was that plaintiffs have performed all the covenants and conditions of their letter to Sandler except as performance was prevented by defendants, who not only failed and refused to perform but acquired the property and have been operating the facilities without the consent and to *433the exclusion of plaintiffs. It is clear from the complaint that plaintiffs are relying not upon their alleged oral agreement to engage in a nebulous business enterprise but upon the letter to Sandler and his memorandum to Edmunds and Firks.
Plaintiffs outlined their proposals to Sandler in writing and apparently gave him additional information; a copy went to defendant Firks. Sandler prepared and submitted to Edmunds an agreement for acquisition of the property by plaintiffs and Firks and Alexander. Although it was alleged that defendants did not object to the proposals, it was also alleged that they decided to and did exclude plaintiffs from the enterprise and engaged in it for themselves.
It is elementary that parties are not bound by proposals or promises they make in an attempt to negotiate a contract that is to be reduced to writing as a complete and final memorial of the matters upon which they have reached agreement, if the negotiations have left to future agreement any matter that is essential to a complete understanding of the .obligations which they propose, respectively, to assume. (Louis Lesser Enterprises, Ltd. v. Roeder, 209 Cal.App.2d 401 [25 Cal.Rptr. 917].)
The project the parties proposed to engage in consisted of buying out other persons who had property interests that must be acquired, the purchase of real property, the construction thereon of a bowling alley, restaurant and bar, which the parties would operate. Unless they accomplished these purposes there would be no joint venture, but only a plan that had failed of accomplishment. An agreement to engage in a joint venture, like any other agreement, in order to be enforceable, must define the obligations intended to be assumed with sufficient certainty to enable a court, when comparing the conduct of the parties with their agreement, to determine whether the respective obligations have been performed or breached.
As previously stated, it appears from the complaint that the parties did not understand or intend themselves to be bound by their tentative oral agreements, nor by any agreement until the matters as to which there was a meeting of the minds were evidenced by a writing duly executed. This, in itself, is a sufficient reason for affirmance of the judgment. However, in our discussion, it will be made clear that there is another reason for affirmance, namely, that the oral agreement, itself, was so vague and incomplete as to be unenforceable.
In the original complaint it was alleged that defendants *434represented they could obtain “extraordinary financing” and that it was agreed that plaintiffs and defendants would share equally “the required cash investment.” In the second amended complaint it was alleged that defendants agreed “to obtain the financing” and that plaintiffs and defendants would “share jointly the costs and the obligations of the enterprise.” It was necessary to buy out King’s undeseribed interest and it was proposed to pay $25,000, if a purchase could be arranged, and it was also necessary to buy out the interest of Edmunds by payment of the amount he had invested and loaned. If those things should be accomplished, the land would be acquired and the bowling alley, the restaurant and the bar would be constructed and equipped. It was not alleged that agreement had been reached as to the amount the parties would be willing to pay King or Edmunds if they were willing to sell, or whether the bowling alley, the restaurant and the bar would be large or small, or what they would cost, or what the land would cost. The “financing” of the venture, no doubt, would have necessitated the borrowing of a large amount of money. What proportion of the total cost could be borrowed and upon what terms, and who would be obligated to repay it? And who would provide the difference between the total cost and the amount that could be borrowed from a third party? Were defendants to advance the amount as a loan, as a part of the “financing,” or was the amount to be paid in by plaintiffs and defendants in equal amounts ?
It appears from the complaint that plaintiffs were wanted as “operators,” as well as partners, and that for their services they were to receive 10 per cent of the profits of the enterprise in addition to their ownership of 45 per cent of the stock of the corporations. It was not alleged that an agreement had been reached as to what the duties or authority of plaintiffs, or either of them, would be in the capacity of operators. It was an important feature of the project and it could well be that the parties could not agree upon the nature of the services to be rendered, or upon the time for which they would have to be rendered in order to earn as compensation an extra amount of stock. Was it for a year, or as long as the business would be operated ?
The alleged oral agreement was, at most, an agreement to endeavor to agree upon these fundamental and essential features of what was hoped to be a joint venture. The letter of plaintiffs to Mr. Sandler was, at most, a proposal as the basis of an agreement to be drafted by Sandler, to be submitted for *435the approval of plaintiffs and defendants. An agreement was drawn and submitted. Plaintiffs have been careful not to allege the contents of the agreement. Obviously, they were not satisfactory to defendants. No changes in the proposals were suggested and no counter proposal was made by defendants, who proceeded to ignore plaintiffs and go ahead without them. In fact, the proposed agreement may not have met with the approval of Edmunds, whose interest had to be purchased. Plaintiffs have incorporated in the complaint a letter which, although irrelevant to the issues, discloses a statement made by Firks to plaintiff Levy, that defendants, instead of by buying out Edmunds, had taken him in as a half owner of the enterprise.
No one contributed any money or property to a supposed joint venture; no one took any action whatever on behalf of a joint venture, and the respective parties acted independently of each other except in the single instance when they engaged the services of Sandler for the preparation of an agreement.
The parties left to future agreement every essential feature of the enterprise which was the subject of their negotiations, but plaintiffs failed in their efforts to reach an agreement with defendants. It would be clear to any court, upon proof of the facts alleged, that the parties did not enter into an enforceable agreement.
The first cause of action sought a declaration of rights under a supposed contract. Since there was no contract pleaded there were no rights and duties to be declared. The demurrer to the first cause of action was properly sustained.
The second and third causes of action incorporated the allegations of the first cause of action with respect to the claimed agreement, and sought damages of $500,000 against Firks and Alexander for breach of contract. The facts were alleged as a basis for an award of damages and since no enforceable contract was pleaded, the demurrer to the second and third causes of action was properly sustained.
The judgment is affirmed.
“Sam: Please read carefully as the letter is addressed as much to you as to Bay.
“July 5, 1960
"Baymoud C. Sandler, Esq.
435 North Bedford Drive Beverly Hills, California
Be: Kingpin Lanes
Firks, Alexander, Levy & Beich
“Dear Bay:
“Enclosed site plan.
“1. The restrictions are to go out.
“2. All reference to signs is to go out.
“3. There is to be a lease to Grandview for $1.00 per year of a site for a 20’ sign as indicated on the site plan.
“4. Please contact Art Edmunds for the transfer and closing of escrow.
“5. All entities are to be decided among Dick Miller, you and I.
“6. Sam Firks and Manny Levy are to talk to Art Edmunds about Froelich’s contract. This is to be done before we sign any of the papers closing the deal.
“7. Consideration should be given to starting afresh so far as is possible so that we are not saddled with the King commitments and all that has gone on before. In this connection we will probably need releases from the individuals and companies heretofore involved. Manny Levy will renegotiate, if possible, with AMF.
“8. When you have advised me that everything has been tentatively set I will negotiate the contract with King on the basis of the draft that you prepared, but including an option to purchase King’s interest at $25,000:00 less $12,000.00 paid to him under the employment contract. In this connection Manny suggests that King’s salary be fixed at $7,500.00 per year commencing with the opening of business.
“9. Sam, George, Manny and I have agreed that Manny and I are to receive 10 per cent of the profits of both operations including the profits on any sale. This is to be evidenced by *432special stock so that the capitalization will be as follows: 90 shares in regular stock split fifty-fifty and 10 shares in the special stock. The special stock is not to have voting rights.
“Regards.
Sincerely,
BR:gs
ec: Mr. Sam Eirks, Mr. Emanuel Levy”
“OFFICE MEMORANDUM
SANDLER AND ROSEN
Date: July 13, 1960
From: Ray Sandler
Subject: Kingpin Lanes
“To: Mr. Art Edmunds
“Dear Art:
“I enclose herewith a draft of the proposed agreement for your examination and approval.
“I call your attention to the conditions provided in paragraph Third. I have been in touch with Leon Kent and I am going to work our directly with him the amendment of the agreement and the substitutions referred to in subparagraph (a) of said paragraph Third. These documents may be worked out prior to the time that this agreement is executed in which event we can attach them as exhibits to this agreement.
“I understand that the negotiations with Eddie King for the modification of his agreement are under way and should be consummated in the very near future. The amendment of the Froelich agreement will be discussed with you by Sam Eirks and Manny Levy. If you will send me a copy of the preliminary title report on the subject property I should be able to indicate our approval thereof without delay.
“Concurrently herewith I am submitting a draft of this agreement to Bernie Reich for his approval and if he has any comments or suggestions, I will communicate them to you. I would also like to have your comments and suggestions as soon as possible so that we can proceed to consummate the deal.
RCS:lh
Ene.
Copy to Sam Eirks
Mr. Bernard Reich”
Very truly yours,
RAT SANDLER

=== CASE 9737912 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:36:50.407703+00 ===

FORD, J.
I concur in the determination that the judgment should be affirmed. My reasons for that conclusion will be briefly stated.
In the second cause of action of the second amended complaint there is incorporated the following allegation of the first cause of action: “Defendants Firks, Alexander and King and some of the other defendants proceeded with the enterprise, acquired the real property, acquired the stock of *436Kingpin Lanes and ... created the entities contemplated by the joint venture and opened the enterprise for business; all, however, to the exclusion of the plaintiffs.” It is further alleged in the second cause of action that by reason of the breach and repudiation of the agreement by the defendants, “plaintiffs have lost the benefits of their said bargain and agreement in the sum of $500,000.00. ’ ’
In the third cause of action it is alleged that about July or August 1960,1 the defendants breached and repudiated the agreement and that “thereafter defendants took over the enterprise to the exclusion of plaintiffs, acquired it for themselves and commenced operations.” It is further alleged that thereby “plaintiffs have lost the benefit of their said agreement in the sum of $500,000.00.”
An action at law will lie for the breach of a valid agreement to undertake a business association in the nature of a joint venture. (See Braxdale v. Bange, 166 Cal.App.2d 399, 402 [333 P.2d 420].)  However, the second amended complaint in the present case fails to disclose wherein the plaintiffs have suffered any damages. A new enterprise was to be undertaken and its success depended upon a number of factors, including the skill of the managers of the undertaking.  In such a ease the proper measure of damages, in the absence of any means of determining the prospective profits of the contemplated business, is the loss sustained by the plaintiffs in preparing to carry out their part of the contract. (Overstreet v. Merritt, 186 Cal. 494, 505-506 [200 P. 11]; see Hartley v. Weller, 104 Cal.App.2d 118, 119-120 [231 P.2d 133]; Gainer v. Storck, 169 Cal.App.2d 681, 688 [338 P.2d 195].)  The pleading fails to disclose any basis for the alleged damages, even though the special demurrer to the cause of action for damages contained in the original complaint had been placed on the ground that it could not be ascertained therefrom how the plaintiffs had been damaged in the sum of $500,000, and the special demurrer to the cause of action for damages in the first amended complaint had been partly based on the ground that it could not be ascertained therefrom whether the alleged damages in the sum of $500,000 were “damages which are claimed to have been proximately caused, or which, in the ordinary course of things, would be likely to result from the alleged breach of contract of the defendants.”
The fact that by the first cause of action of the second *437amended complaint declaratory relief is sought does not aid the plaintiffs. Specific performance of the agreement where-under the parties were to be personally active in the conduct of the enterprise could not be compelled. (See 81 C.J.S., Specific Performance, § 81.) Moreover, as has already been noted, the plaintiffs fail to disclose any basis upon which to predicate a claim for damages. Consequently, the reasoning of the court in Sinclair v. State of California, 194 Cal.App.2d 397, at pages 407-408 [15 Cal.Rptr. 493], is apropos: “The plaintiffs also contend that, regardless of the merits of the controversy presented by their complaint, the general demurrer thereto should have been overruled; that it states a cause of action for declaratory relief because the facts alleged therein show the existence of an actual controversy between them and the defendants; that they are entitled to a declaration respecting this controversy whether the declaration so made is favorable or unfavorable to them, and rely upon the settled rule to this effect. (Salsbery v. Ritter, 48 Cal.2d 1, 7 [306 P.2d 897]; Columbia Pictures Corp. v. De Toth, 26 Cal.2d 753, 760 [161 P.2d 217, 162 A.L.R. 747]; Maguire v. Hibernia Sav. & Loan Soc., 23 Cal.2d 719, 728 [146 P.2d 673, 151 A.L.R. 1062].)
“ It is equally well settled, however, that a judgment of dismissal following an order sustaining a general demurrer to a complaint seeking declaratory relief, when the controversy presented by the allegations of the complaint can be determined as a matter of law, will not be reversed where no prejudice to the right of the plaintiff has resulted from the procedural error incident to such an order and judgment. (Haley v. Los Angeles County Flood Control Dist., 172 Cal.App.2d 285, 292-294 [342 P.2d 476]; City & County of San Francisco v. Budde, 139 Cal.App.2d 10, 12 [292 P.2d 955, 294 P.2d 503]; Davis v. City of Santa Ana, 108 Cal.App.2d 669, 684 [239 P.2d 656]; cf. Anderson v. Stansbury, 38 Cal.2d 707, 717 [242 P.2d 305]—where the same principle was applied in sustaining a judgment of dismissal following an order granting a nonsuit; and Lavine v. Jessup, supra, 161 Cal.App.2d 59, 69 [326 P.2d 238]—where a similar conclusion was based on different reasons.) ’ ’
Files, J., concurred.
■ A petition for a rehearing was denied December 5, 1963, and appellants’ petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied January 7, 1964. Peters, J., was of the opinion that the petition should be granted.
The action was commenced by the plaintiffs on June 23, 1961.

=== CASE 2212399 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:19.377213+00 ===

158 Wis. 2d 123 (1990)
462 N.W.2d 233
Wisconsin DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE, Plaintiff-Respondent,
v.
UNITED STATES SHOE CORPORATION, Defendant-Appellant.[]
UNITED STATES SHOE CORPORATION, Plaintiff-Appellant,[]
v.
Wisconsin DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE, Defendant-Respondent.
No. 89-0682.
Court of Appeals of Wisconsin.
Oral argument December 14, 1989.
Decided September 6, 1990.
*125 For the appellant the cause was submitted on the briefs of Leonard S. Sosnowski of Foley & Lardner of Madison and Larry McMillin of Frost & Jacobs of Cincinnati, Ohio, and oral argument by Larry McMillin.
For the respondent the cause was submitted on the brief of Donald J. Hanaway, attorney general, and Edward S. Marion, assistant attorney general, and oral argument by Edward S. Marion.
Before Eich, C.J., Gartzke, P.J., and Sundby, J.
SUNDBY, J.
In this appeal, we decide that United States Shoe Corporation, under sec. 71.06(1), Stats. (1975),[1] may not offset the net business losses sustained by corporations with which it merged against its 1976 and 1977 Wisconsin net business income. We also decide *126 that the circuit court correctly concluded that a closing agreement between the Department of Revenue and U.S. Shoe, to compromise the taxpayer's franchise tax liability under a June 19, 1984 additional assessment, did not settle U.S. Shoe's franchise tax liability for fiscal years 1976 and 1977. We therefore affirm the circuit court's order.
BACKGROUND
U.S. Shoe is an Ohio corporation engaged in the manufacture and sale of shoes in Wisconsin and elsewhere. In 1966 it acquired the Freeman-Toor Corporation, a Delaware corporation engaged in the manufacture of men's shoes. Freeman-Toor (Del.) organized subsidiary corporations to own and operate each retail sales outlet. On July 31, 1974, Freeman-Toor (Del.) and its subsidiary corporations were merged into Freeman-Toor (Ohio). Sixteen of the retail subsidiaries had net operating losses for fiscal years 1971 through 1974. On July 31, 1975, Freeman-Toor (Ohio) was merged into U.S. Shoe. During fiscal year August 1, 1974 through July 31, 1975, Freeman-Toor (Ohio) had a Wisconsin net loss for franchise tax purposes.
On its 1976 Wisconsin franchise tax return, U.S. Shoe offset against its income the loss reported by Freeman-Toor (Ohio) on its 1975 Wisconsin return. The loss offset included the losses incurred by the retail subsidiaries of Freeman-Toor (Del.). Because not all of the loss was used in fiscal year 1976, U.S. Shoe carried over and offset the excess against its 1977 income.
The department disallowed the claimed offsets and, on March 7, 1980, notified U.S. Shoe of an additional franchise tax assessment for tax years 1976 and 1977. The department claimed that sec. 71.06(1), Stats. (1975), *127 did not permit a corporation to offset against its current income the losses of corporations merged into it. The tax appeals commission reversed.
On June 19, 1984, the department issued to U.S. Shoe a further notice of additional franchise tax assessment for fiscal years 1978-83. The claim was compromised and on December 21, 1984, U.S. Shoe and the department entered into a closing agreement. U.S. Shoe argued that the 1984 closing agreement foreclosed the department from assessing any further franchise taxes against it for any period before January 31, 1983, including the period covered by the March 7, 1980 additional assessment. The tax appeals commission agreed with U.S. Shoe as to fiscal year 1978 and granted it summary judgment barring the additional assessment for that year. The commission granted the department summary judgment determining that the closing agreement did not bar the department's additional franchise tax assessment for the 1975 through 1977 fiscal years.
The circuit court affirmed the commission's disposition of the summary judgment motions but reversed the commission's decision and order as to U.S. Shoe's franchise tax liability for fiscal years 1976 and 1977 and reinstated the department's March 7, 1980, additional assessment.
I.
THE CLOSING AGREEMENT ISSUE
[1]
The closing agreement is entitled "IN THE MATTER OF THE ADDITIONAL FRANCHISE TAXES ASSESSED AGAINST UNITED STATES SHOE CORPORATION UNDER DATE OF JUNE 19, 1984 *128 FOR THE PERIOD JUNE 1, 1977 THROUGH JANUARY 31, 1983 INCLUSIVE."
The closing agreement reads as follows:
It is hereby stipulated and agreed that for purposes of settlement, the correct adjusted incomes of the above-named U.S. Shoe Corporation for the years 7/ 31/78 to 1/31/83, both inclusive, are in the amounts set forth in attached schedules and that upon the basis of such adjusted incomes there are due taxes, penalty and interest to December 27, 1984 totaling $95,836.06.
It is further stipulated that this agreement and the payment of the above additional taxes shall serve as a final disposition of the taxpayer's franchise tax liability up through and including the year ended January 31, 1983. [Emphasis added.]
U.S. Shoe argues that the emphasized language unambiguously settled its franchise tax liability for all years prior to January 31, 1983. The emphasized language supports U.S. Shoe's position. However, the meaning of a particular provision in a contract is to be determined by looking at the whole contract. Crown Life Ins. Co. v. LaBonte, 111 Wis. 2d 26, 36, 330 N.W.2d 201, 206 (1983).
[2]
When the contract is considered as a whole, the conclusion is inescapable that it was intended to apply only to tax years July 31, 1978 to January 31, 1983. The closing agreement settled a dispute between U.S. Shoe and the department with respect to the June 19, 1984 additional assessment directed to fiscal years 1978-83. The agreement has no application to the department's March 7, 1980 additional franchise tax assessment. For these reasons, we reject U.S. Shoe's argument that the *129 closing agreement bars the department from proceeding on its March 7, 1980 additional assessment.
II.
THE LOSS CARRY-OVER ISSUE
A.
The commission concluded: "[U.S. Shoe] is entitled to carry forward the losses of Freeman-Toor (Del.) or Freeman-Toor (OH) during 1971-75 as offsets against its 1976 and 1977 Wisconsin income for corporate franchise tax purposes under sec. 71.06, 1975-77 [S]tats. to the extent income was earned by the same trade or business as incurred the losses initially. Fall River Canning Co. v. Wisconsin Dept. of Taxation, 3 Wis. 2d 632 [89 N.W.2d 203] (1958) no longer controls under reenacted sec. 71.06, 1975-77 [S]tats." The commission was of the opinion that the test of "business continuity"[2] was mandated by sec. 71.06, as reenacted by sec. 84n, ch. 224, Laws of 1975.
[3]
We give no deference to the commission's construction of sec. 71.06(1), Stats. (1975), because the question of whether the revision of sec. 71.06(1) has changed the rule adopted in Fall River is one of first impression. See Local No. 695 v. LIRC, 154 Wis. 2d 75, 84, 452 N.W.2d 368, 372 (1990) (Where legal question is concerned and there is no evidence of any special expertise or experience, *130 weight to be afforded agency interpretation is no weight at all). There is no administrative expertise or precedent disclosed in respect to the resolution of this unique issue. Nor is the commission more competent than this court to interpret and apply sec. 71.06(1), Stats. (1975). See id.
Section 71.06, Stats. (1949), which was in effect when Fall River was decided, provided:
If a taxpayer . . . sustains a net business loss, such loss . . . may be offset against the net business income of the subsequent year and, if not completely offset by the net business income of such year, the remainder of such net business loss may be offset against the net business income of the following year. For the purposes of this section, net business income shall consist of all the income attributable to the operation of a trade or business regularly carried on by the taxpayer . . . .
The Fall River court concluded that under sec. 71.06, Stats. (1949), the carry-over privilege was limited to the "identical taxpayer" who sustained the business loss. Fall River, 3 Wis.2d at 638, 89 N.W.2d at 206. It therefore examined Wisconsin law respecting corporate mergers to determine whether the surviving corporation could be considered the same entity as the merged corporation. It found appropriate the following language from Wisconsin Elec. Power Co. v. Department of Taxation, 251 Wis. 346, 356, 29 N.W.2d 711, 716 (1947):
A merger or consolidation statute may expressly provide that all constituent corporations shall be continued in the surviving corporation. However, there is no such provision in sec. 196.80(1)(c), Stats. The merged corporation is divested of its estate, property rights, privileges, and franchises. It is "without property with which to do business, and *131 without the right lawfully to do business, [and] is dissolved by the operation of the law which brings this condition into existence."
Fall River, 3 Wis.2d at 636, 89 N.W.2d at 205 (citations omitted).
The Fall River court stated: "The decision in the Wisconsin Electric Power Co. Case established the status of merging corporations in this state. The merging corporations cease to exist by operation of law and but one entity, the surviving corporation, remains." Id. at 637, 89 N.W.2d at 206.[3]
The court further said:
The appellant [taxpayer] is unable to show by any language which clearly specifies the same[,] the right to deduct the carry-over losses of the merged corporations and therefore it is unable to claim the deduction. The merging corporations elected to forego this carry-over privilege when they chose to merge. The privilege is confined to the identical taxpayer who sustained the business loss . . . .
Fall River, 3 Wis.2d at 637-38, 89 N.W.2d at 206 (emphasis added).
Fall River establishes that the right to deduct the carry-over losses of merged corporations must be shown by clear language. The Fall River court's construction of sec. 71.06(1), Stats. (1949), became a part of the statute. See Salerno v. John Oster Mfg. Co., 37 Wis. 2d 433, 441, 155 N.W.2d 66, 70 (1967) (where courts interpret a statute and the legislature fails to subsequently amend the *132 statute to effect a change, the court's interpretation of the statute becomes a part thereof). The Fall River court's construction was not overruled by the repeal and reenactment of the statute. See Bruner v. Department of Revenue, 57 Wis. 2d 70, 76, 203 N.W.2d 663, 666 (1973) ("The mere repeal and re-enactment of substantially the same section does not overrule the prior court interpretations.").
The commission found that, after amendment, sec. 71.06(1), Stats. (1975), "clear[ly] and unambiguous[ly]" mandated the surviving corporation's right to deduct the carry-over losses of merged corporations. Section 71.06(1) permitted a corporation to offset "any . . . net business . . . loss . . . attributable to the operation of a trade or business in this state." Because the amendment omitted the qualifying language, "regularly carried on by the taxpayer," the commission concluded that, "[t]he clear focus of the reenacted provision is the trade or business in this state. Therefore, we are of the opinion that the test of business continuity is mandated by the reenacted language and that the test of Fall River Canning is no longer operative."
The commission relied on "persuasive" federal case law. In Wisconsin Electric Power, the Wisconsin Supreme Court rejected this line of authority.
There is considerable authority in recent federal cases to the effect that even in the absence of statutory provision a merged corporation is continued in the surviving corporation for tax exemption and deduction purposes, but it is contrary to earlier and, in our opinion, better reasoned authority such as Rochester R. Co. v. Rochester[, 205 U.S. 236, 256 (1907)]. *133 Wisconsin Elec. Power, 251 Wis. at 356-57, 29 N.W.2d at 716 (footnote omitted). The court described Rochester Railroad as holding that vesting the property rights and privileges of the merged corporation in the surviving corporation was not sufficient to transfer a statutory tax deduction privilege. Id. at 357, 29 N.W.2d at 716.
Wisconsin Electric Power was decided before Libson Shops, in which the United States Supreme Court applied the continuity of business standard to a postmerger loss carry-forward. Libson Shops, 353 U.S. at 386. The Libson Shops Court did not, however, consider the government's argument that the statutory carry-over privilege was not available unless the corporation claiming it was the same taxable entity as that which sustained the loss. Id. at 385-86. Thus, Libson Shops is not authority for rejection of Fall River's "identical taxpayer" test.
B.
[4]
The business loss carry-forward authorized by sec. 71.06, Stats., "falls within the category of tax privileges which, as matters of legislative grace, must be strictly construed against the taxpayer." Midland Fin. Corp. v. Department of Revenue, 116 Wis. 2d 40, 46, 341 N.W.2d 397, 400 (1983). In view of the strict-construction requirement, we disagree with the commission's conclusion that the statute "clear[ly] and unambiguous[ly]" mandates that the business continuity test be applied to the carry-forward of business losses of pre-merger corporations. However, we recognize that the tax appeals commission did not arrive at its conclusion capriciously or frivolously. We therefore accept for purposes of analysis that sec. 71.06(1), Stats. (1975), is susceptible of the construction given it by the commission. Because the *134 statute is ambiguous, we may resort to extrinsic aids to determine legislative intent. State v. Vonesh, 135 Wis. 2d 477, 483, 401 N.W.2d 170, 173 (Ct. App. 1986). "One of the most valuable extrinsic aids of judicial construction is legislative history." Id. (quoting Milwaukee Co. v. Labor & Indus. Review Comm'n, 113 Wis. 2d 199, 204, 335 N.W.2d 412, 415 (Ct. App. 1983).
The commission acknowledged that the legislative purpose in repealing and recreating sec. 71.06(1), Stats., was to change the offset from total income to an apportionment basis.[4] The commission pointed out that despite this stated purpose, the phrase "carried on by the taxpayer" was not reenacted and the phrase "in this state" was substituted. The commission concluded that "[t]he net effect is that the term `trade or business' is no longer modified as to the identity of the offset claimant i.e., a certain legal entity, or the same taxpayer as incurred the loss which formed the basis for the Fall River interpretation." However, the phrase "in this state" is, as the commission conceded, an "apportionment related phrase." Therefore, there is no clear legislative intent to eliminate the "identical taxpayer" requirement of Fall River. The change in language on which the commission relies is consistent with the legislative purpose to change the loss offset from total income to an apportionment basis.
C.
[5]
U.S. Shoe points to other changes in the language of sec. 71.06(1), Stats. (1975), which it claims supports its *135 position that it may utilize the net business loss carryovers of the merging corporations. U.S. Shoe concedes that the purpose of the 1975 amendments was to provide for the apportionment of the net business loss before it is deducted from income in later years. It argues, however, that there is nothing in the legislative history which establishes that this was the sole intended purpose of the amendments. Where a statute has been construed by an appellate court, the legislature is presumed to know that in the absence of a change in the law, the court's construction will remain unchanged. State v. Banks, 105 Wis. 2d 32, 46, 313 N.W.2d 67, 73 (1981). It is therefore unlikely that the legislature would have changed the Fall River rule without stating that it intended to do so.
The most conclusive evidence that the legislature did not intend to change the Fall River rule is found in the report of the Joint Survey Committee on Tax Exemptions.[5] The report, which contains an analysis of the changes the amendments would make in the law, repeatedly refers to changes in terms of apportionment. Nowhere in the report is there any suggestion that the amendments would change the law to allow a surviving corporation to offset against its net business income, the net business losses sustained by corporations with which it merged. Further, the report indicates that the net effect on general program revenues from the proposed change would be an increase of $200,000.[6] However, permitting the surviving corporation to offset against its Wisconsin net business income the business losses incurred by merging corporations in any of the next five *136 preceding income years could significantly decrease general program revenues.
[6]
For these reasons, we reject the commission's conclusion that the language of sec. 71.06(1), Stats. (1975), is "reasonably clear and unambiguous" as applied to post-merger loss carry-overs. We decline to find a legislative intent to change the Fall River rule on the basis of the 1975 amendments.
D.
Finally, we address the commission's persistence in substituting the continuity of business standard for the Fall River standard. In a similar case, the Dane County Circuit Court reversed the commission for much the same reasons we affirm the circuit court today. See Wisconsin Dep't of Revenue v. McHenry Sand and Gravel Co., Wis. Tax Reporter 202-769 (CCH 1986). The commission is bound by the circuit court's construction of sec. 71.06(1), Stats. (1975). Section 73.015(2), Stats., provides that "[i]f the circuit court construes a statute adversely to the contention of the department of revenue, the department shall be deemed to acquiesce in the construction so adopted unless an appeal to the court of appeals is taken . . . ."
[7]
We recognize that in McHenry Sand and Gravel, the circuit court construed a statute consistent with the department's position. Nonetheless, we conclude that the statute's purpose is served if the department and the tax appeals commission are bound by an unappealed decision of the circuit court whether that decision construes a statute consistently or inconsistently with the department's construction. We have held that "[t]his *137 statute [sec. 73.015(2), Stats.,] is designed to insure tax law stability by allowing taxpayers to rely on unappealed circuit court decisions in structuring their financial affairs." McDonald Lumber Co. v. Department of Revenue, 117 Wis. 2d 446, 447, 344 N.W.2d 210, 211 (Ct. App. 1984). It would be anomalous if a taxpayer could rely only on unappealed circuit court decisions decided adversely to the department's construction of a statute, and not on those adopting the department's position.
E.
The commission may be correct that the continuity of business standard is a fairer way to treat pre-merger business losses. The standard treats merged and nonmerged corporations the same. However, if the Fall River "identical taxpayer" rule is to be abandoned or modified, the supreme court or the legislature must act. Neither has done so.
By the Court.Order affirmed.
NOTES
[]  Petition to review denied.
[1]  Section 71.06(1), Stats. (1975), provides in part:
For calendar or fiscal years ending on or after July 31, 1976, a corporation may offset against its Wisconsin net business income any Wisconsin net business loss sustained in any of the next 5 preceding income years to the extent not offset by other items of Wisconsin income in the loss year and by Wisconsin net business income of any year between the loss year and the income year for which an offset is claimed. For purposes of this section Wisconsin net business income or loss shall consist of all the income attributable to the operation of a trade or business in this state, less the business expenses allowed as deductions under s. 71.04.
[2]  See Libson Shops, Inc. v. Koehler, 353 U.S. 382, 386-87, 390 (1957) (under secs. 23(s) and 122 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1939, as amended, the surviving corporation may offset business losses sustained by merged corporations only to the extent that the income against which its offset is claimed was produced by substantially the same businesses which incurred the losses).
[3]  Section 180.67, Stats. (1975), provided that, upon merger, the separate existence of the merged corporations ceased and all property and every other interest belonging to the merged corporations was transferred to and vested in the surviving or new corporation.
[4]  See Report of Joint Survey Committee on Tax Exemptions, Engrossed 1975 S.B. 755, as amended by Conference Amendment 1, sec. 11 at 3 and 6 (March 23, 1976).
[5]  See Report of Joint Survey Committee on Tax Exemptions, Engrossed 1975 S.B. 755, as amended by Conference Amendment 1, sec. 11 at 3 and 6 (March 23, 1976).
[6]  Id. at 4.

=== CASE 9737913 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:36:53.186126+00 ===

MILLER, Justice.
Myria Warren appeals her conviction of three counts, each, of grand theft by transfer and grand theft by exploitation. We affirm in part and reverse in part.
FACTS
From 1917 until 1972, John Edward Hess operated a sheep ranch in Harding County, South Dakota. In 1972, he ceased his ranching operation. Shortly thereafter, he moved to Belle Fourche, South Dakota. In 1976, he sold his 1864-acre ranch for $70 per acre.
Warren had been operating an elderly care business in her home in Belle Fourche since 1973. She generally provided room and board to elderly people who were unable to live alone. She first met Hess in 1984. At that meeting, she informed him she would provide him with room and board for $400 a month. Hess subsequently moved into Warren’s home on June 8, 1984. At the time, he was eighty-nine years old, wearing a hearing aid, had grad*196ually deteriorating eyesight, and ultimately became dependent on a walker and wheelchair for mobility. His overall general health was poor.
Hess had only two living relatives, nephews Kenneth Hammer and A.C. Grudum. Since 1983, Hammer and his family had visited Hess at least once and sometimes twice a year. After Hess moved into the Warren home, they would call at least once a month checking on his health, knowing that it was deteriorating. Grudum had never met his uncle until June, 1987.
In March, 1986, Hess began having problems with his heart. He was taken to the Ft. Meade Veterans Hospital near Sturgis, South Dakota, where he was examined. Due to his heart condition, he was flown to a veterans hospital in Denver, Colorado, where a pacemaker was implanted. Warren testified that she accompanied Hess to Denver at his request. He had allegedly offered to pay her $500 to cover her expenses. After his discharge from the Denver hospital, he spent one night in the Ft. Meade Hospital for observation and then returned to Warren’s home.
Hammer and his wife testified at trial to events surrounding their contacts with Hess and various conversations they had with Warren. Hammer testified that between June and August, 1986, he and his wife, on extension phones, called Warren to inquire into his recovery from the pacemaker surgery. Hammer testified that Warren informed them that she had started levying extra monthly charges of $500 against Hess “for bedwetting.” Mrs. Hammer testified that during this telephone conversation, Warren laughed and stated that she figured out how to make Hess do what she wants, “just make him pay more money.” Hammer testified that he called Warren in February, 1988, again inquiring about his uncle, and Warren informed him that Hess was angry with her for charging him another $1,000 for bedwetting.1 Hess’ attorney, Donn Bennett, confirmed similar conversations with Warren. Mrs. Hammer testified that during a visit in April, 1986, Warren informed her that Hess protested every time she asked him to sign his rent check because it had gone up from $400 to $1,000 a month. She also recalls Warren stating that, “I figure I just as well get all I can out of him because its all going for taxes anyway.” Additionally, she recalls Warren stating that she would like to get Hess to pay off the mortgage on her house. Mrs. Hammer testified that during a visit in September, 1987, Warren informed her that she had brought three of Hess’ matured certificates of deposit (CD’s) home from the bank to get Hess’ signature in order to cash them.2 Warren testified that she could not take him to the bank every time CD’s became due.
Regarding Hess’ health, Mrs. Hammer testified that during a visit in April, 1988, when she and her husband had arrived at Warren’s home, Hess was lying in bed. They noticed that he was lying on his back, his lips were badly swollen, his breathing irregular, and one foot was on the floor. Mrs. Hammer testified that he was filthy and wet, as was his bed. Warren informed them that nothing was wrong with him, that he was just sleeping. They attempted to awaken him to no avail and finally called an ambulance. He was taken to the Ft. Meade hospital, where it was discovered that he had a urinary infection which had become life-threatening.
Dr. Fredric Birch, a physician at the Ft. Meade hospital testified to events surrounding the history of Hess’ health and medical attention he received at Ft. Meade. Dr. Birch testified that he first had contact with Hess on December 21, 1987, concerning episodes of apnea, i.e., absence of breathing, in addition to some heart problems.3 Because of these problems, he was *197admitted to the intensive care unit.4 Dr. Birch testified that communication with Hess was rather difficult. A person had to “shout directly into his ear” or “write on a piece of paper in large letters” for him to read in order to communicate. He was discharged January 5, 1988. Dr. Birch also testified that Hess was readmitted on April 11, 1988, due to a life-threatening urinary infection.
Hess’ other nephew, Grudum, testified to events surrounding his visit with his uncle in June, 1987. During a conversation with Warren, she indicated to Grudum that she charged Hess $900 a month for rent and other boarders only $350-$450 per month, indicating the reason for the difference was that “he can afford it.” Grudum visited with Hess who made him aware that his checking account at that time was in excess of $35,000 and that his income for the previous year was over $42,000. Just prior to his leaving the Warren home, Grudum testified that Warren stated, “well, its too damn bad you have to wait until somebody dies before you can get their money, I’m going to get Ed to pay my $23,000 mortgage.”
On April 12, 1988, after Hess had been hospitalized for the urinary infection previously mentioned, Hammer went back to Warren’s house with a representative of Hess’ lawyer to recover Hess’ property. Hammer asked Warren if he did in fact have all of Hess’ property, to which she replied “Yes.” The following day, Hammer went to the bank to inventory and audit Hess’ safety deposit box. It was discovered that three CD’s were missing: one for $20,000, one for $10,000, and one for $5,000, all listed by the bank as owned by Hess. During the next month, Hammer carefully went through all of his uncle’s papers. He discovered that all the checks written for the months of January and February of 1988 were missing. He eventually discovered, with the assistance of the bank, that two checks issued during those months were made payable to Warren: check # 808 for $24,000 and check # 810 for $2,000. Hammer contacted Hess’ attorney, Donn Bennett, informing him of this discovery. Bennett contacted Warren, asking her if she knew the whereabouts of the missing checks and CD’s. She informed him that she did not have the checks but she did have the CD’s. She refused to turn them over to Bennett before consulting with her attorney.
On September 14, 1988, Warren was in-dieted on three felony counts of grand theft and ten misdemeanor counts of operating a health care facility without a license. On November 23, 1988, she filed a motion to quash the indictment. On December 21, 1988, State filed a dismissal of the indictment. On that same day, the grand jury reindicted Warren, adding eight felony counts of forgery, ten felony counts of grand theft by transfer of another’s property, ten felony counts of grand theft by exploitation of a disabled adult (the ten felony counts of grand theft by exploitation of a disabled adult were all plead in the alternative to grand theft by transfer of another’s property and were based on the same underlying facts), and ten misdemeanor counts of operating a health care facility without a license.
Prior to trial, several counts were dismissed by the trial court on ex post facto grounds. (SDCL ch. 22-46, Abuse or Exploitation of a Disabled Adult, became effective July 1, 1986. The acts complained of occurred prior to that time.) The ten counts of operating a health care facility without a license were severed for trial and ultimately dismissed by the State after the felony convictions were rendered. Warren was found guilty on three counts of grand theft by transfer, specifically Counts X, XI, and XII, and three counts of grand theft by exploitation of a disabled adult, Counts XVI-A, XVII-A, and XVIII-A. She was found not guilty of the other charges including the forgery counts. Warren appeals.
*198DECISION
ISSUE I
WHETHER HESS WAS COMPETENT TO TESTIFY AT TRIAL.
Generally, every person is competent to be a witness if they have personal knowledge of the matter at hand, have sufficient understanding to receive, remember, narrate impressions and are sensible to the obligation of an oath. State v. Lufkins, 381 N.W.2d 263 (S.D.1986). See also SDCL 19-14-1 and -2. “The determination of the witness’ competency is within the discretionary power of the trial judge and may be reversed only upon a showing of abuse of discretion.” Lufkins, supra at 266; State v. Phipps, 318 N.W.2d 128 (S.D.1982).
In Lufkins, the trial court held that the witness was incompetent to testify. We concluded that there had been no showing of an abuse of discretion. It was determined that the witness had lost his personal knowledge of the events in question and lacked the understanding to receive, remember, or narrate any remaining impressions.5 That is not the situation before us.
Hess’ testimony clearly exhibited that he had personal knowledge of the matter before the trial court. His difficulties were not attributed to his inability to receive, remember and narrate, but rather to a lack of physical ability which was attributed to his poor hearing and eyesight.
Dr. Daniel Kennelly, a psychiatrist, testified at the competency hearing that it was his opinion Hess could report facts, has a good remote memory, does understand what telling the truth entails and that it is important. Kennelly testified that the communication problem was basically the result of Hess’ poor hearing.
Donald Janz, a psychologist, performed an evaluation and did some psychotherapy testing with Hess. He determined Hess’ IQ to be in a range between 65 and 70. Mr. Janz testified that a person with that level of IQ would be mildly mentally handicapped.
Dr. Charles Lord, a psychiatrist, testified that Hess suffers from dementia, however, he does understand the concept of telling the truth. Lord testified that Hess communicates better when questions are written for him. Additionally, he testified that if matters became too complex Hess would not be able to follow them.
The trial court recognized that Hess had a diminished mental condition due to his age and low IQ. However, the court also indicated that it believed Hess’ testimony would have some value to the proceedings and would be received under the special care of the court and under guarded circumstances. Additionally, the trial court specifically referred to Lufkins, finding that Hess could understand the obligation of an oath or the need to tell the truth.
The trial court properly guarded against complex matters presented to Hess during questioning. After reviewing his testimony, it is evident that Hess was competent to testify at trial. We find no abuse of discretion.
ISSUE II
WHETHER SUFFICIENT EVIDENCE EXISTED TO SUPPORT WARREN’S CONVICTION OF GRAND THEFT BY TRANSFER.
In determining the sufficiency of the evidence on appeal, the question presented is “whether there is evidence in the record, which, if believed by the jury, is sufficient to sustain a finding of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt_ In making this determi*199nation, the Court will accept that evidence, and the most favorable inferences fairly-drawn therefrom, which will support the verdict.” State v. Miller, 429 N.W.2d 26, 38 (S.D.1988) (citations omitted). See also State v. Jenner, 451 N.W.2d 710 (S.D.1990).
Warren was convicted of three counts of grand theft by transfer in violation of SDCL 22-30A-26 and SDCL 22-30A-17 (grand theft and petty theft distinguished). Warren contends that she could not have been convicted of this crime because there was essentially no “transfer” by her. She contends that any “transfer” which had been made was actually made by Hess. She points out that she was not convicted of the forgery counts of the indictment, thus supporting her position that Hess voluntarily signed all the checks and transferred the money to her (rather than that she had forged the checks, thereby transferring the money to herself).7
Warren essentially concedes that she received these amounts of money but asserts that they were gifts from Hess. With respect to Count X, a check written by Warren and signed by Hess for $1,300 in April, 1986, Warren admitted to previously receiving $700 for rent at the first of the month. She testified that she was given the extra $1,300 so that she could hire extra help in order to care for Hess. On cross-examination, she had difficulty remembering who she hired and had no recall of what she paid.
With respect to Count XI, a CD in the amount of $20,000 was originally in Hess’ name alone, but was changed approximately one year later, to include Warren as co-owner. An employee at the bank where the CD was purchased testified that she made the actual transfer of ownership of the CD but does not recall ever witnessing Hess endorse or initial it for approval of transfer. She also testified that the endorsement by Hess was not necessary for a transfer of ownership but is necessary only to cash it. (This is one of the same CD’s Warren refused to turn over to attorney Donn Bennett.)
Count XII dealt with a $2,000 check drawn on Hess’ account on May 1, 1986, for rent. State’s evidence indicates that at this time Warren’s own checking account contained a minimum balance or was overdrawn. This check was also in her handwriting, but bore Hess’ signature.
Theft by transfer has never been interpreted by this court concerning the element “transfer.” We reject both Warren’s and State’s reliance on the U.C.C. for a definition of that term. In a similar vein, we do not use the definition in the Uniform Fraudulent Transfer Act found at SDCL 54-8A-l(12).
SDCL 2-14-1 provides that: “Words used are to be understood in their ordinary sense except also that words defined or explained in SDCL 2-14-2 are to be understood as thus defined or explained.” “Transfer” is a word of conveyance. Bensinger v. Scott, 625 P.2d 775, 777 (Wyo.1981). Transfer means to convey or remove from one place, person, etc., to another; pass or hand over from one to another; specifically, to change over the possession or control of (as, to transfer title to land). To sell or give. Black’s Law Dictionary 1342 (5th Edition 1979). See also Chappell v. State, 216 Ind. 666, 25 N.E.2d 999, 1001 (1940). The word “convey,” when applied to the disposition of personal property, has the signification of “transfer,” and means the passing of title and dominion from one person to another. Lippman v. State, 104 Ala. 61, 16 So. 130 (1894). Cf. Bailey v. State, 450 A.2d 400, 402-03 (Del.Supr.1982) (the physical delivery of a check when the defendant knew that the payee’s endorsement was forged by a third person was sufficient under forgery statute to constitute transferring the instrument where, defendant requested li*200quor store clerk to cash check but when clerk handed the check back to the defendant refusing to cash it).
Although it is clear that Warren received the funds from the checks and became co-owner of the CD, the record is totally devoid of any evidence that she transferred anything. In fact, as noted earlier, the jury rejected all of State’s claims that she had committed any forgeries.
Her conduct may have been immoral and unthinkable and, in some states, criminal. However, given our legislative language, her conduct was not, offensive as it may seem, theft by transfer.
ISSUE III
WHETHER SUFFICIENT EVIDENCE EXISTED TO CONVICT WARREN OF THEFT BY EXPLOITATION OF A DISABLED ADULT.
Warren was found guilty of three counts of grand theft by exploitation of a disabled adult in violation of SDCL 22-46-3, which provides:
Any person who, having assumed the duty by written contract, by receipt of payment for care, or by order of a court to provide for the support of a disabled adult and having been entrusted with the property of that disabled adult, with intent to defraud, appropriates such property to a use or purpose not in the due and lawful execution of his trust, is guilty of theft by exploitation. Theft by exploitation is punishable pursuant to the provisions of § 22-30A-17.
“Exploitation,” as that term is used in SDCL 22-46-3, is defined as, “the wrongful taking or exercising of control over property of a disabled adult with intent to defraud him of it.” SDCL 22-46-1(3). We hold that Warren’s acquisition of funds belonging to Hess, in the counts alleged, constituted a violation of the statute.
With respect to the $1,000 Christmas gift, Warren was able to obtain this amount while Hess was in the Ft. Meade hospital in ICU for a life-threatening condition. She took advantage of his poor state of health and her trust relationship to acquire the $1,000.
Regarding the $24,000 mortgage check, Warren testified that her mortgage was actually $1,950 less than that amount. She kept the extra money and did not inform Hess of it. Additionally, Hess testified that he just laughed at Warren when she would ask him to pay off her mortgage. Additionally, the testimony of Hess’ nephew, Grudum, indicated that Warren told him that she was going to get Hess to pay off her mortgage. She used her position of trust to obtain the money to pay off the mortgage, which he otherwise appeared not willing to pay, in addition to an extra $1,950 above the mortgage.
With respect to the $2,000 rent check obtained on January 28,1988, Warren testified that this was for February rent. She testified that she was charging additional money for extra care. State’s evidence indicated that the extra care pertained to his bedwetting. Consequently, as State points out, Warren was charging prospectively for February bedwetting. Additionally, Grudum testified that she informed him that she charged Hess more than the other tenants because he could afford it. Mrs. Hammer testified that during a conversation with Warren, Warren informed Mrs. Hammer that she was going to get all she could out of Hess because it all went for taxes anyway. Knowing that Hess was not in a sufficiently healthy condition to refuse such charges and unable to look for housing elsewhere, by virtue of her position of trust, she was able to obtain the additional charges.
Hess did not have any relatives in the area to care for him or to consult with on such matters. He had only two living relatives, neither of which even lived in this state. Both parties essentially agree that Hess was disabled and had to rely on someone for his care. The evidence indicated that when Hess went to Denver to have his pacemaker implanted he did not want anyone else but Warren to go with him, thereby exhibiting his trust and reliance on her for certain emotional needs. Hess’ testimony at trial concerning a question asked by *201the State as to why he would pay her such a large amount for bedwetting he testified, “No other choice. Nothing else I can do,” evidencing that Hess had nowhere else to turn. He either had to use a walker or wheelchair to be mobile. As testified to by Mrs. Hammer, Hess was not accustomed to giving people such large gifts. She testified that she recalled monetarily he would give $10 as a gift to a relative or friend on holidays or birthdays. On one occasion he gave a used colored TV as a wedding gift. In addition, Warren concedes that she assisted Hess in actually writing out checks, helping him purchase CD’s, taking interest checks to the bank, recording transactions in his ledger, and filling out deposit slips, thereby having some control over the documentation and recording of his finances. Hess was almost totally dependent on Warren for his survival.
In determining the sufficiency of the evidence on appeal, the question is whether there is evidence in the record sufficient to sustain a finding of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, if believed by the jury. This court accepts that evidence and the most favorable inferences that can be fairly drawn therefrom, which support the verdict. See State v. Miller, 429 N.W.2d 26, 38 (S.D.1988). See also State v. Jenner, 451 N.W.2d 710 (S.D.1990). We hold that the jury in this case could have found beyond a reasonable doubt that Warren, by virtue of her position of trust, was able to exploit funds accumulated and saved by Hess in violation of the trust instilled in her by Hess.8
We have considered the other issues raised by Warren and find them to be lacking in merit.
Affirmed in part and reversed in part.
WUEST, MORGAN and SABERS, JJ., concur.
HENDERSON, J., concurs in part and dissents in part.
.Warren testified that she did charge him extra for additional care but not specifically for bed-wetting. She also testified that at the times he was wetting the bed he had been ill.
. Later, these CD’s were found to be missing from Hess’ personal effects at the time he moved out of the Warren home.
. It was prior to this time that Hess had the pacemaker installed.
. There was also some indication that he had been suffering from malnutrition. There was no evidence admitted at trial conclusively suggesting that this was the result of neglectful attention by Warren.
. In State v. Lufkins, 381 N.W.2d 263, 266 (S.D.1986), the trial court determined the witness to be incompetent. He medically suffered from "Systemic Lupus Erythematosis,” chronic alcoholism, and dementia. In addition, the witness was unable to recall the day of the victim’s death or that the victim was in fact dead, he had difficulty maintaining his attention span, his memory was not vivid, he was unable to recall dates and places, his memory was not in chronological order, he experienced some memory blocking, he experienced visual hallucinations, he exhibited bizarre behavior, he showed slowing of thought, sparsity of speech, and a loss of intellectual functioning.
. SDCL 22-30A-2 provides:
Any person who transfers property of another, or any interest therein, with intent to benefit himself or another not entitled thereto, is guilty of theft.
. We point out that evidence or even a conviction of forgery is not an element to be proved under the statute nor is this the only means by which a transfer of money could take place.
. State’s evidence indicates that Warren constantly had a minimum balance in her checking account and was overdrawn on several occasions.

=== CASE 9737914 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:36:53.191884+00 ===

HENDERSON, Justice
(concurring in part; dissenting in part).
Although I join the majority opinion on issue one (Hess was competent to testify) and issue three (Warren committed exploitation of a disabled adult), I cannot agree on issue two (that the convictions of grand theft by transfer are to be reversed).
To the contrary, I would uphold the jury verdicts of grand theft by transfer for the reason that the jury heard all of the testimony and was convinced that these crimes were committed against this aged, in-firmed, and helpless old man and that Judge Tschetter properly submitted the case to the jury on grand theft by transfer. There is absolutely no error of law below which justifies setting aside these convictions. Myria Warren is guilty, under the law, and also under the facts.
There are seven paragraphs, under issue two, before the majority opinion then adds the seventh and eighth paragraphs, the latter exonerating Warren by one, and one only, conclusion which is this: “Although it is clear that Warren received the funds from the checks and became co-owner of the CD, the record is totally devoid of any evidence that she transferred anything. In fact, as noted earlier, the jury rejected all of State’s claims that she had committed any forgeries.” The sentence following this statement is, in essence, a lament by the majority opinion that it cannot hold otherwise. It is upon these last two paragraphs that I take great issue with, believing that the lamenting paragraph is totally irrelevant to a legal discussion and the “leap of logic” paragraph, upon which three convictions are reversed, is faulty in analysis.
We must consider the jury instructions submitted by the trial court in assessing the propriety of the three convictions on grand theft by transfer. In settlement of instructions, it is noted that the trial court inquired of defense counsel if defense counsel had any objection to the instructions which the trial court had prepared. *202On page 186 of the trial transcript, volume 5, we find:
Defense counsel: “The instructions in their present form, as indicated by the Court, are not objectionable to the defense.”
The court: “Very well, thank you.”
And thereupon the trial court read the instructions to the jury. Under past cases, in this Court, these instructions became the law of the case, as no objection was voiced by the defendant. A lawyer must protect the record for his client, i.e., preserve the record, with timely objections. And should file his own proposed instructions as to what he believes is the proper law in the case. He cannot idly sit by during the heat of the battle and then, later on, thump his chest, like an angry warrior, and bay at the moon. The leading case on the aforesaid subject in this Court is State v. Halverson, 87 S.D. 110, 203 N.W.2d 421 (1973). The rule is stated as follows: “Where no exceptions or objections were made by the defendant to any instructions of the court, and the defendant proposed no instructions, there is no question concerning the instructions before the Supreme Court on appeal.” This rule was reaffirmed in State v. White Mountain, 332 N.W.2d 726 (S.D.1983).
The majority decision now eviscerates the law of the case by expressing that the facts of this case, insofar as the three convictions on grand theft are concerned, do not fit within the term “transfer.” In my opinion, the terrible things that the defendant did to this aged, defenseless old man, fit squarely within the instructions and squarely within that which the statute forbids. Judge Tschetter’s instructions are found below, and they should be approved so that trial judges, in this state, in the future, have a sense of direction on how to instruct juries on this precise issue. Thus, I would approve these instructions and affirm the convictions, not simply because they are the “law of the case” but also because they correctly identify the elements of the crime itself.
Instruction 17 provided:
The essential elements of the offense of theft by transfer of property as charged in Counts IX through XVIII of the Indictment, each of which the State must prove beyond a reasonable doubt, are:
1. That the defendant at the time and place alleged in the indictment transferred moneys to benefit herself;
2. That said money was the property of John Edward Hess;
3. That the defendant transferred said moneys with intent to benefit herself without being entitled thereto, and
4. That the property had a value exceeding two hundred dollars.
Instruction 18 provided:
In a crime such as that of which the defendant is charged in counts IX through XVIII of the indictment, there must exist a union or joint operation of act or conduct and a certain specific intent.
In the crime of Grand Theft by Transfer there must exist in the mind of the perpetrator the specific intent to unlawfully deprive John Edward Hess of his property and unless such intent so exists that crime is not committed.
Let us now consider the evidence from a proper role as reviewers of the evidence in this case. Our scope of review is long established.
... when reviewing the sufficiency of the evidence our review requires that we accept the evidence and the inferences that the jury may have drawn therefrom in support of the verdict. The jury’s verdict will not be set aside if the evidence and the reasonable inferences therefrom sustain a rational theory of guilt.” (emphasis supplied mine).
State v. Bachman, 446 N.W.2d 271, 272, 273 (S.D.1989).
Clearly, as we apply the facts to the instructions of the trial court and consider our long-standing review, as set forth in Bachman, this Court should not set aside these guilty verdicts.
Consider these two instructions, given by the trial court, also, namely instructions 14 and 15. Instruction 14 simply sets forth, to the jury, the phraseology of SDCL 22-30A-2 which provides:
*203Any person who transfers property of another or any interest therein, with intent to benefit himself or another not entitled thereto, is guilty of theft.
Instruction 15, which is the pivotal point of law in this appeal, provides:
The term transfer, as used in these instructions means to convey or shift from one person or place to another or to make over the possession of legal title to another.
And “transfer,” under this definition, is exactly what Myria Warren did and for which she now stands convicted at the Bar of Justice.
There are no objections to these instructions by defense counsel. They are “law of the case” also. And these instructions are proper statements of the law and should be used by the trial judges of this state in the future.
Conviction on Count X of the Indictment
This arises out of Myria Warren swindling (thieving) Edward Hess out of $1,300 in rent money. She charged him rent of $700 on April 1, 1986. This was the “set amount of rent.” On April 16, her checking account reflected a balance of $5.83. She needed money. So she went to the aged, infirm man and obtained a check for $1,300 on April 16, 1986. She was not entitled to this extra $1,300 rent, and the evidence so established, and the jury so found. Myria Warren testified that she charged this extra $1,300 because of his illness. But the jury did not believe her! Rather, they believed she was guilty of swindling Mr. Hess out of $1,300 by having caused him to “convey” or to “shift from one person or place to another” or to “make over the possession of legal title to another.” She cheated him: she had him transfer money unto her that she was not entitled to; her account reflected an overdraw of $1,184.60 on April 1, 1986; plainly, she was short of money and she took advantage of Mr. Hess, the victim of her inferential, if not outright, theft. The jury drew inferences from the evidence, displaying its common sense, and that is why the holding in Bachman is right on point as we apply (or should apply) our scope of review in this factual situation.
Conviction on Count XI of the Indictment
This arises out of Myria Warren attempting to swindle and cheat and thieve any future heir out of a $20,000 CD in the name of Mr. Hess by simply having her name placed thereon as a joint tenant. She accomplished this because of the age and infirmity of this elderly man. Then to seal her transfer of this property, once the joint tenancy had been accomplished, she had Edward Hess place his initials, “E H” on the reverse side of the CD, or did it herself. This, in commercial law, then made it possible for her to cash the CD. When she was asked to return the CD, she refused, exercising a dominion over it. Common sense tells us that Myria Warren (A) did not own this CD and (B) she manipulated the CD into a position whereby she could cash the CD and thus, under instruction 15, “shift from one person to another,” i.e., transfer. Powerful testimony on this count came from June Grosse, a bank employee. She testified that she, indeed, changed CD # 54180 on April 23, 1986, from Hess to “Edward Hess or Myria Warren," as joint tenants. She further testified that she did not recall seeing Hess at all, when the CD was changed. She further testified that she did not see Hess sign his name or implant his initials on the CD. Furthermore, Mr. Hess himself testified that he did not sign the CD over to her and did not place his initials on the reverse side of the CD. The jury had a duty and right to consider this testimony. That it did. And it arrived at the conclusion that Myria Warren tried to “benefit herself.” Certainly the jury must have been swayed by testimony that Hess’ attorney demanded a return of the CD, and that Myria Warren refused to turn it over to said attorney. If she did not intend to “benefit herself,” she would have returned the CD promptly. Unquestionably, she was exercising dominion and control over this CD. It was not her CD, yet she transferred its status by having her name placed thereon as a joint *204tenant. Again, as we look at the statute, it is perfectly clear that she “shifted it from one person to another.” And she had thereby, also, had an instrument “made over,” i.e., the possession of legal title to another. It is wrong to reverse this conviction on the $20,000 CD.
Conviction on Count XII of the Indictment
This count pertains to the jury’s determination that Myria Warren obtained $2,000 from Edward Hess on May 1, 1986, and constituted a theft by transfer. The facts are that, on this date, a $2,000 check was written and one Dr. Zeldes, an expert, a forensic administrator, testified that, in his opinion, the signature of Edward Hess which appeared on the check was not written by Edward Hess. Hess denied, under oath, that he signed it. He testified that the check was too big. To understand Hess’ viewpoint, he earlier testified that Myria Warren started out charging him $400 a month to permit him to live in her home. He was asked if his rent was ever increased and he told the jury “whatever she could get.” This $2,000 check was written when Edward Hess was seriously ill. He did not receive the $2,000. Myria Warren cashed the check and she got the money. It was an unfair amount of rent; not only was it unfair, it was an outrageous amount. It was a transfer. Testimony revealed that, at this time, she was handling his business affairs such as writing out checks for him, handling his money, and making out deposits for him. Forgery has different elements than the crime My-ria Warren stands charged and convicted of in this specific count of the indictment, namely Grand Theft by Transfer. It is totally ungermane to rely upon rationale, such as the majority opinion on its discussion of reversing this count that “In fact, as noted earlier, the jury rejected all of State’s claims that she had committed any forgeries.” The jury had every right to determine that even if she did not sign Mr. Hess’ name, that she had been writing checks for him, and that if she caused Hess to write his name, and when he was quite ill, that she had no right to obtain a large amount of money, like $2,000, and then claim it as a reasonable amount of rent. Myria Warren testified, under oath, that Hess trusted her while he lived in her home. It is obvious that the jury concluded that she abused this trust and caused to be transferred, over unto herself, the sum of $2,000 which did not belong to her. Is it not true that the jury determines the facts? Myria Warren testified that she charged the said $2,000 as and for rent. She testified that this tremendous increase was due to the additional care Mr. Hess needed. The State dug up the evidence that, just the day before she obtained the said $2,000, Myria Warren’s checking account was overdrawn $2.90. This evidence was admitted and heard by the jury. So why did she obtain the $2,000? Easy answer. She needed it. And she had this old man’s checkbook under her control. Indeed, she caused to have transferred unto herself $2,000 which did not belong to her, it simply being the property of another, and with an intent to benefit herself, thereby fitting herself within the forbidden conduct of SDCL 22-30A-2.
Transfer. A word. What does it mean? Myria Warren now argues what it means in her appellate brief. There are three pages of argument on its meaning in Myria Warren’s brief. I say: It’s too late! Counsel is trying to come in the back door, arguing the definition of “transfer” when he failed to do so in the lower court. Judge Tschet-ter told the jury what it meant. There were no objections. The jury relied on these instructions, including the meaning of “transfer.” A sum of $2,000 was “shifted over” and “from one person to another,” exactly as set forth in the statute. Judge Tschetter’s instructions were proper; we should use them as precedent in the future.
Statutory construction is a rather vague expression. Quite generic in form, it can boil down to many interpretations, from one scholar of the law to the other, all well meaning in their interpretation of what the statute means. Great masters of the law such as Justice Holmes, Justice Brandéis, Learned Hand, and Benjamin Cardozo, all had different styles of literary persuasion *205when called upon to elucidate on the totality of the meaning as it concerned the enactment before them. These styles stem from different approaches, ideas, and thoughts on statutory construction. Unquestionably, before us, does there stand a question of the interpretation of a statute. I can hardly pit myself against the great masters. However, I am constrained to say that the first step in construing a statute requires a recognition and implementation of its underlying purpose. I ask myself: What were the mischiefs intended to be remedied by this statute? Secondly, I further ask myself: What good was the Legislature trying to achieve for the people? Thirdly, I ask myself: How can I apply this statute using words in their ordinary signification so that they do not produce an absurdity?
Before us, the majority seems to take a very restricted, literal approach as to what constitutes “transfer.” I simply cannot join it. I believe the majority uses a strained subtlety, by employing the “forgery” argument, to inadvertently miss the purpose — the mischief — for which this statute was passed by our State Legislature. Doubt and darkness alight upon the Grand Theft by Transfer statute in our state, as a result of the majority opinion. Unfortunately, we have not lit a candle for judges in the future. It appears that the statute has been misinterpreted by the majority opinion because the jury did not find that Myria Warren committed forgery. I call your attention, under the general title of CRIMES, to SDCL 22-1-1:
The rule of the common law that penal statutes are to be strictly construed has no application to this title. All its criminal and penal provisions and all penal statutes are to be construed according to the fair import of their terms, with a view to effect their objects and promote justice, (emphasis supplied mine).
I seriously doubt that there is inadequate statutory draftmanship before us. It appears to me that this Court has placed a rather sharp rephrasing as to the meaning of the statute, eradicating the mischief which it seeks to condemn, and thus does limit its practical effect. Penal statutes are not to be strictly construed, but rather by the fair import of their terms. We have said so in several cases. State ex rel. Strauser v. Jameson, 76 S.D. 490, 81 N.W.2d 304 (1957); Bartron v. Codington County, 68 S.D. 309, 2 N.W.2d 337, 140 A.L.R. 550 (1942); State v. Whitmarsh, 26 S.D. 426, 128 N.W. 580 (1910). The Grand Theft by Transfer statute was passed to make certain acts criminal which offend our society, acts which we see before us committed by Myria Warren. Instruction 15 defines “transfer,” which I have set forth above. Three of her felony convictions are being reversed due to that word “transfer.” The literal force of the majority’s rigidity in statutory construction has eschewed the words of the State Legislature, and thus, denied the will of the sovereign.
Thus, I respectfully dissent to the reversing of the three convictions aforesaid.

=== CASE 9737915 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:36:53.452358+00 ===

ON PETITION TO TRANSFER
SULLIVAN, Justice.
This case grows out of a dispute between a warehouse's owner and tenant over responsibility for maintaining the fire protection sprinkler system. Where a municipal ordinance requires an owner of commercial property to maintain a fire protection sprinkler system, can the owner shift this responsibility to a tenant by written agreement? If so, did the lease at issue here shift this responsibility to the tenant? The Court of Appeals answered both these questions in the affirmative. Fresh Cut, Inc. v. Fazli (1994), Ind.App., 630 N.E.2d 575, reh'g denied. We agree with the Court of Appeals as to the first question but conclude that genuine issues of material fact remain as to the second.
Facts
On or about August 27, 1986, tenant Fresh Cut, Inc., leased part of a warehouse in Indianapolis from owner Bert Fazli pursuant to the terms of a written lease. Paragraphs five and six of the lease provide:
5. Lessee [tenant] shall not use the Leased Premises or fail to maintain them in any manner constituting a violation of any ordinance, statute, regulations, or order of any governmental authority.... The Lessee covenants and agrees that the Lessee will use, maintain and occupy the Leased Premises in a careful, safe, and proper manner and will not commit waste thereon....
6. During the term of this Lease the Lessee shall, at his own cost and expense, maintain in good condition and repair the Leased Premises, including but not limited to the electrical systems, heating and air conditioning systems, roof,-exterior- walls; foundation,[1] and structural frame of the building of which such Leased Premises are a part. Lessee shall also maintain in good repair all interior walls and floors....
*1129In effect at the time and applicable to the property was the following municipal ordinance:
A sprinkler system installed under this standard shall be properly maintained for efficient service. The owner is responsible for the condition of the sprinkler system and shall use due diligence in keeping the system in good operating condition.
Indianapolis and Marion Co., IN, Code § 12-4 (1987) (incorporating by reference N.F.P.A. 13, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems (National Fire Prevention Ass'n 1987)).
On August 5, 1989, the portion of the warehouse occupied by tenant burned. Tenant recovered from its property insurance carrier, State Farm Fire & Casualty Company (State Farm), for damage to personal property and costs of business interruption and re-establishing its business operations at another location.
In January of 1990, tenant and State Farm sued owner alleging that the damages suffered by tenant as a result of the fire would have been greatly reduced if owner had not negligently failed to maintain the building's fire protection sprinkler system in operating condition. In June of 1990, owner filed a counterclaim asserting that under paragraphs 5 and 6 of the lease, he was not responsible for ensuring that the sprinkler system functioned properly and that that responsibility had been assumed by tenant.
On February 18, 1992, tenant filed a Motion for Summary Judgment against owner's counterclaim alleging that: (1) owner had a nondelegable duty in accordance with state regulation and municipal ordinance to maintain the fire protection sprinkler system in operating condition, which duty could not be shifted to tenant per the lease contract provisions or otherwise; and (2) even if owner's duty to maintain the sprinkler system may be shifted, tenant did not agree to accept this duty when it signed the lease contract. On September 1, 1992, the trial court denied tenant's summary judgment motion without opinion. Tenant appealed.
The Court of Appeals affirmed the trial court's denial of tenant's summary judgment motion, holding that: (1) owner could validly shift responsibility for maintaining the fire protection sprinkler system to tenant without violating public policy; and (2) the lease contract unambiguously placed responsibility for maintenance of the fire protection sprinkler system on tenant. Fresh Cut, Inc., 630 N.E.2d at 580. Tenant seeks transfer.
I
The principal point of contention in this case is the extent to which the public policy at issue here-an owner's statutory duty to maintain a fire protection sprinkler system in good operating condition-restricts the freedom of parties to contract. Tenant argues in this interlocutory appeal that, regardless of what might be in the lease, owner had a statutory duty to maintain the fire protection sprinkler system in proper operating condition. Because statutory duties are nondele-gable, tenant reasons, public policy requires that any contract that attempts to shift owner's duty in this regard is invalid. And if the contract is invalid, tenant concludes, owner could not recover on his breach of contract counterclaim, and tenant should have been granted summary judgment.
A
We adopt the analysis used by the Court of Appeals in analyzing this question. Indiana courts recognize the freedom of parties to enter into contracts and, indeed, presume that contracts represent the freely bargained agreement of the parties. Weaver v. American Oil Co. (1971), 257 Ind. 458, 463, 276 N.E.2d 144, 147. This reflects the principle that it is in the best interest of the public not to restrict unnecessarily persons' freedom of contract. Raymundo v. Hammond Clinic Ass'n (1983), Ind., 449 N.E.2d 276, 279 (quoting Hodnick v. Fidelity Trust Co. (1932), 96 Ind.App. 342, 350, 183 N.E. 488, 491); see also Ind. Const. art. I, § 24. A real estate lease is subject to these same principles of contract. Whiteco Indus., Inc. v. Nickolick (1991), Ind.App., 571 N.E.2d 1337, 1339, trans. denied. While questions frequently arise which question the ability of a party to a contract to shift its liability to a *1130third party,2 no such question is present in this case and the ability of parties knowingly and willingly to allocate risk by contract is firmly established. Weaver, 257 Ind. at 465, 276 N.E.2d at 148. Except in certain circumstances,3 this ability of parties to allocate risk by contract extends so far as to permit indemnification for one's own negligence. Indianapolis Power & Light Co. v. Brad Snodgrass, Inc. (1991), Ind., 578 N.E.2d 669, 670.
Despite this very strong presumption of enforceability, courts have refused to enforce private agreements that contravene statute, clearly tend to injure the public in some way, or are otherwise contrary to the declared public policy of Indiana. This principle is illustrated by recent decisions of both our court and the Court of Appeals. See Straub v. B.M.T. by Todd (1994), Ind., 645 N.E.2d 597 (invalidating an agreement pursuant to which a man agreed to impregnate a woman in return for a promise not to assert any child support obligation); Pigman v. Ameritech Publishing, Imc. (1994), Ind.App., 641 N.E.2d 1026 (invalidating an exculpatory clause in a Yellow Pages advertising contract), reh'g deNied (1995), 650 N.E.2d 67.
We agree with the factors identified by the Court of Appeals to be considered in determining whether a contract not prohibited by statute or clearly tending to injure the public but nevertheless alleged to contravene public policy should be enforced: (f) the nature of the subject matter of the contract, e.g., Straub, 645 N.E.2d at 599; (i) the strength of the public policy underlying the statute, e.g., id.; (fii) the likelihood that refusal to enforce the bargain or term will further that policy, e.g., Noble v. Alis (1985), Ind.App., 474 N.E.2d 109, traNs. denied; (iv) how serious or deserved would be the forfeiture suffered by the party attempting to enforce the bargain, e.g., Tolliver v. Mathas (1989), Ind.App., 538 N.E.2d 971, 975, reh'g denied, trans. denied; and (v) the parties' relative bargaining power and freedom to contract, Pigman, 641 N.E.2d at 1026.
B
Nothing in the municipal ordinance at issue here restricts the ability of an owner to delegate responsibility for sprinkler systems. See Code of Indianapolis § 12-4, supra. And, given the nature of the subject matter and the parties' relative bargaining power and freedom to contract, we have little difficulty agreeing with the Court of Appeals that, on these facts, a contract shifting responsibility for sprinkler systems from owner to tenant is not void as against public policy. The subject matter of this contract is the lease of commercial real estate. Commercial real estate leases commonly allocate obligations and risks between owner and tenant. See, e.g., Mark A. Senn, Commercial Real Estate Leases: Preparation and Negotiation 378-379 (2d ed. 1990). For example, Indiana Code § 6-1.1-2-4 (1998) imposes liability on the owner of real property for property taxes, but the tenant is customarily required to pay its share of real estate taxes on leased commercial property. Report, A Practical Guide to Reviewing a Commercial Lease, 19 Real Prop., Prob. & Tr. J. 891, 907 (1984) (reprinted in Milton R. Friedman, Commercial Real Estate Leases 859 (1994)). We also agree that there is no evidence of inequality of bargaining power or of impingement on freedom to contract here. Compare, e.g., Weaver, 257 Ind. at 463, 276 N.E.2d at 147 (invalidating exculpatory clause in service station lease), with Allstate Ins. Co. v. Boles, (1985), Ind., 481 N.E.2d 1096, 1101 (enforcing household exclusion clause in insurance contract). We hold that on this record, there was no public policy impediment to the parties agreeing that tenant would be responsible for maintaining the fire sprinkler system.
II
Holding that the parties were not constrained by public policy to make such a bargain is not the same as holding that they made such a bargain, however.
*1131A
Although the issue has not previously been addressed in Indiana, the general rule is that an owner has the responsibility to comply with statutory obligations affecting leased premises unless a tenant has agreed to assume the obligation. Patrick A. Ranolph, Jr., The Commercial Property Lease 164 (1993); Annotation, Who, As Between Landlord and Tenant, Must Make or Bear Expense of Alterations, Improvements, or Repairs Ordered by Public Authorities, 22 A.L.R.3d 521 (1968) (collecting cases). Cf. Restatement (Second) of Property § 5.5, caveat to subsection (1), at 206 (1977) (applying this rule to residential real estate leases). A tenant's covenant merely to repair the premises does not necessarily obligate the tenant to make repairs necessary to comply with statutory requirements or orders of public authorities. Where the alterations or improvements required or ordered are not structural or substantial in nature but constitute mere repairs or replacements, the tenant must bear the expense pursuant to the covenant to repair. Annotation, 22 A.L.R.3d at 529. But where the alterations or improvements required or ordered are of a structural or substantial nature, the owner must bear the expense, absent a showing that it was the intention of the contracting parties that the tenant assume the obligation. Randolph, The Commercial Property Lease at 165; Annotation, 22 A.L.R.3d at 537. Cf. Quebe v. Davis (1992), Ind.App., 586 N.E.2d 914, 916. Similarly, a tenant's covenant merely to comply with all laws and ordinances obligates the tenant to bear the expense of alterations or improvements required or ordered that are not structural or substantial in nature but constitute mere repairs or replacements. Annotation, 22 A.L.R.3d at 540. But where the alterations or improvements required or ordered are of a structural or substantial nature, the owner must bear the expense, absent a showing that it was the intention of the contracting parties that the tenant assume the obligation. Randolph, The Commercial Property Lease at 165; Annotation, 22 A.L.R.3d at 543.
Questions of whether obligations to comply with statutes or orders of public authorities have been delegated under the terms of a commercial lease from owner to tenant have appeared with some frequency in other jurisdictions. Seq e.g., Hadian v. Schwarts, 8 Cal.4th 836, 35 Cal.Rptr.2d 589, 884 P.2d 46 (1994) (seismic reconstruction ordered as part of earthquake hazard reduction program); Brown v. Green, 8 Cal.4th 812, 35 Cal.Rptr.2d 598, 884 P.2d 55 (1994) (asbestos removal); Wolf v. 2539 Realty Assoc., 161 A.D.2d 11, 560 N.Y.S.2d 24 (N.Y.App.Div.1990) (asbestos removal); Bush Terminal Assoc. v. Federated Dep't Stores, Inc., 73 A.D.2d 943, 424 N.Y.S.2d 28 (N.Y.App.Div.1980) (new sewer lines); Mayfair Merchandise Co. v. Wayne, 415 F.2d 23 (24 Cir.1969) (fire protection sprinkler sys tem); First Nat'l Stores, Inc. v. Yellowstone Shopping Ctr, Inc., 21 N.Y.2d 630, 290 N.Y.S.2d 721, 237 N.E.2d 868 (1968) (fire protection sprinkler system), reargument denied by 22 N.Y.2d 827, 292 N.Y.S.2d 1031, 239 N.E.2d 659. While these cases stand for the general principles that (i) there is no public policy impediment to the tenant assuming these responsibilities vis-a-vis the owner, e.g., Brown, 35 Cal.Rptr.2d at 604, 884 P.2d at 61, and (#) that neither a covenant to repair nor a covenant to comply with all laws carries with it a duty to make permanent, substantial, or unforeseen building additions or alterations, e.g., id., cf. Quebe, 586 N.E.2d at 916, in the end the resolution of each case turns on the precise language of the lease at issue and, in most cases, the facts and cireumstances surrounding its making. This point is illustrated by comparing Mayfair Merchandise Co. v. Wayne and First Nat'l Stores, Inc. v. Yellowstone Shopping Ctr, Inc., supra. In Mayfair Merchandise Co., the lease required the tenant to "make all necessary repairs, structural or otherwise, interior or exterior" and to comply with all statutes, ordinances, and other governmental requirements "for correction, prevention, and abatement of nuisances or other grievances." 415 F.2d at 24. The court, invoking the general rules set forth in the preceding paragraph, held that the tenant was not obligated to bear the cost of complying with a city fire department order requiring installation of a fire protection sprinkler system and proper enclosure of a wooden *1132stairway. Mayfair Merchandise Co., 415 F.2d at 25. However, in First Nat'l Stores, Inc., where the fire department directed the owner of a shopping center to install a fire protection sprinkler system in the basement of a supermarket, the court found that the tenant was obligated to bear the cost of installation. The fire department order did not apply to any other stores in the shopping center and, while the lease provided that the owner was required to make all alterations required by governmental authorities, the lease also provided that the tenant was responsible for alterations required by governmental authorities "as a result of [tenant's] specific use of the premises." First Nat'l Stores, Inc., 237 N.E.2d at 870. Compare also Hadian v. Schwartz, supra, which held the owner responsible for seismic reconstruction of a building ordered by the city as part of an earthquake hazard reduction program even though the lease contained a "compliance with laws" clause and was labelled a "net lease," with Brown v. Green, supra, which held the tenant responsible for removing asbestos pursuant to county order under a lease with terms virtually identical to those at issue in Hadian v. Schwartz. Hadian v. Schwarts and Brown v. Green were decided by the California Supreme Court on the same day. In explaining the difference between the two cases, the Brown court said:
Thus, although broadly applicable criteria for determining the repair and compliance with laws obligations of the parties to a nonresidential lease can be articulated, it does not follow that the outcome in a particular case can be easily forecast on the basis of the text of the lease alone. Each agreement must be evaluated in light of its individual terms under generally applicable contextual criteria and the principle of reasonable construction.
35 Cal.Rptr.2d at 601, 884 P.2d at 58.
B
We disagree with the conclusion of the Court of Appeals that "the terms of the lease unambiguously place responsibility for keeping all of the leased premises, including the sprinkler system, in proper operating condition upon [tenant]." Fresh Cut, Inc., 630 N.E.2d at 580. Indeed, we find the placement of the sprinkler system responsibility highly ambiguous. First, the lease allocates responsibility for maintenance of electrical systems, heating and air conditioning systems, and structural frame to tenant but apparently allocates responsibility for maintenance and repair of the roof, exterior walls, and foundation to owner.4 It is not unambiguously clear into which of these two groups the sprinkler system falls, and since a covenant merely to repair does not carry with it a requirement to make permanent, substantial, or unforeseen building additions or alterations, Quebe, 586 N.E.2d at 916, this ambiguity alone cannot be resolved against the tenant.5 Second, there is no explicit mention of the sprinkler system in the lease but the nature of the obligation asserted against tenant here resembles indemnification, and indemnification clauses are strictly construed and the intent to indemnify must be stated in clear and unequivocal terms. Wilson Leasing Co. v. Gadberry (1982), Ind.App., 437 N.E.2d 500, 501. Third, the lease was draft, ed by owner, and an ambiguous contract will be construed against its drafter. Falley v. Giles (1867), 29 Ind. 114, 115; Tarrant v. Self (1979), 180 Ind.App. 215, 387 N.E.2d 1349, 1353. Lastly, there is evidence here that owner did not acknowledge that he had any legal duty to maintain the building's sprinkler system in good operating condition. This certainly could give rise to an inference that, because owner did not recognize any responsibility for maintaining the sprinklers, he did not delegate that responsibility in the contract.
While we reject the Court of Appeals conclusion that the lease unambiguously placed responsibility for the sprinkler system on the tenant, we also reject tenant's claim that this responsibility clearly re*1133mained with the owner. If a contract is ambiguous solely because of the language used in the contract and not because of extrinsic facts, then its construction is purely a question of law to be determined by the trial court. First Fed. Sav. Bank of Indiana v. Key Markets, Inc. (1990), Ind., 559 N.E.2d 600, 604. Here, however, while the contract is ambiguous and uncertain in its terms,6 we believe that the meaning of the contract may well need to be determined by extrinsic evidence. As such, its construction is a matter for the factfinder. Id. Rules of contract construction and extrinsic evidence need to be employed to determine and give effect to the parties' reasonable expectations. Id. Under such cireumstances, resolution of this issue is inappropriate for summary judgment.
Conclusion
We agree with the trial court that summary judgment in favor of tenant on owner's breach of contract counterclaim was inappropriate in that the lease is not void as against public policy and issues of material fact remain as to whether owner or tenant is responsible for maintaining the sprinkler system under the lease. We grant transfer, vacate the decision of the Court of Appeals, Ind.Appellate Rule 11(B)(3), and remand this case to the trial court for proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion.
SHEPARD, C.J., and DICKSON, J., concur.
DeBRULER, J., dissents with separate opinion, in which SELBY, J., concurs.
1. These words are lined out in the lease, apparently reflecting the agreement of the parties that maintenance and repair of the roof, exterior walls, and foundation remain the responsibility of the owner.
. See, e.g., Perryman v. Huber, Hunt & Nichols, Inc. (1994), Ind.App., 628 N.E.2d 1240, trans. denied; Massengill v. Indiana Nat'l Bank (1990), Ind.App., 550 N.E.2d 97, 99; Stevens v. Thompson (1988), Ind.App., 525 N.E.2d 353.
. E.g., certain indemnification clauses in construction contracts are prohibited by Indiana Code § 26-2-5-1 (1993).
. See note 1, supra.
. Nor can it be said as a matter of law that the covenant to comply with laws here carries with it a requirement to make such additions or alterations. See Annotation, 22 A.L.R.3d at 543 and cases cited therein; Hadian, 35 Cal.Rptr.2d at 593, 884 P.2d at 50; Mayfair Merchandise Co., 415 F.2d at 25. First Nat'l Stores, Inc., 237 N.E.2d at 870.
. Indeed, in its papers supporting its petition to this court, tenant argues that "at a minimum" the lease is ambiguous. Br. of Appellant at 30.

=== CASE 9737916 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:36:53.456784+00 ===

DeBRULER, Justice,
dissenting.
In this case, Fresh Cut, Inc. agreed in August 1986, to lease an uninhabitable building owned by Fazli. Only the lease's alleged sprinkler maintenance requirement made the building legally fit for use. During the term of the lease, after repeated warnings to Fazli from the Marion County Fire Department, the worst finally happened: in 1989 the building burned down, imposing losses on both Fazli and Fresh Cut.
Now, after having benefitted substantially from this lease, Fazli wishes to benefit yet again. Specifically, after having received approximately $100,000 in rent, he wants this Court to declare that a landlord may delegate his duty to maintain fire prevention devices, like the sprinklers in this case, to a tenant, so that Fazli may receive an additional $200,000 (or more) in insurance proceeds. Unfortunately, a majority of this Court is ready to do precisely that, denying that there exists any public policy reason for voiding a contract which purports to delegate such duty.
The majority correctly identifies the factors that are relevant when deciding whether to enforce a contract where it arguably violates public policy: (1) the subject matter of the contract; (2) the strength of the public policy underlying the statute; (8) the likelihood that refusal to enforce the contract will further that policy; (4) the seriousness and justness of any forfeiture suffered by the party attempting to enforce the bargain; and (5) the parties' relative bargaining power. These are similar to the factors in the old Tunkl test, but, since the California Supreme Court was applying a statute, the factors are not identical. See Tunkl v. Regents of University of California, 60 Cal.2d 92, 32 Cal.Rptr. 33, 35, 383 P.2d 441, 443 (1963). However, it is worth observing that in our most recent relevant case, Straub v. Todd (1994), Ind., 645 N.E.2d 597 (parent cannot contractually delegate his child support obligation because of important public policy, ie., ensuring child's ability to receive support from two parents), only the first two factors were discussed explicitly, while the last two were discussed not at all.
The court errs in its application of those factors to this case. While the maintenance of fire prevention equipment may not be a unique subject for a contract, the public policy of ensuring such maintenance is overwhelming, evidenced by the penalty assessed upon conviction for non-maintenance. See *1134Indianapolis and Marion Co., IN, Code § 1-8. The Indianapolis Code incorporates by reference N.F.P.A. 13, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems, and 183A, Inspections, Testing and Maintenance of Sprinkler Systems (National Fire Prevention Ass'n 1987). Code of Indianapolis, § 12-4. N.E.P.A. 18 states, in pertinent part, "The owner is responsible for the condition of the sprinkler system...." N.F.P.A. 13A says, "The responsibility for properly maintaining a sprinkler system is the obligation of the owners of the property."
The willingness of the public to impose criminal liability on a violator is certainly strong evidence of a weighty public policy. Refusing to enforce this contract would ensure that other owners carefully check their holdings to insure that the fire prevention systems are adequate and would do no more than put Fazli in the situation that he should have been in, i.e., responsible for his own losses that were due to the fire. I believe that the parties bargaining power was about equal, so that factor is not particularly important. This contract was an obvious attempt to avoid the important public policy of requiring owners to maintain essential fixtures upon their property. See Vandalia R.R. Co. v. Fort Wayne and N. Ind. Traction Co. (1918), 68 Ind.App. 120, 118 N.E. 839.
I dissented in Stroub, precisely because the majority was too quick to dismiss the contract. In Straub, we looked with kindness upon, and voided the contract made by, a woman who, according to this Court's interpretation of the facts, attempted to trade her daughter's right to child support for sex. Should we be less solicitous towards a Hoosier business like Fresh Cut?
SELBY, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9737980 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:39:08.782598+00 ===

CONLEY, P. J.
This case involves the grisly death of a Negro laborer, who was a citizen of Tulare. On the last day of the year 1963, after a period of concentrated drinking, Hugh McCarthur died from a massive traumatic skull fracture and severe burns. There is ample evidence, the truth of which we must accept on this appeal inasmuch as the jury found him guilty (People v. Sweeney, 55 Cal.2d 27, 33 [9 Cal.Rptr. 793, 357 P.2d 1049]; People v. Caritativo, 46 Cal.2d 68, 70 [292 P.2d 513]), that the defendant, Carl Campbell, one of the decedent’s drinking companions, was criminally responsible not only of fracturing the decedent’s skull, but of attempting to dispose of the body by burning; unless there was prejudicial error requiring a reversal, the judgment of voluntary manslaughter must be affirmed. The attorney rep*41resenting the defendant does not contend that the evidence is insufficient to warrant the conviction.
As Carl Campbell, charged with the murder (Pen. Code, § 187), did not have the means to hire an attorney, the court appointed the Public Defender of Tulare County to represent him at the trial. The case was submitted to the jury, after a six-day hearing, on the stipulated alternatives of a verdict of murder in the second degree, manslaughter, or not guilty. The jury found the defendant guilty of voluntary manslaughter, an offense included within the charge of murder (Pen. Code, § 192, subd. 1).
During the last day of the year, Junius Deville (sometimes called Julius Deville by various witnesses), Lonnie (also called Berl) McCarthur, Carl Campbell, and Hugh McCarthur began drinking early in the morning in the McCarthur home at 933 South “Q” Street in Tulare; the McCarthur brothers and Junius Deville lived there; Berl McCarthur was a cripple, having previously lost a leg; Carl Campbell was a friend and frequently visited the others; those of the group who were able to work were engaged in casual day labor, such as picking cotton, but the day was too wet and gloomy to justify their labor on that day. The men spent the day in drinking liquor which was purchased on the credit of Berl McCarthur. They did some cleaning about the house, and cooked a meal consisting of chicken and beans, of which they ate at various times.
With the consent of Carl Campbell, the owner, Junius Deville and Berl McCarthur took a broken television set to the home of a repairman who agreed to fix it. Later, the two left the McCarthur house and drove several blocks away to that portion of Tulare where there were persons seeking entertainment at bars and pool rooms; when they left the home, they testified that Hugh McCarthur was locked inside the house and Carl Campbell was outside, dressed only in a T-shirt, levis, socks and shoes; they testified that Junius Deville locked the front door and also placed a padlock on the rear door. The two men returned a relatively short time afterwards at about 7 p. m. and, as Junius Deville tried to open the padlock on the back door, the hasp fell to the floor, and when Junius went into the house he was aware of smoke and immediately thereafter found Hugh McCarthur lying on the floor in the front room with his head and shoulders away from the open connecting doorway of the kitchen; the victim was dead; he showed evidence of severe burns in three sep*42arate places. Berl poured water from the kitchen over the body which was lying on the right side with a smouldering cotton jacket piled beside the head and shoulder. A heater hose, which had been detached from a coupling on a stove in the front room and which entangled a broom partially above the coils of the hose and partially below them, was still attached to the petcock at the side of the room from which the gas could flow. The end of the 7- or 8-foot hose, uncoupled from the heater, lay beneath the jacket.
The police were called and made a thorough investigation. The autopsy established that Hugh McCarthur had died from a combination of severe burns and blows to his eyes and the back of his head which had resulted in a massive skull fracture. The padlocked rear entrance to the house had been forced open by someone; five separate fires had made their marks on the woodwork of the room, and the victim’s body had been subjected to three separate and unconnected fires; obviously, such burning was not the result of an accident.
When Junius and Lonnie left the house, the victim was lying on the sofa as a result of his heavy drinldng (his blood-alcohol content, ascertained after death, being .300). Defendant was seen shortly after 7 p. m. on “P” street dressed in his overcoat, a brown sport coat, red shirt (all of which had been allegedly locked in the house when Berl and Junius had left there) besides levis, shoes and socks. His levis were soaked with blood and water, and the hem of the overcoat had blood on it; his shoes showed traces of blood and were water soaked. The rather rare type of these blood samples was the same as the victim’s. The knuckles of the appellant’s right hand were swollen and there were traces of blood between his fingers; his alcohol blood content, measured later, was .208. The brown sport coat worn by the defendant belonged to the victim and had been taken from the back bedroom closet.
Defendant contended that when Berl and Junius left he had gone back to the house, had entered when he found the front door unlocked, that while he was inside, on two separate occasions he had picked up the victim from the floor where he had fallen as a result of intoxication and had placed him on a bed in the back bedroom; he denied any knowledge of the victim’s death; the blood and water inferentially got on his clothes and the blood on his hands when he picked up the fallen decedent and carried him to the bed; he got the additional clothes from the closet with the consent of the decedent. The defendant’s account of what he did, or did not do, was consistent from the start.
*43Appellant claims that the court committed prejudicial error by admitting People’s exhibits 5, 6, and 7, photographs which showed the body of the decedent in an “excruciating [burned] condition,” because such exhibits were “purely cumulative,” citing People v. Burns, 109 Cal.App.2d 524, 541 [241 P.2d 308, 242 P.2d 9].  Of course, it is improper to introduce gruesome pictures which contribute nothing toward the solution of the evidentiary problems involved in a criminal case, and which are produced for the sole purpose of shocking or disgusting the jury. However, the question of the admissibility of offered photographs because their probative value as evidence outweighs any probable prejudicial effect rests primarily within the discretion of the trial court, and if they add to the thrust of the evidence and thus help the jury to ascertain the truth, a ruling admitting them will not be disturbed on appeal. (People v. Modesto, 59 Cal.2d 722, 734 [31 Cal.Rptr. 225, 382 P.2d 33]; People v. Lindsey, 56 Cal.2d 324 [14 Cal.Rptr. 678, 363 P.2d 910]; People v. Atchley, 53 Cal.2d 160, 168 [346 P.2d 764].) Service on a murder trial jury is not entertainment; such duty is serious and onerous; by serving, the jurors are executing a primary and necessary duty as citizens. Often the details of evidence are unpleasant, but adult finders of fact must face this duty calmly and undismayed,  The photographs which were introduced by the prosecution tended legitimately to establish that three areas on the body of the decedent were subjected to humanly induced fires, and that there were separate fire spots located in the room containing the body; even though certain of the details may have been cumulative, we cannot interfere with the discretion of the trial court in admitting them in evidence.
The testimony of the witness, Fred H. Wynbrandt, a criminalist with the State Department of Justice, is objected to. His qualifications are not questioned; the area of objection is restricted to the fact that he testified with respect to a gas heating stove and the use of natural gas. Appellant claims that there is nothing in the record which indicates that the type of fuel used in the McCarthur home was natural gas. This objection seems to be a wholly false quantity in view of the fact that it was not even mentioned by way of objection at the trial.
If any objection is made to expert testimony, it is for the trial court to determine whether or not a proper foundation has been laid,  If defendant’s counsel believes that the *44evidence sought to be introduced has not had a proper foundation proven for it, his fundamental duty is to object on that ground to the proffered evidence. From the lack of objection by the public defender it may be inferred that he realized that everyone involved knew that natural gas was the type of fuel used in Tulare. Besides, there are numerous places in the reporter’s transcript where witnesses refer to the use of “gas” in Tulare and there is definite evidence that the heating stove in question was one designed for the use of gas.
The trial court has a broad discretion to decide whether to admit evidence of an experimental nature and whether or not a proper foundation has been laid. (Yecny v. Eclipse Fuel Engineering Co., 210 Cal.App.2d 192, 204-205 [26 Cal.Rptr. 402]; Odell v. Frueh, 146 Cal.App.2d 504, 511 [304 P.2d 45, 76 A.L.R.2d 345].) It is difficult to believe that the judge owed some hazy duty to interfere with the testimony of the expert witness in the total absence of any objection.  Generally speaking, failure to object at a trial is equivalent to a waiver of any claim of error in the admission of evidence (People v. Modell, 143 Cal.App.2d 724, 731 [300 P.2d 204]).
The appellant alleges also that the district attorney committed prejudicial error by asking too many leading and suggestive questions. The Attorney General’s brief states that objection to the form of the questions asked by the district attorney was made at only one time and on that occasion that the district attorney withdrew his question and properly re-framed it. It is not claimed that objection was often made to the form of the district attorney’s questions or that the court on its own motion should have admonished the district attorney to use a different method of questioning.  The rule against asking leading questions, that is to say questions which suggest an answer or constitute instruction to a willing witness (People v. Mora, 139 Cal.App.2d 266, 272 [293 P.2d 522]; Code Civ. Proc., § 2046), does not apply stringently in non-controversial matters, or when it is legitimate to employ some suggestion to refresh a witness’s memory, or when an expert witness is being interrogated or when exhibits are being identified (Bruce v. Western Pipe & Steel Co., 177 Cal. 25, 27 [169 P. 660]; People v. Mora, supra, 139 Cal.App.2d 266, 272; Chula v. Superior Court, 109 Cal.App.2d 24, 38-39 [240 P.2d 398]; People v. Mason, 86 Cal.App.2d 445, 455-456 [195 P.2d 60]; People v. Wilson, 46 Cal.App.2d 218, 224 [115 P.2d 598]).
*45An attentive reading of the record fails to show any excessive use of illegitimate leading questions or any prejudicial results therefrom. And even if there were a different record in that respect, it would scarcely be proper for counsel to insist upon such an objection for the first time on appeal (People v. Wilder, 151 Cal.App.2d 698, 707 [312 P.2d 425]; People v. Whitholt, 77 Cal.App. 587, 588 [247 P. 245]).
It is also urged that the district attorney was guilty of prejudicial misconduct when he asked one of the state’s witnesses, William Jackson, who ran an establishment containing pool tables, whether he had had any trouble with the appellant on the night of the homicide after it had been committed. The objection made below was that the question was incompetent, irrelevant, and immaterial, and thereupon the prosecution withdrew the question. There is no indication that the district attorney asked the question for the purpose of creating prejudice against the defendant. The ease at bar involved an inquiry by the jury whether the crime, if it were committed by defendant, constituted second degree murder or manslaughter. Murder, of course, involves malice aforethought, and the mental state of appellant at the time of the killing, or shortly afterwards, was important. Whether the defendant had committed the murder a few minutes before, or whether he in fact knew nothing about it and it was an accident, or the result of a crime by someone else was for the jury to determine. The attitude and state of mind of the defendant in the short period following the death was a legitimate factor in determining the presence or absence of criminality. The viewpoint of the district attorney, therefore, was not improper and no prejudicial error can be premised upon what occurred.
As might be expected at this point in juridical history, defendant’s appellate counsel invokes the principle referred to in People v. Dorado, 62 Cal.2d 338 [42 Cal.Rptr. 169, 398 P.2d 361]; In re Lopez, 62 Cal.2d 368 [42 Cal.Rptr. 188, 398 P.2d 380]; People v. Modesto, 62 Cal.2d 436 [42 Cal.Rptr. 417, 398 P.2d 753]; Escobedo v. Illinois, 378 U.S. 478 [84 S.Ct. 1758,12 L.Ed.2d 977]; and Massiah v. United States, 377 U.S. 201 [84 S.Ct. 1199, 12 L.Ed.2d 246], The authorities above cited enunciated constitutional principles as to which everyone in the United States has an equal right. Those principles, like the “gentle rain from heaven” which alike falls upon the just and the unjust, make no distinction with respect to beneficiaries. But it is also obvious that the constitutional *46bill of rights is not designed to free guilty people; it is established, rather, to assure a fair and impartial trial to every accused person.
While there is presently no distinction in California as to the impact of constitutional rights as between confessions and admissions establishing an essential fact or element necessary to prove guilt (People v. Atchley, supra, 53 Cal.2d 160, 170), there are situations in which minor or incidental statements by a person accused of crime may not constitute reversible error.  As is said in the opinion in People v. Dorado, supra, 62 Cal.2d 338, 356: ‘1. . . under some circumstances the introduction into evidence of statements obtained from a defendant during police interrogation in violation of his right to counsel and his right to remain silent may constitute harmless error. ...”
We think that the special circumstances are present here. The essential inquiry is whether a defendant has made such admissions freely and voluntarily, and, beyond that, whether the defendant has had a fair trial.
In this case, it is apparent from an intensive reading of the record and a common sense consideration of all of the factors involved, that the defendant made what amounted to a free and voluntary statement, and that he did have a fair trial. It is true that there is no specific or affirmative evidence that he was advised by the law enforcement officers that he could remain silent and that he had the right to the services of an attorney. On the contrary, there is nothing positively shown as it was in the Escobedo, Dorado, and other similar cases, that there was in fact a preceding lack of such preliminary advice by the police officers.
The defendant’s statement was taken on tape at the jail on the day following the tragedy. It is not claimed by him or anyone else that he was subjected to pressure or abuse, physical or mental, or that he was made any promises for a statement of facts within his knowledge relating to the death. However, if we assume that no such warnings were in fact given to the defendant, we must keep in mind that the record shows positively that the minor or incidental admissions which were made before the officers had also been made freely by him on the same day to his drinking companion, Junius Deville. The incidental or inferential admissions on the tape were that he had been in the dwelling house after Berl and Junius had left for a different part of town, that he had twice lifted the decedent from the floor where he had fallen as the result of his drinking, and had placed him on a couch *47or bed, and that he had worn some of the decedent’s clothing by consent. The defendant stated that he had not broken any locks, but had entered the house freely through the front door and that he had acted throughout as a friend of the dead man. This same statement of his claim of the essential happenings was given on the day following the tragedy to Junius Deville, who had no connection with the arresting officers, or with any one else involved in law enforcement. The witness, Deville, testified to these incidental admissions prior to the tender of the tape in evidence.
In addition, it was established that, after the brother of the decedent and Deville had locked the front and rear doors of the home with the decedent inside and the defendant outside, the defendant appeared in the “P” street area wearing a brown sport coat of the decedent which had been located in a closet of the house; this showed conclusively that the defendant had been in the house. There were, therefore, two lines of proof aside from the inferential statement on the tape that the defendant had been inside the McCarthur home after Berl and Junius had left for town; the statements on the tape were not something unique; the same essential factors had been previously proven by other evidence.
Lastly, no objection was made to the reception of the tape in evidence. Ample—in fact even excessive—opportunity was afforded to defendant’s attorney to make any objection he deemed proper if he were disposed to do so. On the day prior to the introduction of the statement in evidence, the trial judge insisted that defendant’s counsel must preliminarily hear the entire tape so that he could make any objection that he thought it proper for him to make. On the following day, defendant’s attorney stated in open court that he had become familiar with the entire contents of the tape, and that he was satisfied; he made no objection of any kind to its receipt in evidence.
In an adversary proceeding such as a criminal trial, the side which later claims that error was committed must object to the reception of questioned evidence or other procedure ; a failure to do so is normally considered a waiver of any objection. (People v. Ibarra, 60 Cal.2d 460, 462 [34 Cal.Rptr. 863, 386 P.2d 487]; People v. Lopez, 60 Cal.2d 223, 249 [32 Cal.Rptr. 424, 384 P.2d 16]; People v. Wilson, 60 Cal.2d 139, 146-148 [32 Cal.Rptr. 44, 383 P.2d 452]; People v. Hyde, 51 Cal.2d 152,157 [331 P.2d 42]; People v. Richardson, 51 Cal.2d 445, 447 [334 P.2d 573]; People v. Jordan, *4845 Cal.2d 697, 708 [290 P.2d 484]; Dryer v. Dryer, 231 Cal.App.2d 441, 451 [41 Cal.Rptr. 839]; People v. Gurrola, 218 Cal.App.2d 349, 354 [32 Cal.Rptr. 368]; People v. Hernandez, 197 Cal.App.2d 25, 31 [17 Cal.Rptr. 20]; People v. Prado, 190 Cal.App.2d 374, 378 [12 Cal.Rptr. 141]; Crocker-Anglo Nat. Bank v. American Tr. Co., 170 Cal.App.2d 289, 299 [338 P.2d 617]; People v. Ryan, 140 Cal.App.2d 412, 423 [295 P.2d 496]; People v. Gonzales, 69 Cal.App. 609, 613 [231 P. 1014]; Witkin, California Evidence, § 700, p. 832, § 723, pp. 751-752, 1963 Supplement, § 700, p. 270, § 723, p. 272.)
As is said in 3 California Jurisprudence, Second Edition, Appeal and Error, section 140, page 604: “It is a general rule of appellate review, early established and long adhered to, that questions not raised in the trial court will not be considered on appeal.”
And this familiar rule is thus phrased in 4 Corpus Juris Secundum, Appeal and Error, section 228, page 665: “Generally, . . . questions, of whatever nature, not raised and properly preserved for review in the trial court, will not be noticed on appeal; ...” and is supported by a note containing citations from jurisdictions throughout the United States including over 50 from California.
The recent opinion in In re Lessard, 62 Cal.2d 497, 503 [42 Cal.Rptr. 583, 399 P.2d 39], states: “A failure to object to the introduction of evidence which defendant alleges was illegally obtained precludes the successful presentation of the issue at the appellate level.”
The cases relied upon by counsel normally deal with situations where the point was clearly made at the trial by objection and the adverse ruling was then charged as error on appeal. In the Dorado case, supra, 62 Cal.2d 338, 344-345, there had been an objection to the admission in evidence of the confession in the trial court and the lower court had overruled the objection. In Modesto, supra, 62 Cal.2d 436, it seems apparent that objection was made at the trial to the admission of the questioned statements (People v. Modesto, supra, 59 Cal.2d 722, 733). The Escobedo case, supra, 84 S.Ct. 1758 ruled on an objection to the evidence made during the trial (see: People v. Escobedo, 28 Ill.2d 41 [190 N.E.2d 825, 827].)
In the instant case, the record is even consistent with the thought that counsel for defendant desired that the evidence in question should be received. For the only reasonable de*49fense which the defendant could have hoped to establish was that he actually entered the house in a normal fashion through the front door, that the decedent was staggering drunk and fell one or more times during a search by him for more liquor; that the decedent’s skull was fractured as the result of one of the falls; that the defendant in kindness twice picked him up and laid him on a bed; that blood and water got onto the defendant’s hands and clothing when he was thus acting as a good Samaritan, and that the fatal result arose from an accident or the wrongful act of an interloper rather than through a criminal assault by him. This in fact proved to be his defense when he took the witness stand and described, in great detail, all of the alleged events of the fatal day. In order to show that this was not a last-minute invention on his part, it was advantageous to defendant to prove that as early as the day after the death he had told the officers charged with investigating the crime the same story that he consistently vouched for at all times thereafter. During his recital of events on the tape and in his testimony on the witness stand, he denied that he had ever struck the decedent, caused his death, or burned his body, or that he had taken any clothes that he did not have permission to take, or that he had gotten blood on his hands and clothing as the result of a criminal assault. The tape did not include a confession or the admission of any primary factor necessary to prove his guilt; he denied at all times that he was responsible for the death.
It seems clear to us that the statement made by the defendant was in effect voluntarily made, that it was not a confession or an admission of any fact or element necessary to establish the crime, and that because his attorney failed to make any objection to the offer of this evidence in the court below and announced that he was satisfied, no error warranting a reversal of the judgment was committed. A defendant’s rights under the Sixth and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution, and under similar safeguards contained in the Constitution of California, are not designed to do away with other time-honored features of a criminal prosecution; there is no necessity on the part of an appellate court at least in the circumstances shown by the record in this case, to invoke principles which were not urged in any form or made the basis of objection in the court below. The Public Defender of Tulare County acted ably for the defendant during the lengthy ease; we believe that Carl *50Campbell received a fair trial and that the judgment of conviction should be upheld.
The judgment is affirmed.
Brown (R. M.), J., concurred.

=== CASE 9737981 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:39:08.787209+00 ===

STONE, J., Concurring and Dissenting.
I have no quarrel with the affirmance in this case, but I must dissent from that portion of the majority opinion holding that failure to advise a defendant of his Sixth Amendment constitutional rights must be raised in the trial court or it is waived, and as a necessary corollary thereto that a silent record raises the presumption that a defendant has been advised of such rights under the Sixth Amendment.
To view in proper perspective the holding that a defendant’s Sixth Amendment rights are waived if not asserted in the trial court, it is necessary to first determine whether a silent record raises the presumption that a defendant has been advised of such rights. The import of People v. Dorado, 62 Cal.2d 338 [42 Cal.Rptr. 169, 398 P.2d 361]; In re Lopez, 62 Cal.2d 368 [42 Cal.Rptr. 188, 398 P.2d 380]; People v. Modesto, 62 Cal.2d 436 [42 Cal.Rptr. 417, 398 P.2d 753], and other recent eases, is to require as a condition precedent to the use in evidence of a confession or admission, proof that a defendant has been advised of his rights under the Sixth Amendment and that he knowingly waived them.
California courts have long required that it be shown that a confession was freely and voluntarily made, without coercion, threats or undue pressure, and without promises of reward, immunity from punishment, or leniency, real or apparent, by those in authority. (People v. Miller, 135 Cal. 69 [67 P. 12].) The same proof has been required for use of admissions as evidence since People v. Atchley (Dec. 1959) 53 Cal.2d 160 [346 P.2d 764], (See CALJIC 29 A-l.) The burden is upon the prosecution to prove that these conditions precedent have been met.
Not only must the trial judge first satisfy himself whether the foundational evidence meets the requirements for the use of the confession or admission in evidence, but also he must instruct the jury that his determination is not binding upon them, the jurors must determine for themselves whether the proper foundation has been laid to permit consideration of the confession.
Dorado and kindred cases have made proof that a defendant *51has been advised of his rights under the Sixth Amendment a part of this foundational proof. Since it is a condition precedent to the use of a confession or admission, this evidence is as essential to the record as the confession or admission itself. There is no room for a presumption from a silent record that the foundation has been laid. Therefore it seems to me that the majority holding that objection to lack of the foundational evidence is waived if not raised in the trial court, is untenable. If the confession or admission is in the record, but the foundational evidence necessary to make it useable as evidence is not, the record reflects error on its face. And since the record reflects reversible error, it can be raised for the first time on appeal.
I find no difficulty in distinguishing a violation of a defendant’s Sixth Amendment rights in the use of a confession or an admission as evidence, from the introduction of other kinds of evidence subject to exclusionary rules, such as that obtained by an illegal search. Objection to the introduction of such other kinds of evidence is waived if not made in the trial court, because unless objection is made no foundational evidence is required for its use.

=== CASE 9737894 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:36:34.463383+00 ===

WUEST, Justice
(concurring specially).
I concur. The key in this case was factual. Did Olsen see the oncoming vehicle and try to beat it across the highway, or did he fail to see it? If it was the former, he should have been held for trial on manslaughter charges. If the latter, the dismissal was correct.
Magistrates are not the finders of fact (i.e. jury) in criminal prosecutions. Conflicting facts or inferences are for the trier of fact to resolve. State v. Dunn, 121 Wis.2d 389, 359 N.W.2d 151 (1984). However, a magistrate must necessarily ascertain the facts to decide probable cause. In performing this function he may assess the weight and competency of the evidence and the credibility of the witnesses. People v. Paille, 383 Mich. 621, 178 N.W.2d 465 (1970).
In this case the spontaneous statement at the accident scene by defendant he did not see the oncoming vehicle is credible. It does not appear to be a statement conceived after .the fact to exculpate himself from a manslaughter charge. The magistrate apparently determined from the spontaneity of the remark Olsen did not see the oncoming vehicle, hence no manslaughter charge. Under that scenario, it was not an abuse of discretion to dismiss the charges.

=== CASE 2212350 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:18.791184+00 ===

650 N.E.2d 1139 (1995)
Wayne BONNER, Defendant-Appellant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Plaintiff-Appellee.
No. 20S03-9506-CR-633.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
June 7, 1995.
*1140 Michael A. Dvorak, Hahn, Walz, Knepp, Dvorak & Higgins, South Bend, for appellant.
Pamela Carter, Atty. Gen., Cynthia L. Ploughe, Deputy Atty. Gen., Indianapolis, for appellee.
DICKSON, Justice.
Defendant Wayne Bonner was convicted of dealing in cocaine, a Class A felony. The Court of Appeals affirmed. Bonner v. State (1994), Ind. App., 641 N.E.2d 634. We now grant the defendant's petition for transfer. In his appeal, the defendant alleges three errors: (1) improper admission of hearsay evidence; (2) improper admission of testimony assuming facts not in evidence; and (3) improper admission of opinion testimony. The first issue is dispositive.
The Elkhart County Drug Task force received a tip that the defendant was dealing drugs and thereafter began a surveillance of his activities. During the period of surveillance, the officers observed the defendant engaging several times in what they believed to be drug transactions. These observations eventually culminated in the defendant's arrest. At trial, three officers testified, over defense objection, to the substance of statements made to them by informants.
The defendant claims that testimony at the trial concerning very specific details, such as the location of transactions and types of drugs sold, was improper hearsay and therefore inadmissible. Ind.Evidence Rule 802. The State responds that the testimony was merely introduced to demonstrate why the police took certain actions and that accordingly *1141 it is not hearsay. In order for a statement to fall within the definition of "hearsay," it must be "offered in evidence to prove the truth of the matter asserted." Ind.Evidence Rule 801(c).
In Craig v. State (1994), Ind., 630 N.E.2d 207, this Court articulated the analysis to be employed where the admissibility of evidence of out-of-court statements received by police officers engaged in investigative work is challenged as hearsay, and the State urges a purpose other than to prove a fact asserted therein. Courts must first consider whether the fact to be proved under the State's suggested purpose for the statement is relevant to some issue in the case and whether any danger of prejudice outweighs its probative value. Id. at 211. Thus, in order for an out-of-court assertion of fact to be excluded from the definition of hearsay on grounds that it is not "offered to prove the truth of the matter asserted," Evid.R. 801(c), it must be offered for another purpose relevant under Rule 401 and must not be excludable under Rule 403. Because neither the propriety of the police's decision to investigate nor the specific content of the out-of-court statements to police was a material issue in the Craig trial, the statements were determined to have been erroneously admitted.
In the present case, three police officers testified to the fact that they had been informed that the defendant was trafficking drugs, two of them even specifying, inter alia, the names of the alleged drugs. See Record at 91-92, 255, 289. To illustrate, the following exchange with Undercover Agent 127 reveals the information presented to the jury:
Q How did you first hear the name Wayne Bonner?
A Through a piece of intelligence through the Elkhart County Drug 
Q When you say, "piece of intelligence," what are you referring to?
.....
A Pieces of intelligence that I'm referring to are the day-to-day information that comes in from sources.
Q What information did you have regarding Mr. Bonner?
A We had information indicating that he was involved in drug trafficking in Elkhart County.
Q When you say, "drug trafficking," what do you mean by that?
A Sale of narcotics.
Q And did you have any narcotics specifically that he was selling or a variety?
A Had indicated that he was selling cocaine and/or marijuana.
Record at 92.
Neither the content of the informants' statements nor the propriety of the police initiating an investigation was seriously questioned at trial. Because the out-of-court statements lacked relevance to any contested issue other than the matters asserted therein, they must be viewed either as irrelevant or as hearsay and their admission was improper.
Although it was error for the trial court to admit the officers' testimony, we will not reverse the conviction if the error is harmless. Craig, 630 N.E.2d at 211. An error is not harmless if it prejudices the defendant's substantial rights. Martin v. State (1993), Ind., 622 N.E.2d 185, 188. See also Ind.Trial Rule 61. To determine whether the defendant's substantial rights were prejudiced, we must assess the probable impact of the improperly admitted evidence upon the jury. Short v. State (1982), Ind., 443 N.E.2d 298, 308. The improper admission of evidence is harmless error when the conviction is supported by substantial independent evidence of guilt sufficient to satisfy the reviewing court that there is no substantial likelihood that the questioned evidence contributed to the conviction. Jaske v. State (1989), Ind., 539 N.E.2d 14, 22. A reversal may be compelled if the record as a whole discloses that the erroneously admitted evidence "was likely to have had a prejudicial impact upon the mind of the average juror, thereby contributing to the verdict." Hardin v. State (1993), Ind., 611 N.E.2d 123, 132 (quoting Traver v. State (1991), Ind., 568 N.E.2d 1009).
We must recognize that, despite other evidence of the defendant's guilt, the erroneously *1142 admitted testimony here was likely to have had a prejudicial impact upon the jury. The jury, faced with the responsibility of determining whether the defendant was guilty of the offense of dealing in cocaine on February 3, 1989, was subjected to repeated evidence that police received information before this date indicating that the defendant was participating in "drug trafficking" involving cocaine. This assertion was emphasized through its repetition in the separate testimony of three officers. Record at 92, 255, and 286-89.
We note a factor which may have diminished somewhat this resulting prejudicial impact. The trial court admonished the jury that the testimony was not to be "taken by you as the truth or falsity or anything about those statements whether they were true or not true" but were "solely admitted for the purpose of explaining to you why this officer and his co-workers did what they did. You're not to take those statements as being true or false." Record at 94-95. The presence of jury admonitions may be considered in determining whether an error is harmless. Eliacin v. State (1975), 263 Ind. 119, 123, 325 N.E.2d 201. However, the simple fact that an admonition is given does not necessarily mean that particularly prejudicial, erroneously admitted evidence will be erased from the minds of reasonable jurors or omitted from their deliberations. See White v. State (1971), 257 Ind. 64, 76-77, 272 N.E.2d 312, 317; Smith v. State (1984), Ind. App., 471 N.E.2d 733, 735-36.
In view of the nature, scope, and repetition of evidence at issue, we cannot conclude that there was no substantial likelihood that this evidence contributed to the conviction, and thus we decline to find the error harmless.
The decision of the Court of Appeals is vacated, the judgment of the trial court is reversed, and this cause is remanded for a new trial.
SHEPARD, C.J., and DeBRULER, SULLIVAN and SELBY, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9737895 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:36:35.513209+00 ===

ERICKSTAD, Chief Justice.
Caroline lilies appeals from “the Amended Judgment dated January 29, 1990, and the subsequent Order Amending the Order Amending Judgment dated February 19, 1990” issued by the County Court for Rich-land County, sitting under assignment of the Presiding District Judge pursuant to section 27-07.1-17(9), N.D.C.C., asserting that the court erred in setting the child support obligation of ex-husband Gerald lilies, and in its allocation of dependency tax exemptions. Gerald lilies cross-appeals on the grounds that the court erred in setting the child support obligation of both parties and by reducing ex-wife’s arrearages. We affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand.
Caroline and Gerald lilies were married on August 10, 1974. In August of 1980, Caroline filed for divorce in the District Court for Richland County. Trial of this matter was held before the Honorable Robert L. Eckert on September 21, 1981, with the judgment being entered on September 28, 1981. The judgment granted the divorce, distributed the couple’s marital assets, and made provisions for the custody, support, and parental visitation of the children.
The district court’s judgment provided that the couple would have joint custody of their three children, with physical custody being granted to Caroline during the nine school months and to Gerald during the summer months. Gerald was allocated the dependency exemptions for the two youngest children while Caroline was allocated the exemption for the oldest child. Additionally, Gerald was ordered to pay $250 per month in child support during the months that Caroline had physical custody of the children, and Caroline was ordered to pay $200.00 a month during the period Gerald had physical custody of the children.1
*880During the summer of 1984, Caroline expressed a desire and intention to continue her education. As a result, on August 8, 1984, the parties entered into a stipulation concerning the child support arrangement. The stipulation provided that Gerald’s support payments would be reduced to $170 per month during the time Caroline had physical custody of the children. Caroline’s support obligations were to be suspended until she completed or discontinued her educational plans. The district court approved the stipulation on August 28, 1984, with the condition that should either party begin to receive any type of welfare assistance, the original payment schedule would be revived.
In October of 1985, Gerald was notified that his support payments were in arrears. Upon further investigation Gerald discovered that his support payments had been increased to the amount set by the original payment schedule because Caroline began to receive governmental aid on September 1, 1985. On December 5, Gerald filed a motion to amend the August 28, 1984, order, with the intent of eliminating the provision that reinstated the original support obligations if either party received governmental assistance. Gerald also requested that he be allowed to claim all of the dependency exemptions until Caroline stopped receiving the governmental assistance.
On January 2, 1986, the district court issued an order in response to Gerald’s December 5, 1985, motion. This new order provided that Caroline would be responsible for her support payments, but enforcement of those payments would be suspended until she completed her education. The order also provided that Gerald receive all three of the dependency exemptions during the period Caroline’s support payments were suspended. In all other respects the original judgment of divorce dated, September 28, 1981, was to remain in effect.
In May of 1989, Caroline was graduated from North Dakota State University. On October 11, 1989, Caroline initiated a motion to establish the amount of arrearages, seek an increase in Gerald’s support obligations, and eliminate her support obligations. Gerald responded with a counter motion to increase Caroline’s support obligations.
On December 31, 1989, the county judge, hearing the case on assignment by the presiding district judge, issued an order amending judgment which set the support obligation to commence on January 1, 1990, at a rate of $225 a month from Gerald to Caroline for all twelve months of the year. Caroline’s support obligation was eliminated. Gerald was granted all three dependency exemptions, and Caroline’s arrearages were reduced from $3,450 to $2,500. Upon motion by Caroline, the court issued an order amending the order amending judgment which included the findings that Caroline’s gross monthly income was $2,675 (net income $2,110) and Gerald’s gross monthly income was $1,871 (net income $1,647.57).
Caroline appeals from the December 31, 1989, order amending judgment asserting that the court erred by setting Gerald’s support payments at only $225 per month and by giving Gerald all three dependency exemptions. Gerald cross-appeals asserting the court erred by setting his support payments too high, eliminating Caroline’s support obligation, and reducing Caroline’s arrearages.
I. The Support Payments
Caroline contends that the court erred when it failed to consider the child support guidelines in setting the amount of Gerald’s support obligation. Subsection 3 of N.D.C.C. 14-09-09.7 establishes a rebut-table presumption that the amount of child support reflected in the guidelines is correct, and further provides that “[a] written finding or a specific finding on the record must be made if the court determines that the presumption has been rebutted.” Caroline argues that, as the child support payments Gerald is required to make vary significantly from the payment schedule provided in the child support guidelines, and the court failed to make findings justifying this variance, the court erred in set*881ting the amount of Gerald’s support obligation.
Caroline first raised this issue on appeal. We have previously stated that new issues cannot be considered for the first time on appeal. Lynch v. Williston City Com’n, 460 N.W.2d 136, 138 (N.D.1990); Farm Credit Bank of St. Paul v. Stedman, 449 N.W.2d 562, 565 (N.D.1989); Kern v. Art Schimkat Construction Co., 125 N.W.2d 149 (N.D.1963). See also, Lang v. Bank of North Dakota, 423 N.W.2d 501, 502 (N.D.1988) (allowing a new claim to be raised but recognizing that usually a new issue cannot be considered for the first time on appeal). Although Caroline did request that the court make additional findings concerning the parties’ gross and net incomes, she at no time raised the issue that the court failed to follow N.D.C.C. 14-09-09.7 by failing to make written findings that the correctness of the guidelines had been rebutted by factors not considered by the guidelines. Because the question of whether or not the court must follow N.D.C.C. 14-09-09.7 in these respects was not raised in the trial court, we will not consider that issue on appeal. For the law of this ease, as it determines the rights of the parties in this case, we will consider the appropriateness of the court’s award of child support in light of our past decisions without reference to that issue.
The trial court has the power to modify the amount or method of support to be paid upon a showing that the financial circumstances of the parties has significantly changed. E.g. Burrell v. Burrell, 359 N.W.2d 381 (N.D.1985).
“A trial court’s determination on modification of child support is treated as a finding of fact subject to the clearly erroneous standard of review under Rule 52(a), NDRCivP. Bloom v. Fyllesvold, 420 N.W.2d 327 (N.D.1988). A finding of fact is clearly erroneous when, although there is some evidence to support it, the reviewing court is left with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made. Id.”
Koch v. Williams, 456 N.W.2d 299, 300 (N.D.1990). However, we will not substitute our judgment for that of the trial court. That we may have viewed the evidence differently had we been the trier of the facts will not support a determination that the findings of the trial court were clearly erroneous. Gabel v. Gabel, 434 N.W.2d 722, 723 (N.D.1989). The court determined that the financial circumstances of both parties had significantly changed since the time of the original judgment and the subsequent hearings concerning support. In 1981, Gerald’s gross monthly income was determined to be $1,287. The court found that the monthly gross income of Gerald for the year 1990 will be $1,871. In 1981, Caroline’s gross monthly income was determined to be $1,029. The court found that the monthly gross income for Caroline for the year 1990 will be $2,675. In light of the evidence which supports these findings, we do not find the trial court’s finding that there had been a significant change in circumstances to be clearly erroneous.
Caroline asserts on appeal, and Gerald asserts on cross-appeal, that the court erred in determining the amount of child support Gerald should pay. Gerald also asserts in his cross-appeal that the court erred in releasing Caroline from her support obligation. When determining the amount of child support to be paid by each party, the court focuses “on how the changed circumstances affect the financial needs of the supporting spouse and his or her ability to pay, as well as on the needs of the children and the dependent spouse.” Burrell, 359 N.W.2d at 383 (citing Corbin v. Corbin, 288 N.W.2d 61 (N.D.1980)). The needs of the children will be balanced with the supporting parent’s ability to pay. Burrell, 359 N.W.2d at 383. A parent’s ability to pay is not necessarily indicated by earnings alone, but the court must also consider the parties’ net worth, which includes physical assets and his/her earning ability as demonstrated by past income. Id. A trial court’s determination of child support will not be reversed on appeal unless it is found to be clearly erroneous. E.g. Fleck v. Fleck, 427 N.W.2d 355, 357 (N.D.1988). We will conclude that such a finding is clearly erroneous when we are *882left with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made. Burrell, 359 N.W.2d at 383; Rule 52(a), N.D.R.Civ.P.
Specifically, the court found that: Caroline has a $15,000 debt as a result of the schooling which permitted her to increase her yearly income; Gerald is able to raise some food through his farming operations; Caroline’s gross monthly income for 1990 will be $2,675, yielding a net monthly income of $2,110; and Gerald’s gross monthly income for 1990 will be $1,871, yielding a net monthly income of $1,424.57.
In light of these findings and careful review of the record, we are not left with a definite and firm conviction that the trial court made a mistake in setting the amounts of child support the parties were to pay. Accordingly, we conclude that the district court’s determination of the amounts of child support to be paid by each party, none on the part of Caroline and $225 per month less $50 per month towards arrearages until all arrearages are paid on the part of Gerald, was not clearly erroneous and therefore the judgment in that respect is affirmed.
II.Tax Exemptions
Caroline asserts that the district court erred in granting Gerald all three dependency exemptions. We have previously determined that the trial court may allocate income tax dependency exemptions. McKenzie v. Jahnke, 432 N.W.2d 556, 557 (N.D.1988); Fleck, 427 N.W.2d at 359. Caroline argues that the tax exemptions should be allocated to her because such an allocation would result in a more effective use of the exemptions. Although it may be prudent to place the exemptions in the hands of the party who will most benefit, perhaps with a reciprocal reduction in the other party’s support obligation, we have not previously required the trial courts to do so. Considering that the court has relieved Caroline of all support obligation during the summer months, and her new earning power and substantial income, we are not left with a definite and firm conviction that the trial court erred in this respect and that this finding is clearly erroneous. The judgment in this respect must be affirmed.
III.Arrearages
Gerald asserts in his cross-appeal that the district court erred in reducing the amount of Caroline’s accrued support obligation. We have previously held that accrued and unpaid child support payments cannot be modified. Koch v. Williams, 456 N.W.2d at 302; Meadows v. Meadows, 312 N.W.2d 464, 467 (N.D.1981); Geigle v. Geigle, 294 N.W.2d 386, 390 (N.D.1980); Gasser v. Gasser, 291 N.W.2d 272, 276 (N.D.1980); Corbin v. Corbin, 288 N.W.2d at 64; Kinsella v. Kinsella, 181 N.W.2d 764, 770 (N.D.1970). Caroline neither challenges our prior case law nor offers alternative authority. That part of the judgment which reduces the amount of Caroline’s arrearages must therefore be reversed and the judgment in that respect be modified.
IV.The Validity of the Guidelines
As two panels of our temporary Court of Appeals have reached opposite results on the application of the child support guidelines, mandated by section 14-09-09.7, N.D. C.C., as they are at least tangentially involved in this case, and confusion will result unless the validity of the guidelines is clarified, we have asked the parties to this case to brief the issue of the validity of the guidelines.2 Because this issue was not raised in the lower court, our determination of that issue cannot apply to this case. Lynch, 460 N.W.2d at 138.
This is not the first time that we have declined to apply a decision to the case at hand and instead have applied it wholly *883prospectively. E.g., Walker v. Omdahl, 242 N.W.2d 649, 658 (N.D.1976); Forster v. N.D. Workers Comp. Bureau, 447 N.W.2d 501, 503 (N.D.1989). In Walker, we noted:
“The doctrine which we apply today is a modification of the ‘Sunburst Doctrine’ named after an opinion by Justice Cardozo in Great Northern Ry. Co. v. Sunburst Oil and Refining Co., 287 U.S. 358, 53 S.Ct. 145, 77 L.Ed. 360, 85 A.L.R. 254 (1932).”
Id. at 658.
For prospective application, we will now consider whether or not N.D.C.C. 14-09-09.7 was properly promulgated.
The Department of Human Services is an administrative agency and is subject to the provisions of the Administrative Agencies Practice Act, Chapter 28-32, N.D.C.C. Mullins v. Dept. of Human Services, 454 N.W.2d 732, 734 (N.D.1990); Falcon v. Williams Cty. Social Serv. Bd., 430 N.W.2d 569 (N.D.1988). In order to adopt a valid rule, the Department of Human Services must comply with the prescribed procedures which are found in Chapter 28-32, N.D.C.C. Mullins, 454 N.W.2d at 734; Johnson v. N.D. Workers Comp. Bureau, 428 N.W.2d 514, 518 (N.D.1988). A rule will not be determined to be valid unless it is adopted in substantial compliance with section 28-32-02, N.D.C.C., which requires the agency to afford all interested parties an opportunity to express their views on the proposed rule. Mullins, 454 N.W.2d at 734; Johnson, 428 N.W.2d at 518-19; N.D. C.C. 28-32-03(5) (N.D.1989).
Gerald asserts in his brief and Caroline concedes in her brief that section 14-09-09.7, N.D.C.C., makes the support guidelines a rule that must be adopted in substantial compliance with Chapter 28-32, N.D.C.C.3 The issue of whether or not the guidelines were promulgated in accordance with Chapter 28-32, N.D.C.C., was decided by a panel of the temporary Court of Appeals after submission of the parties’ briefs, but prior to oral argument of this case. See Huber v. Jahner, 460 N.W.2d 717 (N.D.App.1990). Huber held that the guidelines had not been properly promulgated. In McDonough v. McDonough, 458 N.W.2d 344 (N.D.App.1990), another panel of the temporary Court of Appeals, in essence, held the provisions of 14-09-09.7 mandatory without being asked to determine whether or not the guidelines had been properly promulgated. We agree with Huber that the child support guidelines, established by the Department of Human Services under N.D.C.C. 14-09-09.7, are invalid because the Department of Human Services failed to promulgate the guidelines in compliance with Chapter 28-32, N.D.C.C.
Our decision in this respect shall not apply in this case, but it shall apply prospectively to all trial court cases decided after the issuance of the mandate in this case, and to those cases in which the issue was raised in a trial court prior to this opinion and are now on appeal or are eligible for appeal.
*884This case is affirmed as to setting of support payments, affirmed as to the allocation of dependency tax exemptions, reversed as to the reduction of arrearages, and remanded to the trial court for appropriate amendment of the judgment.
GIERKE, J., concurs.
VERNON R. PEDERSON, Surrogate Justice, sitting in place of LEVINE, J., disqualified.
. The original judgment provided that Caroline’s support obligation would be set by the following formula:
"The percentage of the Plaintiff's salary to Defendant's salary shall then be the percentage of $250.00 per month which the Plaintiff shall pay to the Defendant for the three summer months under the same terms as the Defendant’s nine month child support period.”
. In McDonough v. McDonough, one panel of our temporary Court of Appeals determined that the trial courts are required to make written or specific findings explaining a deviation from the child support guidelines pursuant to subdivision 3 of N.D.C.C. 14-09-09.7. 458 N.W.2d 344 (N.D.App.1990). In Huber v. Jah-ner, a second panel of our temporary Court of Appeals determined that the child support guidelines established by the Department of Human Services under N.D.C.C. 14-09-09.7 had not been promulgated in accordance with Chapter 28-32, N.D.C.C., and were therefore not valid. 460 N.W.2d 717 (N.D.App.1990).
. Section 14-09-09.7, N.D.C.C., was amended in 1989 to create “a rebuttable presumption that the amount of child support which would result from the application of the child support guidelines is the correct amount of child support.” Section 28-32-02(3), N.D.C.C., reads:
“The agency shall adopt a procedure whereby all interested persons are afforded reasonable opportunity to submit data, views, or arguments, orally or in writing, concerning the proposed rule, including data respecting the impact of the proposed rule. In case of substantive rules, the agency shall conduct an oral hearing. The agency shall consider fully all written and oral submissions respecting a proposed rule prior to the adoption, amendment, or repeal of any rule not of an emergency nature. The agency shall make a written record of its consideration of all written and oral submissions contained in the rule-making record respecting a proposed rule."
A “Rule” under the Administrative Agencies Practice Act is defined as follows:
“6. ‘Rule’ means the whole or a part of an agency statement of general applicability that implements, interprets, or prescribes law or policy, or the organization, procedure, or practice requirements of the agency. The term includes the amendment, repeal, or suspension of an existing rule....”
Section 28-32-01(6), N.D.C.C. We believe it is clear that, after amendment, section 14-09-09.7, N.D.C.C., requires the agency to promulgate the support guidelines as a “substantive” rule within the meaning of section 28-32-02, N.D.C.C. See generally, Johnson v. N.D. Worker's Comp. Bureau, 428 N.W.2d 514, 519 (N.D.1988).

=== CASE 9737896 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:36:35.517224+00 ===

VANDE WALLE, Justice,
concurring specially.
I am uncomfortable with the apparent inconsistency in refusing to reach the issue raised by Caroline concerning the trial court’s failure to make findings justifying the variance in support payments from the child-support guidelines but reaching the issue of the validity of the guidelines which neither party raised below nor on appeal until requested to do so by this Court.
However, as the opinion notes, there are inconsistent results being reached among the trial courts and among panels of the Temporary Court of Appeals. I believe that fact justifies the extraordinary action we have taken in the majority opinion to resolve the conflict and prevent further inconsistent results. Insofar as the procedure may appear unfair to Caroline, i.e., to refuse to consider an issue she failed to raise below while considering an issue not raised by either party, she should nevertheless not prevail on the basis of rules which have no legal effect, notwithstanding the application of the “Sunburst Doctrine.”

=== CASE 9737898 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:36:35.5232+00 ===

MESCHKE, Justice,
concurring and dissenting.
I concur in parts I, III, and IV of the majority opinion. I join in the special concurrence of Justice VandeWalle. I respectfully dissent from part II on allocation of the dependents tax exemptions.
I am left with a definite and firm conviction that the trial court erred in allocating all three dependents tax exemptions to Gerald. Caroline is contributing a much larger share to the care and support of her three children than Gerald, since she has their physical custody for the nine school months. Her economic contribution to their food, clothes, shelter, and other needs necessarily exceeds the modest $225 per month contributed by Gerald for those months, no doubt by a large margin. Caroline has the larger income as well. In fairness, she should be allocated at least one tax exemption, if not two.
Our blindness to the uneven allocation of dependents tax exemptions in this case is a continuation of the unrealistic judicial attitudes that has brought on federally dictated guidelines for child support. I would reverse the allocation of the dependents tax exemptions and remand for reconsideration on that issue.

=== CASE 9737899 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:36:35.890394+00 ===

OPINION
HOFFMAN, Judge.
Appellant-defendant Raul Sanchez appeals his conviction for child molesting, a Class C felony. The evidence relevant to review is recounted below.
After her parents' divorce, seven-year-old A.W. visited her mother on weekends. Her mother, M.W., was living with Sanchez in a mobile home at the time. During each of the approximately five visits A.W. made to the residence shared by M.W. and Sanchez, Sanchez directed A.W. to lie on a couch. He would then place his hand down the front of AW.'s pants, inside of her underwear. The incidents happened while MW. was in another room or in the shower.
A.W. told M.W. of the incidents. No action was taken. A.W. then told her father, D.W. D.W. contacted authorities which resulted in Sanchez's prosecution and convietion for child molesting. This appeal ensued.
Sanchez raises several issues for review. As consolidated, the dispositive issues are:
(1) whether the trial court erred in allowing the results of a polygraph to be admitted at trial and in failing to instruct the jury regarding polygraph evidence; and
(2) whether the evidence is sufficient to sustain the conviction.
First, Sanchez contends that the otherwise valid stipulation he entered into regarding the use of his polygraph examinations as evidence was invalid because the prosecutor's name was affized to the form by an office *736manager. Thus, according to Sanchez, the trial court erred in allowing the admission of polygraph evidence at the trial. It is noteworthy that Sanchez makes no claim that his agreement to the stipulation was involuntary or unintelligent.
Generally, the results of polygraph examinations are inadmissible at trial unless the parties have entered into a valid stipulation. Harris v. State (1985), Ind., 481 N.E.2d 382, 384. To be valid, stipulations must be signed both by the defendant and by a representative of the prosecuting attorney's office. See id. As argued by Sanchez, "a representative of the prosecuting attorney's office" in all likelihood is a reference to a deputy prosecuting attorney. However, the record is devoid of evidence that the employee was without authority to affix the prosecuting attorney's name to such documents or that the prosecuting attorney did not intend to be bound by such a practice. No error occurred in determining that a valid stipulation existed.
Sanchez also argues that the trial court erred in failing to instruct the jury on the limited use of polygraph evidence. There are four prerequisites to admission of polygraph test results: 1) that the prosecutor, defendant and defense counsel all sign a written stipulation providing for the defendant's submission to the examination and for the subsequent admission at trial of the results; 2) that notwithstanding the stipulation, the admissibility of the test results is at the trial court's discretion regarding the examiner's qualifications and the test conditions; 3) that the opposing party shall have the right to cross-examine the polygraph examiner if his graphs and opinion are offered in evi-denee; and 4) that the jury be instructed that at most, the examiner's testimony tends only to show whether the defendant was being truthful at the time of the examination, and that it is for the jury to determine the weight and effect to be given the polygraph evidence. Davidson v. State (1990), Ind., 558 N.E.2d 1077, 1085-1086.
Here, the stipulation was signed by the appropriate parties inasmuch as Sanchez was not represented by counsel at the time. The examiner's qualifications and the conditions under which the test was administered were presented in evidence. Also, Sanchez was afforded an opportunity to cross-examine the test examiner. However, no limiting instruction as to the weight of the testimony was given. Although Sanchez did not tender such an instruction, admissibility of the results are contingent upon the limiting instruction.
Because the admission of polygraph evidence is generally disfavored, see Brown v. State (1992), Ind., 587 N.E.2d 111, 113, the failure to give a limiting instruction as to use of the evidence cannot be harmless. Absent the limiting instruction, the jury may believe that an indication of deceptive answers is tantamount to guilt rather than one component in its assessment. As urged by Sanchez, the failure to comply with prerequisites to admission of the polygraph evidence requires reversal for a new trial.
Sanchez also contends that the evidence is insufficient to support the conviction because there was no evidence that he intended to satisfy his sexual desires. Sanchez is mistaken.
Courts reviewing sufficiency will neither weigh the evidence nor judge the credibility of witnesses and may consider only that evidence most favorable to the verdict, together with all reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom. Marshall v. State (1993), Ind., 621 N.E.2d 308, 320. Here, A.W. unequivocally testified that on several occasions while her mother was out of the room, Sanchez ordered her to lie down on the couch at which time he would place his hand down the front of her pants under her underwear. Intent may be established by cireum-stantial evidence and inferred from conduct, and the natural and usual sequence to which such conduct usually points. Pedrick v. State (1992), Ind.App., 593 N.E.2d 1213, 1220. Sanchez's acts of repeatedly placing his hand on A.W.'s genital area, while her mother was out of the room, sufficiently establishes the element of intent. There being sufficient evidence to support the conviction, the cause may be retried.
*737The failure to properly instruct the jury on the limited use of the polygraph evidence requires reversal. Other issues raised by Sanchez are specific to the trial and need not be addressed in view of the reversal.
Reversed.
RUCKER, J., concurs;
STATON, P.J., dissents with opinion.

=== CASE 9737900 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:36:35.894046+00 ===

STATON, Presiding Judge,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent. The Majority correctly finds error in the trial court's failure to give a limiting instruction regarding the weight and effect of polygraph evidence. However, Sanchez waived this error when he failed to object to the court's final instructions and failed to tender a limiting instruction. Lyons v. State (1992), Ind.App., 600 N.E.2d 560, 567, reh. denied. While it is the duty of the trial court to properly instruct the jury, a defendant may not sit idly by while the court makes an error in instructing the jury and then argue on appeal that the error entitles him to a new trial. Burton v. State (1988), Ind., 526 N.E.2d 1163, 1165-1166. This rationale is especially applicable under the cireumstances of this case, in which Sanchez expressly stipulated to the admission of the evidence in question.
The Majority states that because polygraph evidence is generally disfavored, the failure to give a limiting instruction cannot be harmless.1 This reasoning assumes that the failure to give a limiting instruction is fundamental error. An error in instructing the jury will not cireumvent our procedural rules unless the error is blatant, and the potential for harm is substantial and appears clearly on the face of the record. Blackmon v. State (1983), Ind., 455 N.E.2d 586, 590.
In this case, the potential for harm from omission of the specific instruction does not rise to the level of fundamental error. The trial court gave both a preliminary and a final instruction regarding the jury's exclusive role in determining the weight and ered-ibility of the evidence. These instructions applied to all evidence under consideration, including the polygraph examiner's testimony. Moreover, the record otherwise supports Sanchez's conviction. The victim's testimony regarding the incidents of molestation was unequivocal and consistent in content and language with her prior statements. See DeBruhl v. State (1989), Ind.App., 544 N.E.2d 542, 546 (the uncorroborated testimony of the victim is sufficient to support a conviction).
The omission of a specific instruction under these cireumstances was not blatant error, and did not deprive Sanchez of due process. Accordingly, defense counsel's failure to tender a limiting instruction waived the error on appeal. Lyons, supra; Burton, supra. Sanchez's conviction should be affirmed.
. Our supreme court has dictated otherwise. In Hare v. State (1984), Ind., 467 N.E.2d 7, the trial court admitted into evidence the results of a polygraph examination, but later refused the defendant's limiting instruction. Our supreme court concluded that although the limiting instruction should have been given, the error was harmless because the conviction was clearly supported by the record. Id. at 16.

=== CASE 9737901 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:36:38.873494+00 ===

OPINION OF THE COURT
Titone, J.
In each of these cases, the defendants were convicted of larceny after selling goods to customers, taking the customers’ money and then failing to deliver the promised goods. Their appeals from the judgments of conviction require us to revisit the specialized requirements for the crimes that were known as larceny by false promise and larceny by false pretenses before the adoption of the Penal Law.
*613I.
People v Norman
In 1989, according to the trial evidence, defendant entered into a one-year lease on an old sawmill in South Colton, New York, opened a business office in the City of Watertown and began selling kits to individuals wishing to build their own log homes. In June of 1990, Joseph and Sharon Gana, responding to a newspaper advertisement, contacted defendant and expressed an interest in purchasing one of his log home kits. During their discussions, defendant offered the Ganas the opportunity to become dealers for his product. As dealers, the Ganas would be responsible for allowing prospective customers to see their own log home and would receive a 15% commission on any home they sold or on any sale defendant made as a result of their referral.
On July 19, 1990, the Ganas signed a contract to purchase a log home kit for $20,325. The delivery date was left open because the Ganas needed to dig a foundation before they would be ready to receive their logs. Payment was to be made upon delivery, which, according to defendant, would occur within two weeks of the Ganas’ request.
Approximately three weeks after the Ganas signed their contract, defendant called them and stated that he had another couple from their area, the Mikels, who were interested in a dealership. Defendant was prepared to give the Ganas’ dealership to this couple unless the Ganas paid for the log home kit by August 9th. According to Sharon Gana, defendant was quite insistent on that date. Anxious not to lose their dealership opportunity, the Ganas obtained a loan and wired defendant the full amount of the purchase price on August 8, 1990. No arrangements for delivery were made at that time, since the Ganas’ foundation was still not ready.
In mid-September of 1990, the Ganas told defendant that they were ready for their kit, but, despite defendant’s promise to deliver at least part of the material, several weeks passed without a delivery. In the ensuing weeks, defendant offered the Ganas a series of excuses for his failure to deliver, including problems with truckers, problems with the mill, a death in the family, a need for new equipment and a claim that the logs milled for the Ganas had turned black. In the end, the Ganas travelled to defendant’s office, arriving just in time to see him packing up his telephone, office items and books. At *614that point, defendant told the Ganas that he had spent their money and was unable to obtain further materials or supplies without new financing.
A subsequent investigation revealed that defendant’s bank account had been overdrawn during the first week in August and that he had used the Ganas’ money to pay his personal bills and overdue business debts. Defendant admitted to investigators that none of the money had been used to purchase materials for the Ganas’ log home kit. When asked whether he intended to compensate the Ganas, defendant first told investigators that he was trying to obtain financing based on the equity he had in the mill. He said nothing further on this subject, however, when confronted with the fact that he did not have an ownership interest in the mill.
In addition to the testimony of the Ganas and several investigators, the People elicited testimony from other customers who had purchased log home kits from defendant and had had similarly unsatisfactory experiences. The evidence furnished by these witnesses, which was admitted primarily on the question of defendant’s larcenous intent, demonstrated that defendant had several other unfilled orders outstanding at the time he accepted the Ganas’ money. It was undisputed that defendant had laid off all of his mill workers and had "shut down” operations at the mill some two weeks before he asked for the Ganas’ money.
In opposition to the People’s case, the defense called two individuals who had purchased log homes from defendant and were completely satisfied with his services. The defense also produced Laurie Mikels, who confirmed that she and her husband had expressed an interest in becoming log home kit dealers for defendant. One additional witness stated that the mill had a small inventory of logs in the early part of the summer of 1990. Two others described the movement of logs on the mill property and the shipment of several truckloads of logs away from the property.
Testifying on his own behalf, defendant described how his business operated and discussed his dealings with the Ganas. According to defendant, he had used the Ganas’ money to buy logs for their kit and, in fact, their logs remained, already milled, on the South Colton property. Responding to testimony from the Ganas and other customers, defendant denied having given them a series of false excuses for his failure to deliver kits that had been ordered and paid for. Defendant further *615stated that he had been in the process of attempting to obtain financing for his ailing business at the time he was arrested for stealing from the Ganas. Defendant acknowledged having been convicted of two prior crimes: grand theft arising out of a 1984 Florida incident and a Virginia felony.
At the close of the evidence, the trial court, echoing the language of Penal Law § 155.05 (2) (d), instructed the jury on the elements of larceny by false promise and the special burden of proof associated with that crime. The jury thereafter found defendant guilty of third degree grand larceny (Penal Law § 155.35) and third degree criminal possession of stolen property (Penal Law § 165.50). On defendant’s appeal from the judgment of conviction, however, the Appellate Division reversed and dismissed the indictment, holding that the evidence had been insufficient "to show guilty intent on the part of defendant.” (202 AD2d 1013, 1014.) In so ruling, the Court stressed that defendant’s intent not to keep his promise "may not be inferred from the mere nonperformance of the promise” (see, Penal Law § 155.05 [2] [d]). The People now appeal from that Court’s order.
People v King
The incident out of which the charges against defendant King arose began when defendant, who owned a used car business, engaged in a conversation with Carol Bondy, a local print shop owner with whom he had dealt on several occasions. According to the People’s trial evidence, Bondy expressed an interest in buying a small Bronco or Jeep for her son, who would soon be returning home after a stint with the Marines. Within a month, defendant called Bondy to tell her that he had seen a Bronco and planned to acquire it for her at an auction. A few weeks later, defendant drove a two-tone Bronco to Bondy’s shop and offered to sell it to her. With defendant’s permission, Bondy’s boyfriend, Karl Rohrbaugh, took the vehicle for a test drive and pronounced it sound. Bondy then agreed to pay $4,977.50 for the vehicle and gave defendant a $2,000 down payment. This transfer of funds was witnessed by an individual named Fred Peterson, who was in Bondy’s shop to transact business of his own. Peterson, who testified for the People at trial, recalled talking to Bondy about her purchase of the Bronco. According to Peterson, Bondy pointed to the Bronco, which was parked in the parking lot, and he noted that the vehicle, a 1988 bronze and beige model, was the same as the one he had.
*616The following week, defendant told Bondy that he would need the rest of the money for the Bronco "to get the title processed.” Bondy met with defendant and, in Rohrbaugh’s presence, gave him the additional $2,977.50. Papers, including one for the Department of Motor Vehicles, were signed.
Despite repeated inquiries, defendant failed to deliver the Bronco to Bondy, instead giving her and Rohrbaugh a series of excuses over the course of some 25 conversations. Finally, approximately four months after Bondy had paid defendant for the car, Rohrbaugh confronted him, demanding that he either deliver the vehicle or return the purchase price. At that point, defendant denied having received the full $4,977.50 from Bondy. In a subsequent telephone conversation, defendant told Rohrbaugh that he had spoken to an attorney and had been advised not to say anything else. Shortly thereafter, Bondy received a notice that defendant had brought an action against her in Small Claims Court for $2,000 for "monies due on car deal.” At that point, Bondy contacted the District Attorney’s office to report what she believed to be a crime. Subsequent investigation revealed that no vehicle meeting the description of the two-tone Bronco was ever registered or titled to defendant.
Testifying on his own defense, defendant stated that he had shown Bondy a 1987 black vehicle and agreed to sell it to her for $5,800. According to defendant, he and Bondy later quarreled about the price of magnetic signs that he had ordered from her. Several visits and phone calls failed to bring a resolution to the dispute. After Bondy refused either to refund his deposit or give him the signs, defendant decided to bring an action in Small Claims Court. He identified the action as one for "monies due on car deal” because the magnetic signs that were the subject of the dispute referred to "car deals.” Defendant’s fiancé corroborated his testimony by stating that she had once taken a message from Bondy about the magnetic signs.
At the close of the evidence, defense counsel argued that the jury should be instructed on the elements of larceny by false promise. The prosecutor opposed this request, stressing that the People were alleging that defendant was guilty of larceny by false pretenses. In view of the People’s position, the trial court charged the jury only on the elements of the latter crime. The jury ultimately found defendant guilty of third degree grand larceny. The Appellate Division upheld the *617resulting judgment of conviction, and defendant King has taken a further appeal by permission of a Judge of this Court.
II.
On this appeal, defendant Norman argues that the trial evidence established that he was guilty of no more than an ordinary civil breach of contract and that the exacting requirements for proving criminal larceny by false promise were not satisfied. Defendant King, who was also convicted of larceny, contends that the case against him was erroneously submitted as a larceny by false pretenses rather than a larceny by false promise and that, accordingly, he was wrongly deprived of the benefit of the higher burden of proof that is required in connection with the latter crime. An assessment of the merits of these claims requires a review of the common-law history and contemporary application of these two types of larceny.
Historically, the crime of larceny, which was created by English Judges rather than Parliament, was narrowly circumscribed to encompass only trespassory takings, most of which entailed some threat to the public peace (People v Olivo, 52 NY2d 309, 315; see, 2 LaFave & Scott, Substantive Criminal Law § 8.1 [a], at 328; 4 Blackstone’s Commentaries, at 229-250; Bassett v Spofford, 45 NY 387; see also, 3 Torcia, Wharton’s Criminal Law § 354, at 298 [14th ed]). As trade and business expanded, however, the English legal system became more sensitive to the need to protect property owners’ interests in personalty. As a consequence, the courts began to create legal fictions which treated certain types of takings as "trespassory” even though the owner had voluntarily relinquished actual physical possession of the property (id.).1
For example, a bailee who opened closed bales and misappropriated some or all of the contents was deemed to have committed a "trespassory” taking either because the bailee’s possessory right terminated upon the "breaking of the bulk” or because the package’s contents, as distinguished from its *618covering, were deemed to continue in the possession of the bailor (id.; see, Carrier’s Case, YB Pasch 13 Edw IV, f 9, pi 5 [1473]). A second category of fictitious "trespassory” takings involved situations in which property that had been entrusted to a person in a special relationship to the owner was nonetheless deemed to have constructively remained in the owner’s possession (2 LaFave & Scott, op. cit., at 329; see, Bazeley’s Case, 2 East PC 571 [Cr Cas Res 1799]; 3 Holdsworth, A History of English Law, at 365 [3d ed 1923]; cf., 39 Geo III, ch 85 [1799] [creating crime of embezzlement]).
The third historical category of larceny, larceny by false pretenses, was originally created as a matter of legislative decree rather than judicial prescription (2 LaFave & Scott, op. cit., at 331-332; see, 30 Geo II, ch 24 [1757]).2 The gravamen of that offense was obtaining property, with the intent permanently to deprive the owner, by fraudulently inducing the owner to part with both possession and title through the use of false statements about some prior or existing facts.3 As adopted in New York and many other jurisdictions, the crime of larceny by false pretenses did not apply to the act of obtaining money or property by a false promise to do something (such as repaying a loan or delivering goods) in the future (see, e.g., People v Miller, 169 NY 339, 351-353; Ranney v People, 22 NY 413). Although a promise accompanied by an intention not to perform could theoretically have been viewed as a false statement of an existing fact (see, Chaplin v United States, 157 F2d 697, 700 [Edgerton, J., dissenting]), most courts, including this one, took the narrowest possible view and held that such conduct did not constitute the crime of larceny by false pretenses (People v Blanchard, 90 NY 314, 325). The judicial reluctance to criminalize such conduct was principally derived in concerns about jailing individuals for mere nonpayment of debt and in the courts’ sensitivity to the potential chilling effect that criminalizing such conduct might *619have on business (see, e.g., People v Churchill, supra, at 156; Chaplin v United States, supra; 2 LaFave & Scott, op. cit., § 8.7, at 387).
It was not until 1965, when the present Penal Law was adopted, that this State recognized the making of a dishonest promise as a crime (Penal Law § 155.05 [2] [d]; see, Third Interim Rep, Temporary State Commn on Revision of Penal Law and Criminal Code, Feb. 1, 1964, at 25). Since that time, the statute defining the crime of larceny has criminalized both wrongful takings by "false promises” and wrongful takings by "false pretenses” (Penal Law § 155.05 [2] [a], [d]).
With regard to larceny by false pretenses, the Penal Law incorporates the historical elements that were applied at common law, i.e., a false material statement about a past or presently existing fact (Penal Law § 155.05 [2] [a]; see, People v Churchill, supra). With regard to larceny by false promises, Penal Law § 155.05 (2) (d) provides that the crime occurs "when, pursuant to a scheme to defraud, [a person] obtains property of another by means of a representation, express or implied, that he * * * will in the future engage in particular conduct, and when he does not intend to engage in such conduct.” Thus, as adopted in New York, the crime of larceny by false promise is limited to situations in which an individual has made a promise while harboring a present intention not to perform.
While the two crimes have considerable overlap (see, 2 LaFave & Scott, op. cit., at 387), it is important not to lose sight of the distinction between them, particularly in light of the special burden of proof that the Legislature has imposed in prosecutions for larceny by false promise. Because of continuing concerns about the need to avoid prosecution for conduct constituting only civil breach of contract, the Legislature has specifically provided that the inference of guilty intent may not be drawn solely from the fact that the defendant’s promise was not performed (Penal Law § 155.05 [2] [d]; see, People v Churchill, supra; People v Ryan, 41 NY2d 634, 640). Moreover, the Legislature has provided that a conviction of larceny by false promise "may be based only upon evidence establishing that the facts and circumstances of the case are wholly consistent with guilty intent or belief and wholly inconsistent with innocent intent or belief, and excluding to a moral certainty every hypothesis except that of the defendant’s intention or belief that the promise would not be *620performed” (Penal Law § 155.05 [2] [d]). That evidentiary standard parallels the burden associated with criminal prosecutions involving wholly circumstantial proof (see, e.g., People v Ford, 66 NY2d 428; see also, People v Geraci, 85 NY2d 359, 371-372).
III.
The Appellate Division concluded that the evidence against defendant was legally insufficient to establish that he acted with larcenous intent under the strict standard set forth in Penal Law § 155.05 (2) (d). The Court’s application of that standard and the dissenter’s comments on the subject here suggest the need for further discussion about the proper standard for appellate review.
Although the trier of fact in the Norman case was bound to consider the evidence in light of the statutory "moral certainty” standard, the function of an appellate court reviewing the record for legal evidentiary sufficiency under Penal Law § 155.05 (2) (d) is limited to assessing whether the inference of wrongful intent logically flowed from the proven facts and whether any valid line of reasoning could lead a rational trier of fact, viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the People, to conclude that the defendant committed the charged crime (People v Williams, 84 NY2d 925; see, People v Wong, 81 NY2d 600, 608; People v Jennings, 69 NY2d 103; People v Deegan, 69 NY2d 976; see also, People v Geraci, supra, at 371-372). At this level of inquiry, Penal Law § 155.05 (2) (d)’s "moral certainty” standard is not an appropriate criterion for measuring the sufficiency of the People’s proof.
Contrary to the dissenter’s contention, the standard of review we are applying here is not a sudden departure from precedent, but rather is a reflection of well-established principles that have regularly been reiterated in our recent case law. In People v Deegan (69 NY2d 976, 978-979, supra) and People v Jennings (69 NY2d 103, 114-115, supra), we stated that the "moral certainty” standard is only for the trier of fact and that the proper measure of legal sufficiency is whether the facts and the inferences that flow therefrom support a finding for the People on every element of the charged crime. We also stated in Deegan that the availability of innocent inferences is not relevant to the sufficiency inquiry. In so holding, we expressly overruled an older case, People v Eckert (2 NY2d 126, 129), in which the Court stated *621that the legal sufficiency of circumstantial evidence is determined, at least in part, by whether the facts and inferences "exclude to a moral certainty every other reasonable hypothesis but guilt.” We subsequently made clear that the principles articulated in Deegan and Jennings, both of which involved sufficiency review of indictments-, apply equally to appellate review of legal sufficiency after trial (People v Wong, 81 NY2d 600, 608; see also, People v Geraci, 85 NY2d 359, supra; People v Williams, 84 NY2d 925, 926, supra). The dissenter’s suggestion that the Jennings principle is limited to review of the sufficiency of Grand Jury evidence may be maintained only if this subsequent line of cases is ignored.
To the extent that the dissenter posits a heightened standard of review for all cases in which the moral certainty standard is relevant, the validity of his position is belied by the recent case law. To the extent that the dissenter’s argument is premised on the unique character of larceny-by-false-promise prosecutions, his position cannot withstand analysis. Contrary to the dissenter’s novel construction, Penal Law § 155.05 (2) (d) does not purport to modify or affect the judicially developed standards for appellate review. Rather, the statute’s reference to the "moral certainty” standard merely serves to ensure that the fact finder will be required to utilize that more exacting test in all prosecutions for larceny by false promise, regardless of whether or not the particular prosecution rests on wholly circumstantial proof. As such, the statute mandates no more than that which this State’s application of the constitutional reasonable-doubt standard mandates in wholly circumstantial cases, i.e., that the trier of fact refrain from finding guilt unless it is satisfied that the proof excludes all innocent hypotheses "to a moral certainty.”
Similarly, the older line of cases which the dissenter cites does not provide persuasive support for the theory that legal sufficiency review is different in appeals involving larceny-by-false-promise prosecutions than it is in all other cases in which the moral certainty standard is pertinent. People v Ryan (supra, at 640), People v Churchill (47 NY2d, at 158, supra) and People v Luongo (47 NY2d 418, 429), were all decided before the clarifying holdings in Jennings, Deegan and their progeny — at a time when the Court frequently intermingled "moral certainty” verbiage with its legal sufficiency analysis. Indeed, during the same era, moral certainty verbiage was also injected into sufficiency decisions in appeals involving prosecutions based on wholly circumstantial proof *622(see, e.g., People v Montanez, 41 NY2d 53; People v Benzinger, 36 NY2d 29; People v Cleague, 22 NY2d 363). Just as this Court would now avoid that type of fact-based analysis in circumstantial-evidence sufficiency appeals, so too must we avoid engaging in such fact-based analysis in sufficiency appeals from convictions for larceny by false promise.
Significantly, the discussion in Jennings on which the dissenter relies (dissenting opn, at 629) did not distinguish at all between the "Ryan line of cases” and the cases in which the moral certainty standard was pertinent because of the circumstantial nature of the proof. On the contrary, Ryan was cited interchangeably with the latter class of cases (see, 69 NY2d, at 114, citing People v Ryan, supra; People v Borrero, 26 NY2d 430; People v Cleague, supra; People v Bearden, 290 NY 478; People v Newman, 80 Misc 2d 975, affd 85 Misc 2d 761), thereby confirming that this Court has not previously viewed Penal Law § 155.05 (2) (d) as requiring a unique level of sufficiency review.
Finally, we eschew the "moral certainty” standard as an appropriate measure for legal sufficiency review because its application would blur the important distinction between the role of the fact finder and that of the reviewing court. Evaluating the evidence to determine whether it is "wholly inconsistent with innocent intent or belief’ and whether it "excludes] to a moral certainty every hypothesis except that of [guilty] intention” (Penal Law § 155.05 [2] [d]) requires such mental operations as sifting through the proof, drawing the plausible inferences and, most critically, weighing the strength of those inferences. The very term "moral certainty” connotes that the decision-maker must possess a particular degree of conviction about the correctness of its conclusion, thereby demonstrating the test’s unsuitability for the more objective legal sufficiency inquiry. In the absence of a clear indication of a contrary legislative intent, we decline to construe Penal Law § 155.05 (2) (d) as modifying the concept of "legal sufficiency” — a concept that has its roots in the constitutional and statutory limitations on our review powers.
IV.
People v Norman
Viewed under the prism of the appropriate appellate review standard, the evidence against this defendant was sufficient to establish his guilt of larceny by false promise on *623the theory that he took the Ganas’ money at a time when he had no intention of delivering the log cabin kit he had promised them. The jury was entitled to believe the evidence that defendant had pressured the Ganas into giving him the full purchase price of the kit they had ordered and had then spent all of their money on past-due personal and business bills without using any of it to purchase materials for their kit. There was also evidence that defendant had laid off his mill workers approximately one week before he took the Ganas’ money, that he had closed his bank account shortly after paying his bills and that he was unable to obtain more suppliers or services without new financing. This evidence that, at the time he took the Ganas’ money, defendant lacked the wherewithal to perform and had no realistic prospect of changing the situation in the near future provided ample ground for a jury to “[exclude] to a moral certainty every hypothesis except that of defendant’s intention or belief that [his] promise would not be performed” (Penal Law § 155.05 [2] [d]).
The additional evidence that defendant had offered a series of dubious excuses for failing to deliver the victims’ logs, that he had business dealings with other customers with similar results and that he had been caught packing up his office equipment when the Ganas went to his office to confront him lent further support to the inference that defendant had intended to bilk the Ganas from the outset (see, People v Rolchigo, 33 AD2d 1060, affd 28 NY2d 644). Finally, defendant’s patently false statement to investigating officers that he planned to compensate the Ganas by using his equity in the mill — a property he did not own — furnished additional circumstantial proof of his criminal intent at the time he took the Ganas’ payment.
In this regard, we note our rejection of defendant’s suggestion that his guilty intent not to perform should be assessed solely on the evidence concerning the situation on July 19, 1990, the date he and the Ganas entered into a formal contract for the purchase of a log home kit. Under the circumstances of this case, an equally and perhaps even more relevant point for the jury to consider defendant’s intent was August 8, 1990, the date on which defendant received and accepted the Ganas’ money.
We further note that this Court’s holding in People v Churchill (supra) does not require a rejection of the sufficiency *624of the People’s case here. While the Churchill Court held that the accused’s failure to perform as promised coupled with his use of the customer’s down payment for personal expenses did not suffice to establish larceny by false promise, the Court also went on to note that “the record [wa]s devoid of any proof that defendant would require additional funds for the completion of the work remaining to be done on the contracts” (id., at 158). Here, in contrast, there was evidence that defendant himself had admitted that, having spent the Ganas’ money on his own expenses, he would need additional funds to obtain materials and supplies for their log home. Further, there was proof from which the jury could infer that, unlike the Churchill defendant, this defendant, whose mill was already closed and without a crew of workers by the time he took the money, could not have performed even if he had had the necessary materials and supplies.
Finally, the legal sufficiency of the People’s trial evidence was not negated by defendant’s efforts to show through his own testimony and that of his witnesses that there were prepared logs for the Ganas at the mill, that he had an adequate inventory of logs on the premises and that the mill was shipping logs to other destinations during the summer of 1990. The jury was entitled to reject defendant’s attempt to establish his ability to perform, particularly in light of the tentative and somewhat inconsistent nature of the evidence he presented. Accordingly, the Appellate Division erred in holding that defendant’s conviction for larceny by false promise should be vacated.
People v King
Defendant King, who was convicted of larceny by false pretenses, failed to preserve his present claim that the evidence against him was insufficient because it failed to demonstrate the existence of a false representation concerning a presently existing fact. Although at the close of the evidence defense counsel made a motion to dismiss for failure of the prosecution’s proof, his arguments were confined to a claim that the People’s witnesses were not credible. Counsel did not argue, as appellate counsel argues now, that an essential element of the crime had not been proven. Accordingly, the present sufficiency argument cannot be reviewed in this Court (see, People v Bynum, 70 NY2d 858).
Defendant’s remaining claim seeks to capitalize on the similarity between the crimes of larceny by false pretenses *625and larceny by false promise. Reiterating the contention his attorney made at trial, defendant argues that the People’s case against him was actually one for larceny by false promise rather than larceny by false pretenses and that the former crime should have been submitted to the jury in place of the latter. The erroneous refusal to submit the case as a larceny by false promise prosecution was highly prejudicial, defendant contends, because it deprived him of the opportunity to have the jury consider the evidence of his intent under the far more exacting standard of proof prescribed for that crime (see, Penal Law § 155.05 [2] [d]).
To the extent that this claim does not overlap with defendant’s unpreserved sufficiency argument and is therefore reviewable, it is utterly lacking in merit. In addition to showing that defendant had made an unfulfilled promise to deliver a particular car, the trial evidence supported the inference that defendant had made a material misrepresentation of fact to Bondy, namely that he owned the vehicle in question and therefore had the power to sell it to her. While defendant never made a specific oral claim that the bronze and beige Bronco was his to sell, his conduct conveyed as surely as a direct statement that he had an interest in the Bronco sufficient to enable him to transfer ownership to her (see, 2 LaFave & Scott, op. cit., at 384 [a conviction for larceny by false pretenses can rest on unwritten expression or unspoken conduct]). This conduct included his first telling Bondy that he had seen a particular Bronco and planned to acquire it for her at auction and then bringing a Bronco to Bondy’s shop for a test drive. It also included his telling Bondy he needed the rest of her money "to get the title processed” and giving her Department of Motor Vehicle forms to sign.
In sum, there was more to the case against defendant King than a simple false promise made with an intent not to perform. Accordingly, the prosecution was entitled to choose to prosecute him for larceny by false pretenses rather than for larceny by false promise. The fact that the evidence might have also supported a false promise theory is of no moment, since, as long as their theory was supported by the adduced facts, the People had the right to have the case submitted to the jury under the Penal Law subdivision they had chosen.
Accordingly, in People v Norman, the order of the Appellate Division should be reversed and the case remitted to that Court for a review of the facts (see, CPL 470.25 [2] [d]; 470.40 *626[b]); in People v King, the order of the Appellate Division should be affirmed.
. It has been suggested that the early treatment of all felonies as capital offenses was responsible, at least in part, for the English courts’ confinement of the crime of larceny to a relatively narrow class of cases (People v Churchill, 47 NY2d 151, 155; ALI, Model Penal Code § 223.1, Commentary, at 128-129 [1980]; 3 Torcia, op. cit., § 354, at 300; but see, People v Olivo, supra, at 315, n 1, citing Fletcher, Metamorphosis of Larceny, 89 Harv L Rev 469, 483-484).
. This shift in the law-making initiative from the judiciary to the legislative body occurred as part of an over-all trend that arose toward the end of the 18th century as a result of a number of factors, including the expansion of the prestige and power of Parliament and a change in the perceived role of Judges from policy-makers to interpreters of "natural law” (see, ALI, Model Penal Code § 223.1, Commentary, at 128-129 [1980]).
. The common-law crime of "larceny by trick,” which had been created by the courts at an earlier point in history, was limited to situations in which possession of, but not title to, the property had been obtained by the wrongdoer’s false statements (see, People v Olivo, supra, at 316; 2 LaFave & Scott, op. cit, at 331; 3 Torcía, op. cit, § 355, at 301).

=== CASE 9737902 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:36:38.880127+00 ===

Bellacosa, J.
(dissenting). I respectfully dissent in each case, and vote to affirm in People v Norman and to reverse in People v King. Both criminal actions should be dismissed.
In Norman, defendant failed to deliver logs to a purchaser who paid the price for a kit and materials to build a house in the Adirondacks. In King, defendant on Long Island failed to deliver a promised and paid-for used vehicle. Both defendants acted wrongly. However, in my view and on the respective records, their transgressions are not criminal. Instead, the cases reflect quintessentially civil transactions gone awry. Moreover, the standard of appellate review for the sufficiency issue in this unique larceny classification may engender confusion with respect to well-settled principles and protections.
Thus, I conclude that in addition to criminal prosecutions for these derelictions being counter-intuitive, defects in the statutory-policy analysis and appellate review lead to false positives concerning the satisfaction of the high hurdle set by the Legislature and this Court for the successful prosecution of such woebegone civil bargains and transactions (see, e.g., People v Luongo, 47 NY2d 418; People v Churchill, 47 NY2d 151; People v Ryan, 41 NY2d 634, 639-640; Penal Law § 155.05 [2] [d] ["a finding (of larceny by false promise) may be based only upon evidence establishing that the facts and circumstances of the case are wholly consistent with guilty intent * * * and wholly inconsistent with innocent intent * * * and excluding to a moral certainty every hypothesis except that of the defendant’s intention or belief that the promise would not be performed”]).
The history and development of the distinct varieties of larceny in criminal jurisprudence, while fascinating, are enmeshed in arcane nuance, sophistication and technicality. Nevertheless, there is something to be said for an overarching, simplified approach. These cases qualify for the simpler approach and, thus, my analysis in each case does not reach or require discussion of the fine distinctions between larceny by false promise or false pretenses and the like. Indeed, in the King case, I find that the particular record satisfies the threshold preservation prerequisite as well.
The controlling guidepost for these cases should be the recognition of the steadfast reluctance, resistance and barriers established by the Legislature and the courts against authoriz*627ing the transmutation of civil mishaps into felonious inflations. To obscure the central demarcation, that for centuries has marked the boundary between civil and criminal matters in the myriad of ordinary commercial transactions, trivializes true criminality, diverts attention and resources away from victims of true crimes against "the People,” and engenders opportunistic manipulation of the criminal processes by unhappy civil suitors for redress of private wrongs and harms. My direct-line approach to the disposition of these two cases and others like them would accord greater respect and adherence to the important differences inherent in the distinct hemispheres of civil and criminal disputes.
Moreover, the majority is imposing for the first time a significantly switched and more forgiving standard of review in favor of the People with respect to the "moral certainty” element of larceny by false promise (Penal Law § 155.05 [2] [d]). This Court’s consistent methodology, mandated by the pertinent and unique penal statute (Penal Law § 155.05 [2] [d]), is found in People v Ryan (41 NY2d 634, 640-642, supra), People v Churchill (47 NY2d 151, 158-159, supra), People v Luongo (47 NY2d 418, 428-429, supra), and even People v Jennings (69 NY2d 103, 114), so heavily and curiously relied on by the majority for the opposite view.
In People v Ryan (41 NY2d 634, supra), this Court considered the proof for larceny by false promise and stated that "[t]he standard in the statute equates to the rule used in circumstantial evidence cases” (id., at 640). The Court added that "we must conclude that the proof has failed to exclude to a moral certainty every hypothesis except a guilty intent” (id., at 642 [emphasis added]; see also, id., at 641 [stating that "it cannot be said with any moral or reliable degree of certainty that * * * defendant did not intend to complete the transaction”]).
Similarly, in People v Churchill (47 NY2d 151, supra), this Court again applied the moral certainty standard, with no mention of the more generally applicable deferential standard of review at the appellate level. Significantly, in finding for the defendant in Churchill, this Court emphasized:
"The inferences to be drawn from this record certainly do not exclude to a moral certainty every hypothesis but that at the time he entered into the contracts defendant had no intention of meeting his obligations. Indeed, equally strong is the infer*628ence that defendant was simply an inexperienced, uneducated tyro whose talents of salesmanship surpassed his ability to manage a business” (id., at 158).
This Court, on review, explicitly and faithfully applied the heightened statutory canon, holding that it was "impossible [for it] to conclude that the proof exclud[ed] to a moral certainty every hypothesis except guilty intent” (id., at 159).
Again, in People v Luongo (47 NY2d 418, supra), the Court reiterated the Ryan and statutory standard of proof, stating that a finding of larcenous intent "may be made only where that determination flows naturally and reasonably from the facts in evidence and must exclude to a moral certainty any implication that the defendant has committed a mere civil wrong” (People v Luongo, 47 NY2d 418, 428, supra).
Thus, as has been demonstrated, this Court has consistently used the "circumstantial evidence/moral certainty standard” as the appropriate level of scrutiny for appellate review in larceny by false promise cases (see, People v Jennings, 69 NY2d, at 114, supra; People v Luongo, 47 NY2d 418, supra; People v Churchill, 47 NY2d 151, supra; People v Ryan, 41 NY2d 634, supra). Contrary to the majority’s view, the moral certainty standard articulated by this Court for reviewing legal sufficiency of larceny by false promise convictions is not mere "verbiage” (majority opn, at 621), which can be summarily cast aside (see, People v Luongo, supra; People v Churchill, supra; People v Ryan, supra). This heightened standard of scrutiny on appellate review is compelled by the Legislature’s explicit and unique inclusion of this terminology in the very definition of the crime of larceny by false promise (see, Penal Law § 155.05 [2] [d]). Indeed, it is this statutory, definitional distinction, ignored by the majority’s analysis, that for purposes of appellate review, distinguishes the larceny by false promise line of cases from the circumstantial evidentiary-ruletype cases on which the majority relies (majority opn, at 622), where deferential appellate review is proper.
In formulating the modern, non-common-law brand of larceny by false promise provision, the Commission on Revision of the Penal Law warned "that an unqualified larceny by false promise 'might result in an avalanche of criminal prosecutions based upon conduct essentially civil in character and constituting little more than breach of contract’ ” (Donnino, Practice Commentary, McKinney’s Cons Laws of NY, Book 39, *629art 155, at 103, quoting Staff Notes of Commn on Revision of the Penal Law and Criminal Code, Proposed New York Penal Law, McKinney’s Spec Pamph, at 351-352 [1964]). To implement the ensuing, explicit legislative directive, this Court, therefore, has consistently applied the more exacting "moral certainty” standard at the appellate review phase (see, People v Churchill, supra; People v Luongo, supra; People v Ryan, supra). That careful practice and protection, strictly followed in People v Ryan, People v Churchill, and People v Luongo, cannot be undone by the majority’s bare assertion that, in these cases, "the Court frequently intermingled 'moral certainty’ verbiage with its legal sufficiency analysis” and that "moral certainty verbiage was also injected into sufficiency decisions [in other contexts]” (majority opn, at 621).
Further and notwithstanding the majority’s conclusory assertions, People v Jennings (69 NY2d 103, supra) did not depart from the approach adopted in our earlier precedents, nor did it, in my view, effect a wholesale sub silentio overruling of cases and what they stand for. To the contrary, Jennings — an indictment/Grand Jury review case — implicitly continues support for the view that traditional, deferential appellate review is not enough in the larceny-by-false-promise-trial context (see, People v Jennings, 69 NY2d 103,114, supra).
In People v Jennings, this Court considered the issue of the proper standard for reviewing the sufficiency of larceny evidence before a Grand Jury (id., at 114 [emphasis added]). In finding that the lower court had erred in dismissing the indictment after applying the higher moral certainty standard of proof of larcenous intent (id., at 114), this Court expressly distinguished the Grand Jury indictment cases:
"The cases cited to justify this heightened scrutiny, however, only addressed the question whether the circumstantial evidence of larcenous intent adduced at trial supported a petit jury’s finding that guilt was established beyond a reasonable doubt. Manifestly, such cases are not controlling on a motion to dismiss an indictment prior to trial” (People v Jennings, 69 NY2d 103, 114 [emphasis in original and added]).
Not only was the question we face today not before us in Jennings, but we explicitly limited the reach of the Jennings holding to the indictment phase of the larceny prosecution (id., at 114). Consequently, if People v Jennings (supra) is now *630declared to have overruled the consistent, long-standing, prior approach adopted by this Court in People v Ryan (41 NY2d 634, 640-642, supra) and reaffirmed in its progeny (see, People v Churchill, 47 NY2d 151, 158, supra; People v Luongo, 47 NY2d 418, 428-429, supra), it comes as a surprise to me — and may, perhaps, to scrutinizing interpreters and observers of this Court’s works.
In sum, in my view, these cases do not meet the necessary hurdles of review and sufficiency and, in any event, do not merit prosecutorial cognizance in the criminal hemisphere.
Chief Judge Kaye and Judges Simons, Smith, Levine and Ciparick concur with Judge Titone; Judge Bellacosa dissents and votes to reverse in a separate opinion.
In People v Norman: Order reversed and case remitted to the Appellate Division, Fourth Department, for further proceedings in accordance with the opinion herein.
In People v King: Order affirmed.

=== CASE 9737903 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:36:40.157398+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE KNECHT delivered the opinion of the court: Plaintiff John Steinberg sought a declaratory judgment of the rights and liabilities of the parties concerning a $100,000/$300,000 garage policy issued by Universal Underwriters Insurance Company (Universal) to Honda of Illinois, Inc, (Honda). The issue is whether the garage policy affords coverage to Timothy Massey, an insured driver who was involved in an accident with plaintiffs decedents while test driving an automobile owned by Honda. We find Massey is not "an INSURED” under Universal’s garage policy and reverse and remand with directions. On August 19, 1990, while driving an automobile owned by Honda, Massey was involved in a collision with plaintiff’s three decedents. At the time of the accident, Massey was covered by his mother’s personal automobile insurance policy with State Farm which satisfied the minimum coverage limits of $20,000/$40,000 under the mandatory insurance provision of the Illinois Vehicle Code (Code) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 951/2, par. 7 — 601). It is undisputed Massey and the vehicle are covered under the State Farm policy. However, in a second-amended complaint, plaintiff sought coverage for Massey’s negligent operation of Honda’s automobile under the garage policy and judgment against Universal. Plaintiff filed a motion for summary judgment contending coverage of Massey exists as a matter of law under the garage policy. Universal filed a cross-motion for summary judgment claiming Massey is not "an INSURED” under the garage policy. The circuit court disagreed with Universal and granted plaintiff’s motion for summary judgment. Universal appeals.  The interpretation of an insurance policy is a question of law properly decided on a motion for summary judgment. (Outboard Marine Corp. v. Liberty Mutual Insurance Co. (1992), 154 Ill. 2d 90, 108, 607 N.E.2d 1204, 1212.) As a question of law, our review of the circuit court’s granting a summary judgment is de novo. Outboard Marine Corp., 154 Ill. 2d at 102, 607 N.E.2d at 1209. To determine whether Massey is covered under Universal’s garage policy, we must look to the policy language: "WHO IS AN INSURED With respect to the AUTO HAZARD: 1. YOU; 2. Any of YOUR partners, paid employees, directors, stockholders, executive officers, a member of their household or a member of YOUR household, while using an AUTO covered by this Coverage Part, or when legally responsible for its use. The actual use of the AUTO must be by YOU or within the scope of YOUR permission; 3. Any other person or organization required by law to be an INSURED while using an AUTO covered by this Coverage Part within the scope of YOUR permission.” (Emphasis added.) Clearly, Massey does not fall within the scope of paragraph one or two. The issue then is whether Massey is a person "required by law to be an INSURED” under paragraph three of the garage policy.  The circuit court, relying on Madison Mutual Insurance Co. v. Universal Underwriters Group (1993), 251 Ill. App. 3d 13, 621 N.E.2d 270, appeal denied (1994), 154 Ill. 2d 561, held Massey is a person "required by law to be an INSURED.” In Madison Mutual, the Fifth District Appellate Court interpreted identical language in a garage policy. The court held the phrase "required by law to be an INSURED” resulted in insurance coverage for the operator of a loaner vehicle, who already had coverage under his father’s automobile policy, pursuant to section 7 — 601 of the Code, even though the mandatory insurance provision does not explain whether the owner or the operator of the automobile is required to provide that insurance. (Madison Mutual, 251 Ill. App. 3d at 16, 621 N.E.2d at 272.) Section 7 — 601 provides: "[N]o person shall operate *** and no owner shall permit another person to operate *** a motor vehicle *** unless the motor vehicle is covered by a liability insurance policy.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 951/2, par. 7 — 601.) Bound by Madison Mutual, the circuit court held Massey, as an operator of Honda’s vehicle, is also "required by law to be an INSURED” pursuant to the Code. Universal concedes in States with laws requiring car dealers to provide permissive users of automobiles with insurance, said operators are persons "required by law to be an INSURED.” However, such a law does not exist in Illinois. While the Code provides that no one may operate a vehicle unless the vehicle is covered by insurance, it does not necessarily require vehicle owners to provide coverage for operators. Where the Illinois legislature has desired vehicle owners to provide insurance for permissive vehicle users, it has specifically stated so by statute, such as the car rental provision of the Code (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 951/2h, par. 9 — 105) and the taxicab owners provisions (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 951/2, pars. 8 — 108, 8 — 109), both of which require permissive users of rental cars and taxicabs to be covered by the owners’ insurance. However, Illinois has no statute requiring car dealers to provide insurance coverage for customers or permissive users. Absent such a statute, Massey is not "required by law to be an INSURED” under Universal’s garage policy.  Universal also árgues since Massey was already insured by State Farm at the time of the accident, he is not a person "required by law to be an INSURED” under the garage policy. The court in Madison Mutual rejected a similar argument stating: "The third definition of insured in the Universal policy makes no mention of whether the person required by law to be insured has insurance coverage under a separate policy. Whether or not a person is insured under a separate policy when he or she borrows a car from [a car dealer] is of no consequence in determining whether he or she is 'required by law’ to have insurance under Universal’s definition of insured.” (Madison Mutual, 251 Ill. App. 3d at 16, 621 N.E.2d at 272-73.) We reject the Madison Mutual analysis and find the garage policy was intended to cover only uninsured or underinsured customers, those otherwise "required by law to be an INSURED.” (See Springfield Fire & Casualty Co. v. Gamer (1993), 255 Ill. App. 3d 685, 627 N.E.2d 1147.) Accordingly, Massey, as a permissive user with personal insurance coverage sufficient to comply with the Code, is not "an INSURED” under the garage policy. Had Massey been an uninsured or an underinsured motorist, Universal’s garage policy would have triggered liability coverage in the amount required to comply with the minimum limits of the Code. However, since Massey’s State Farm policy did insure the vehicle up to the minimum limits of the Code, Universal’s garage policy was not called into play. This conclusion is further supported by Universal’s policy provision entitled "THE MOST WE WILL PAY,” which provides: "With respect to persons or organizations required by law to be an INSURED, the most WE will pay is that portion of such limit needed to comply with the minimum limits provision of such law in the jurisdiction where the OCCURRENCE took place. WE will pay only the amount needed to comply with such minimum limits after such other insurance has been exhausted.” (Emphasis added.) Universal has unambiguously created an excess clause which provides excess coverage is not available until the primary insurance has been exhausted. Excess insurance is secondary insurance coverage which attaches only after a predetermined amount of primary coverage has been exhausted. (Bailey v. State Farm Fire & Casualty Co. (1994), 267 Ill. App. 3d 653, 656, 642 N.E.2d 1323, 1326.) Under the Code, the predetermined amount of primary liability coverage required is $20,000/$40,000. Massey’s personal automobile insurance policy with State Farm satisfies those limits. Therefore, coverage under Universal’s garage policy is not available to Massey. We hold Massey is not a person "required by law to be an INSURED” as defined in the garage policy. Had we found Massey to be "an INSURED,” we would still reverse to the extent of liability coverage imposed by the circuit court. Were the $100,000 /$300,000 limits to be extended to all customers or permissive users such as Massey, the garage policy would have read "up to the limits of this policy,” rather than up to "the minimum limits provision of [Illinois].” In this instance, the minimum limits provision set forth in section 7 — 601 of the Code is $20,000/$40,000, not $100,000/$300,000 as provided in Universal’s policy and awarded by the circuit court.  We also reject the Madison Mutual view that Universal shall be the primary insurer of any judgment rendered against permissive users. There is no Illinois law which requires mandatory primary liability coverage under the facts in this case. Nor is there anything in the insurance contract between Universal and Honda which requires a judgment against a test driver or permissive user must be first satisfied by Universal. Accordingly, we reverse and remand with directions to vacate summary judgment in favor of plaintiff and grant summary judgment in favor of Universal. Reversed and remanded with directions. LUND, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9737904 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:36:40.16137+00 ===

JUSTICE COOK, dissenting: I respectfully dissent, although I agree that the policy limits are only $20,000 / $40,000. In Madison Mutual, the court relied on the language of the policy to decide the question we consider. The garage liability policy there, like ours, defined an insured to be "any other person or organization required by law to be an INSURED while using an AUTO covered by this Coverage Part within the scope of YOUR permission.” If a person is "required by law” to be an insured, it does not make any difference, for purposes of the definition, whether that requirement is satisfied by Universal’s garage liability policy or by some preexisting coverage. (Madison Mutual, 251 Ill. App. 3d at 16, 621 N.E.2d at 272-73.) I agree with Madison Mutual that someone in the position of Massey is required by law to be insured and accordingly is an insured under the garage liability policy. Madison Mutual indicated it was not clear, under the Illinois mandatory insurance law, whether it is the operator or the owner that must provide the mandatory insurance. (Madison Mutual, 251 Ill. App. 3d at 16, 621 N.E.2d at 272.) It is clear to me, however, that under the mandatory insurance law the owner of a vehicle must provide insurance coverage. The statute provides that no person shall register or maintain registration of a motor vehicle "unless the motor vehicle is covered by a liability insurance policy.” (625 ILCS 5/7 — 601(a) (West 1992).) The statuté does not indicate that a policy covering the driver is sufficient, it states that the motor vehicle must be covered by a policy. There is a difference between a policy which insures certain vehicles and those who operate them, and a policy which insures certain drivers and the vehicles they operate. The uninsured owner of a vehicle cannot protect himself from liability under the mandatory insurance law by allowing the vehicle to be operated only by drivers who have their own insurance. The mere registration of an uninsured vehicle, even one which is never used, violates the law. The Secretary of State may enforce the mandatory insurance law by random registration checks and by requests that owners furnish proof of insurance. (625 ILCS 5/7 — 601(a) (West 1992).) Insurance cards must be issued by the insurer for each motor vehicle insured, and if the policy does not cover any driver operating the vehicle with the owner’s permission, the insurance card shall contain a warning. (625 ILCS 5/7 — 602 (West 1992).) Probably an insured driver operating an otherwise uninsured vehicle is not subject to penalty under section 3 — 707 of the Code (625 ILCS 5/3 — 707 (West 1992)), but the owner is in violation and his registration could be suspended under section 7 — 606 (625 ILCS 5/7 — 606 (West 1992)). See Meacham & Andersen, Illinois’ Mandatory Insurance Law, 78 Ill. B.J. 298, 301 (1990). The requirement that an owner maintain insurance covering the vehicle is consistent with the policy behind the mandatory insurance law. The law did not intend a situation where sometimes there might not be coverage. An owner can be certain of his own coverage and that his vehicle is specifically listed on his policy. It should not be a defense for an uninsured owner that the driver had his own insurance, a fact over which the owner has little direct control. Insurance on the vehicle is superior to insurance on the driver, because insurance on the vehicle will generally cover other drivers using the vehicle with the permission of the owner. (See 625 ILCS 5/7 — 317(b)(2) (West 1992).) Because Honda was required to have insurance under the mandatory insurance law, and because Honda was prohibited from permitting Massey to use its vehicle unless the vehicle was covered by a liability insurance policy, I would hold that Massey was "required by law to be an INSURED,” despite the fact that other coverage was available to Massey. The majority opinion holds the Universal garage liability policy to be excess over the State Farm policy. I do not understand how we can say that without considering the language of the State Farm policy. The State Farm policy contains language that it is only excess: "If *** a non-owned car *** has other vehicle liability coverage on it, then this coverage is excess.” The parties do not discuss the issue in their briefs, but I would expect the garage liability policy to be primary. The trial court so held in Madison Mutual, and that seems to be the general rule. (Automobile Underwriters, Inc. v. Hardware Mutual Casualty Co. (1971), 49 Ill. 2d 108, 112, 273 N.E.2d 360, 362-63; International Insurance Co. v. Sentry Insurance (1977), 45 Ill. App. 3d 634, 359 N.E.2d 1219.) Garage liability insurers seem to be continually changing their policies to avoid that result, but the supreme court has not been sympathetic to those efforts. Automobile Underwriters, 49 Ill. 2d at 112, 273 N.E.2d at 362-63 (mere inclusion of phrase "either primary or excess” in the "escape” clause insufficient). If the garage liability policy is primary, then that policy must pay its full limits before the excess policy is involved. The garage liability policy accordingly cannot benefit from payments which will be made under the excess policy. However, I agree with the dissenting opinion in International Insurance that the policy language ("THE MOST WE SHALL PAY”) "discloses a scheme of coverage” that the garage liability insurer shall pay no more than the amounts required by the mandatory insurance law, $20,000/$40,000. International Insurance, 45 Ill. App. 3d at 638, 359 N.E.2d at 1222 (Trapp, J., dissenting); see also Guaranty National Insurance Co. v. Koch (1993), 242 Ill. App. 3d 692, 611 N.E.2d 91; Springfield Fire & Casualty Co. v. Garner (1993), 255 Ill. App. 3d 685, 627 N.E.2d 1147. Accordingly, I would affirm that portion of the trial court’s decision which found that Massey was covered by Universal’s garage liability policy, but would remand with instructions to find that the limits of the policy are $20,000/$40,000.

=== CASE 2212381 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:19.155949+00 ===

222 Cal. App. 2d 721 (1963)
NICHOLAS RODES, Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
IRENE SHANNON, Defendant and Respondent.
Civ. No. 27281.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. One.
Dec. 2, 1963.
Fainer & Steele and Jerrell Babb for Plaintiff and Appellant.
Rager & Olio and Henry F. Rager for Defendant and Respondent.
FOURT, J.
This is an appeal by the plaintiff from a judgment which decreed among other things that he should not be entitled to damages or specific performance of a contract with reference to the purchase of certain real property.
A resume of some of the facts is as follows:
Plaintiff, a licensed real estate broker, maintained an office in the Lancaster area where he conducted his business. He had been in the area for many years and was familiar and acquainted with properties in the vicinity which were being purchased and sold. The defendant owned a parcel of real property which was located in the Lancaster-Antelope Valley area. Prior to March 6, 1958, the defendant had listed her property (consisting of approximately 6 acres) with the plaintiff for sale at a price of $6,500. It may be assumed that the plaintiff made at least some effort to sell the defendant's property at the price quoted. By reason of a favor which had been performed by the defendant for the plaintiff previously, plaintiff had indicated that he would not charge her the usual real estate broker's commission if he sold her property. Plaintiff later in talking with the defendant told her it would be better for her to sell her property for $2,500 and to get rid of it. He indicated to her that she could get $2,500 for the property and finally after some considerable persuasion she consented to sell the real property for such a figure. The so-called purchaser obtained by the plaintiff was Blanche Nelson, an employee in his office. In fact Blanche Nelson had no intention of purchasing the property but was acting solely for the plaintiff, her employer. An escrow was entered into at the Bank of America, Lancaster Branch, between defendant *723 and Blanche Nelson on March 6, 1958, for the sale of the property for the sum of $2,500. Blanche Nelson, shortly after the escrow was opened, assigned her interest in the same to the plaintiff. While the escrow above mentioned was pending, plaintiff entered into another escrow to sell the same real property to persons by the name of Diaz for the sum of $6,500. There was no change in the character of the property from March 6, 1958, to April 1, 1958, and there were no changes of any importance within the area in which the property was located. The second escrow (between plaintiff and the Diazes) had a provision therein to the effect that the sale was contingent upon the sale between defendant and Blanche Nelson being concluded.
It must be admitted that Rodes was in fact the principal in both transactions. The complaint charged that the defendant had entered into a written contract whereby she had agreed to sell the property for the sum mentioned ($2,500), that he had done everything which was legally required of him under the contract, that by the terms of the contract he was entitled to the possession of the real property on or before April 6, 1958, but that defendant refused to perform, that he was a real estate broker which she knew, that he had acquired the claim sued upon and the real property for the purposes of resale and that he had a purchaser ready, willing and able to purchase the same on or before April 6, 1958, at a profit to plaintiff and he asked for damages and specific performance.
The answer in effect generally denied the allegations of the amended complaint. In the joint pretrial conference memorandum the plaintiff sets forth among other things under the heading of "contentions of the plaintiff" that "the plaintiff ... contends that defendant knew that he had a buyer for the said property and was opening an escrow concurrently with the escrow in which she was interested, for the purpose of effectuating the resale." This would seem to indicate without question that the plaintiff knew at the time of his dealing with the defendant that he intended to and was at that time "effectuating the resale" of the property in question.
Among the contentions of the defendant as set forth in a "joint pre- trial statement" were the following "that the sales price was $2500.00; that plaintiff told defendant the fair value of the property was $2500.00; that defendant relied on said statement; that at said time the fair value of said property was $7500.00; that at said time Blanche Nelson *724 was an undisclosed dummy acting for plaintiff; that plaintiff had a secret sale pending to sell said property for approximately $6500.00; that defendant ascertained the true value of said property after opening the escrow and then immediately cancelled the escrow; and that the escrow was not completed within the prescribed time and was properly cancelled by defendant."
The trial court made findings two of which are set forth in the footnote hereto.  [fn. 1] Thereafter a judgment was awarded to the defendant that plaintiff take nothing by his amended complaint.
[1] Appellant now argues that the court erroneously made findings with reference to the matter of the breach of the fiduciary relationship between himself and the defendant because, as he now asserts, such activity on his part was not at issue.
We think that the pretrial order clearly puts in issue the very matter about which plaintiff now complains. A reading of the reporter's transcript demonstrates that there was ample testimony in the evidence from which the court could draw the necessary inferences and conclusions to find and determine as it did. *725
As to the value of the property the defendant owner testified that in her opinion the property was worth $6,500. Admittedly within 24 days after the plaintiff made his agreement with the defendant, through a dummy in his own office to purchase the property for the sum of $2,500, he made a resale of the property to the Diazes for $6,500.
Plaintiff was the agent of the defendant in the transaction. [2] An agent is a fiduciary. His obligation of diligent and faithful service is the same as that imposed upon a trustee. (Civ. Code,  2322, subd. 3; Rest., Agency,  13; Kinert v. Wright (1947) 81 Cal. App. 2d 919, 925 [185 P.2d 364] [secret profit]; Sands v. Eagle Oil & Ref. Co. (1948) 83 Cal. App. 2d 312, 318 [188 P.2d 782] [secret profit]; Estate of Arbuckle (1950) 98 Cal. App. 2d 562, 569 [220 P.2d 950, 23 A.L.R. 2d 372], [destruction of principal's will entrusted to his care; held will destroyed by fraud (constructive) within the meaning of Prob. Code,  350]; Adams v. Herman (1951) 106 Cal. App. 2d 92, 98 [234 P.2d 695]; Store of Happiness v. Carmona & Allen, Inc. (1957) 152 Cal. App. 2d 266 [312 P.2d 1104].) See sections 28, 29 and 30 of 1 Witkin, Summary of California Law, Agency, wherein it is stated in part:
"[28] General Principles"
"An agent has no right to obtain an interest adverse to his principal. He will therefore not be allowed to deal with the subject matter of the agency without a full disclosure of the facts. (See Rest., Agency,  387, 388, 390.) And if he makes any secret profits from his agency the principal can recover them. (Thomas v. Snyder (1931) 114 Cal. App. 397 [300 P. 117]; Schwarting v. Artel (1940) 40 Cal. App. 2d 433 [105 P.2d 380]; Thompson v. Stoakes (1941) 46 Cal. App. 2d 285 [115 P.2d 830]; Anderson v. Thacker (1946) 76 Cal. App. 2d 50, 65 [172 P.2d 533]; Savage v. Mayer (1949) 33 Cal. 2d 548 [203 P.2d 9]; Adams v. Herman (1951) 106 Cal. App. 2d 92, 98 [234 P.2d 695]; Crogan v. Metz (1956) 47 Cal. 2d 398, 404 [303 P.2d 1029]; Sears, Roebuck & Co. v. Blade (1956) 139 Cal. App. 2d 580, 590 [294 P.2d 140]; Store of Happiness v. Carmona & Allen, Inc. (1957) 152 Cal. App. 2d 268 [312 P.2d 1104]; Rest., Agency  388; 2 Stan.L.Rev. 574; 1944 A.S. 620; 1956 A.S. 253; 13 A.L.R. 905; 71 A.L.R. 933; 126 A.L.R. 1357; see infra,  29 et seq.) But if he acts in good faith, fully disclosing all material facts, he may enter into a valid transaction with his principal for an adequate consideration. (Helbing v. Helbing (1948) 89 Cal. App. 2d 224 [200 *726 P.2d 560]; Stevens v. Hutton (1945) 71 Cal. App. 2d 676 [163 P.2d 479].)"
"* * *"
"[29] Personal purchase by Purchasing Agent"
"Under the general rule against self-dealing by a fiduciary, an agent authorized to purchase certain property for his principal cannot purchase it for himself instead. (See Sands v. Eagle Oil & Ref. Co. (1948) 83 Cal. App. 2d 312, 320 [188 P.2d 782]; 1947 A.S. 609; 20 A.L.R. 2d 1140.)"
"* * *"
"[30] Personal Purchase by Selling Agent"
"(1) General Rule. If an agent with authority to sell property buys it himself, the burden is upon him to show that the transaction was proper in all respects. The principal may avoid it if there is any unfairness, even though the price is not inadequate. (Williams v. Lockwood (1917) 175 Cal. 598 [166 P. 587]; Silver v. Logue (1932) 127 Cal. App. 565 [16 P.2d 183]; Young v. Young Holdings Corp. (1938) 27 Cal. App. 2d 129, 148 [80 P.2d 723]; Cisco v. Van Lew (1943) 60 Cal. App. 2d 575, 584 [141 P.2d 433].) ...."
[3] A gratuitous agent insofar as exercising good faith is concerned is to be held to the same obligation as any other agent. (McPhetridge v. Smith (1929) 101 Cal. App. 122 [281 P. 419]; Ward v. Andrews (1919) 44 Cal. App. 390 [186 P. 605]; Brand v. Mantor (1935) 6 Cal. App. 2d 126 [44 P.2d 390]; Webb v. Saunders (1949) 89 Cal. App. 2d 732, 736 [201 P.2d 816] [utmost good faith required]; Ramey v. Myers (1952) 111 Cal. App. 2d 679, 685 [245 P.2d 360] [liable for secret profits].)
Restatement, Agency, section 390, states in part:
"One employed as agent violates no duty to the principal by acting for his own benefit if he makes a full disclosure of the facts to an acquiescent principal and takes no unfair advantage of him. Before dealing with the principal on his own account, however, an agent has a duty, not only to make no misstatements of fact, but also to disclose to the principal all relevant facts fully and completely. A fact is relevant if it is one which the agent should realize would be likely to affect the judgment of the principal in giving his consent to the agent to enter into the particular transaction on the specific terms. Hence, the disclosure must include not only the fact that the agent is acting on his own account (see  389), but also all other facts which he should realize have or are likely to have a bearing upon the desirability of the transaction *727 from the viewpoint of the principal. This includes, in the case of sales to him by the principal, not only the price which can be obtained, but also all facts affecting the desirability of sale, such as the likelihood of a higher price being obtained later, the possibilities of dealing with the property in another way, and all other matters which a disinterested and skillful agent advising the principal would think reasonably relevant."
"If the principal has limited business experience, an agent cannot properly fail to give such information merely because the principal says he does not care for it; the agent's duty of fair dealing is satisfied only if he reasonably believes that the principal understands the implications of the transaction. ..."
"The agent must not take advantage of his position to persuade the principal into making a hard or improvident bargain. If the agent is one upon whom the principal naturally would rely for advice, the fact that the agent discloses that he is acting as an adverse party does not relieve him from the duty of giving the principal impartial advice based upon a carefully formed judgment as to the principal's interests. If he cannot or does not wish to do so, he has a duty to see that the principal secures the advice of a competent and disinterested third person. An agent who is in a close confidential relation to the principal, such as a family attorney, has the burden of proving that a substantial gift to him was not the result of undue influence. Even though an agent employed to sell is not in such a position, payment of less than the reasonable market value for property he buys from the principal is evidence that the bargain was unfair. If the principal is not in a dependent position, however, and the agent fully performs his duties of disclosure, a transaction of purchase and sale between them is not voidable merely because the principal receives an inadequate price or pays too great a price."
[4] The principal may rescind a sale of her property concluded by an agent to himself (as here) unless the agent has fully disclosed to her as the principal that he was in fact the purchaser, and a showing of actual damages by her is not required as a condition to rescission under such circumstances. (Burke v. Bours, 92 Cal. 108, 112-113 [28 P. 57]; Sterling v. Smith, 97 Cal. 343, 347 [32 P. 320]; Curry v. King, 6 Cal. App. 568, 574, 575 [92 P. 662]; Butler v. Agnew, 9 Cal. App. 327, 331-332 [99 P. 395]; Newell-Murdoch Realty Co. v. Wickham, 183 Cal. 39, 43-45 [190 P. 359]; Silver v. Logue, *728 127 Cal. App. 565 [16 P.2d 183]; Sands v. Eagle Oil & Ref. Co., 83 Cal. App. 2d 312, 320 [188 P.2d 782].)
The judgment is affirmed.
Wood, P. J., and Lillie, J., concurred.
"VI"
"Finds as true that at the time of the making of said contract that plaintiff was the true and real buyer of said real property and that the said assignor, Blanche Nelson, was not acting for herself but was in truth and in fact acting for Nicholas Rodes, the plaintiff, in the purchase of said property; that plaintiff did shortly after the execution of the contract referred to as Exhibit 'A' in the amended complaint contract to sell the said real property agreed to be purchased from the defendant for the sum of $6500.00; that plaintiff did not advise the defendant of the existence of said subsequent sale or the terms and provisions thereof; that plaintiff had, previous to the execution of said Exhibit 'A', acted as a real estate broker for defendant in attempting to find a purchaser for said real property."
"VII"
"Finds as true that there existed between the plaintiff and the defendant the relationship of broker and principal; that said relationship constituted the plaintiff a fiduciary and trustee as to the defendant; that the plaintiff had imposed upon him a duty of acting in the highest good faith towards his principal, the defendant; that the plaintiff had the obligation of disclosing all the facts in connection with which he was employed, to not take unfair advantage of the defendant and plaintiff was under an obligation to disclose to the defendant the fact of said subsequent sale made during the escrow of the said real property; finds as true that the plaintiff violated all of the obligations herein set out and did not disclose the facts required by him to be disclosed to plaintiff and violated his fiduciary trust as to the defendant."
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1

=== CASE 9737905 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:36:48.102887+00 ===

HABHAB, Judge.
Appellant Karen Marie Trute Chester-man appeals the district court’s granting of appellee’s motion for modification of child support. We affirm.
The marriage of Karen and William Chesterman was dissolved in May 1988. The district court awarded the parties joint custody of their only minor child, John, with Karen having primary physical care. The decree directed William to pay Karen $400 per month in child support. This support obligation was to last until John finished high school or until the age of twenty-two if John engaged in post-secondary education.
On October 6, 1988, John voluntarily moved from Karen’s residence to William’s house. William ceased child support payments and in November of 1988 filed the present petition to modify the decree, seeking the elimination of his child support obligation retroactive to October 1988. John turned eighteen in December and was due to graduate from high school in May of 1989.
*697The district court in its ruling of May 4, 1989, found John’s move from Karen’s residence to William’s house constituted a substantial change in circumstances warranting modification of the dissolution decree. While noting that it lacked the authority to retroactively reduce William’s child support obligation, the district court nonetheless ordered Karen to pay $500 per month in child support from December 1988 through May 1989. Commencing June of 1989, Karen was ordered to pay $100 per month child support for John so long as John was enrolled in a post-secondary educational program, but in no event was the support to extend beyond John’s twenty-second birthday. William’s support obligation was continued at its current level of $400 per month, but William was to make the payments directly to John. Karen has appealed from the modification order.
Our review of orders on applications to modify child support is de novo. Iowa R.App.P. 4. While we accord weight to the trial court’s findings of fact, we are not bound by them. Iowa R.App.P. 14(f)(7).
I.
Karen first challenges the trial court’s finding that John’s change of residence from Karen’s house to William’s residence was a substantial change in circumstances such that would justify modification of the dissolution decree. See Iowa Code § 598.21(8). Upon entry of the dissolution decree, Karen was awarded primary physical care of John. In September of 1988, suffering from emotional stress, John voluntarily checked himself into the hospital. After his hospitalization, John chose to move in with William. John has continued to reside with his father since October 6, 1988. We concur with the district court’s determination that John’s change of residence constitutes a substantial change in circumstances warranting modification of the dissolution decree. See In re Marriage of Green, 417 N.W.2d 252, 254 (Iowa App.1987).
II.
Karen also asserts the trial court’s support obligation runs afoul of the prohibition on retroactive reduction of child support awards upon modification. See In re Marriage of Shepherd, 429 N.W.2d 145, 147 (Iowa 1988). As we have noted:
Modification of a decree for support payments operates prospectively and not retrospectively. The right to modify does not authorize the court to divest the parties of rights under the original decree. Even where a decree is modified and a change is made the payments that have accrued up to that time cannot thereby be affected.
In re Marriage of Mills, 441 N.W.2d 416, 418 (Iowa App.1989) (quoting Vrban v. Levin, 392 N.W.2d 850, 852 (Iowa App.1986)) (citations omitted); see In re Marriage of Sheperd, 429 N.W.2d at 146; Gilliam v. Gilliam, 258 N.W.2d 155, 156 (Iowa 1977); Wren v. Wren, 256 Iowa 484, 489, 127 N.W.2d 643, 646 (1964).
We agree with the appellant that the district court was without authority to excuse past due and accrued child support payments. See In re Marriage of Sheperd, 429 N.W.2d at 147; In re Marriage of Harvey, 393 N.W.2d 312, 313 (Iowa 1986). But a review of the trial court’s ruling reveals that it did not do so. The trial court was clear in its ruling that it had no authority to nullify the support obligations of the appellee. In fact, the trial court left untouched the appellee’s support obligation of $400 per month.
What the trial court did was to require the appellant to pay support for her child retroactive to the date of appellee’s filing his petition for modification. The question then before us is whether this ruling was proper.
The evaluation of a child support award is guided by the factors listed in Iowa Code section 598.21(4). The amount awarded is for the reasonable and necessary support of the child. Iowa Code § 598.21(4). The obligation to support should be apportioned according to the ability of each parent to contribute. In re Marriage of Bornstein, 359 N.W.2d 500, 504 (Iowa App.1984). Since both parents have a duty to support *698their children, we look to needs of the child and the ability of each parent to contribute.
When we review the financial circumstances of the appellant, we agree with the trial court that she has the ability to contribute towards the support of her child in the amounts designated. We reach this result after examining the record and finding the appellant has gross income of $1,850 per month and, after deducting federal and state income taxes and FICA, a disposable income of $1,639.26. In addition, it cannot go unnoticed that she has judgment against the appellee for support payments that accrued during the period of time he had custody of John.
We also affirm the trial court in its holding requiring the appellant to pay support retroactive to the date of the filing of the modification petition. As the court stated in In re Marriage of Sheperd, 429 N.W.2d at 147:
Our prior decisions have granted the court authority to make an increase in child support payments retroactive to the date of filing the petition to modify.
The appellant contends that Shep-erd and those cases upon which it relies are distinguishable from the case at bar for in those cases the court authorized an increase of a preexistent child support obligation. The appellant then argues that since at the time of the filing of the modification petition she was under no court order to provide support that the trial court’s modification order to pay child support can only act prospectively. We disagree. In doing so, we hold that the court does have the authority to require payment of child support retroactive to the date of the filing of the modification petition even in those circumstances when the dissolution decree created no obligation to pay child support.
III.
Finally, William seeks appellate attorney fees. An award of attorney fees is not a matter of right, but rests within the court’s discretion and the parties’ financial positions. In re Marriage of Kern, 408 N.W.2d 387, 390 (Iowa App.1987). We are to consider the needs of the party making the request, the ability of the other party to pay, and whether the party making the request was obligated to defend the trial court’s decision on appeal. In re Marriage of Castle, 312 N.W.2d 147, 150 (Iowa App.1981). We decline to award either party attorney fees for this appeal. Costs of this appeal are assessed to appellant.
AFFIRMED.
OXBERGER, C.J., concurs.
SACKETT, J., concurs in part and dissents in part.

=== CASE 2212410 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:19.51565+00 ===

462 N.W.2d 597 (1990)
In re the Petition for DISCIPLINARY ACTION AGAINST Robert J. SENG, Jr., an Attorney at Law of the State of Minnesota.
No. C8-90-2290.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
November 15, 1990.
ORDER
The Director of the Lawyers Professional Responsibility Board filed a petition with this Court alleging that the respondent Robert J. Seng, Jr. has committed professional misconduct warranting public discipline. In the petition, the Director alleges that, in October of 1989, while respondent was suspended for nonpayment of attorney registration fees and was on restricted status for noncompliance with Continuing Legal Education ("CLE") requirements, respondent agreed to represent some clients in the sale of some real estate; that, at the time respondent agreed to represent these clients, respondent knew the status of his attorney license and knew that he was not authorized to represent clients; that respondent represented these clients in several conversations with the buyer's attorney regarding the terms of an escrow agreement; that respondent took another attorney's stationary, without that attorney's knowledge or consent, for respondent's use in corresponding with the buyer's attorney; that respondent represented his clients at the real estate closing; and that, after the closing, respondent failed to obtain an order in a proceeding subsequent, as was required by the escrow agreement and failed to communicate with his clients regarding the matter. Respondent had been on stipulated private probation from October 6, 1987 to October 6, 1989, for past misconduct. The private probation was terminated in October of 1989, despite respondent's continuing attorney registration and CLE delinquencies, because respondent apparently was not practicing law.
After the Director's investigation, the petition in this matter was filed along with a stipulation for discipline between the Director and respondent. In the stipulation, the respondent waived all of his procedural rights to hearings as provided in Rule 10(a), Rule 9 and Rule 14, Rules on Lawyers Professional Responsibility. Respondent also waived his right to interpose an answer and unconditionally admitted all of the allegations of the petition. Respondent joined with the Director in recommending *598 that appropriate discipline pursuant to Rule 15, Rules on Lawyers Professional Responsibility, is indefinite suspension with no right to petition for reinstatement until 1 year after the date of this order. Respondent further agreed to the imposition and payment of $750 in costs pursuant to Rule 24, Rules on Lawyers Professional Responsibility.
The Court, having considered all of the facts and circumstances surrounding this matter, the petition of the Director, and the stipulation of the parties, NOW ORDERS:
1. That the respondent, Robert J. Seng, Jr., hereby is indefinitely suspended pursuant to Rule 15, Rules on Lawyers Professional Responsibility, with no right to petition for reinstatement until 1 year after the date of this order.
2. That the respondent shall pay to the Director the sum of $750 in costs and disbursements pursuant to Rule 24, Rules on Lawyers Professional Responsibility.

=== CASE 9737917 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:36:56.377237+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE HOFFMAN delivered the opinion of the court: Ricky Hill was indicted on three counts of first degree murder and one count of robbery for the death of Edwin Nowak. On March 27, 1992, after a second trial, a jury convicted Hill of first degree murder and robbery. The court sentenced him to 32 years in prison for murder and a concurrent sentence of seven years for robbery. The defendant now appeals and we address the following issues: (1) whether the trial court erred by not suppressing a statement which resulted from the detention and interrogation of a citizen when the State conceded that probable cause to arrest did not exist until the defendant implicated himself in the crime; (2) whether the trial court erred in admitting other crimes evidence; and (3) whether Hill’s sentence was excessive. We affirm. Hill filed a pretrial motion to suppress a statement he made to the police on January 19,1990. At the hearing on the motion, Chicago police officers Anthony Wojcik and Diego Flores testified that while on patrol at around 1 p.m. on January 18, 1990, some 19 months after the crime, they saw Hill walking on North Hoyne Street in Chicago. At the time, the officers had information that Hill knew something about the robbery and murder of Edwin Nowak. Wojcik and Flores testified that Hill, whom they knew, approached their squad car when they called out to him. Hill told them that he knew nothing about the robbery. Both officers testified-that Hill agreed to ride with them to the fourteenth district station to talk with detectives. The officers testified that they did not handcuff or search Hill. Chicago police detectives Bernard Brennan and John Boyle testified that they went to the fourteenth district station on January 18, 1990, after learning from Officer Wojcik that he had located a witness to a homicide. Detective Brennan testified that they arrived at the fourteenth district station between 2 and 2:30 p.m. and talked briefly with Hill. In this conversation, Hill described a homicide he had seen. Brennan and Boyle testified that they were unfamiliar with the circumstances of the homicide Hill said he witnessed, which required a return to Area Five headquarters to research the case. Brennan and Boyle testified that Hill agreed to accompany them to Area Five and they transported him in their squad car at about 2:30 p.m. At Area Five, Brennan and Boyle located a file with incidents similar to those Hill described at the fourteenth district station. Brennan and Boyle testified that at no time was Hill handcuffed. They spoke to Hill in an interview room for about an hour. Brennan testified that Hill’s account contained "minor discrepancies.” Hill agreed to take a polygraph test at police headquarters. As there was no available test time until the next day, January 19, Brennan told Hill "that nothing was going to be accomplished that evening, and *** we were going to have to do it tomorrow; at which time [Hill] became concerned that members of the gangs or the defendant — who he was describing as the defendant would find out that he was talking to police and would anyway attempt to harm him.” Boyle testified that Hill "indicated to my partner and myself that he was somewhat fearful about going back into the 14th district as far as he might become the victim of a gang retaliation.” Brennan testified that he told Hill he could stay overnight at Area Five, but must ask permission to leave the interview room so as not to disrupt ongoing investigations at the station. Brennan explained that he excluded the reason for Hill’s overnight stay from his case report — a fear of retaliation — because he considered the information irrelevant to the investigation. Brennan and Boyle testified that Hill ate sandwiches purchased at about 6 p.m. Brennan described the interview room as 12 by 10 feet with a bench, table, chairs, and a metal ring on the wall above the bench. He also testified that he told the sergeant in charge that "a witness, not an offender” planned to stay the night in one of the interview rooms. Brennan and Boyle testified that, to the best of their knowledge, no one read Miranda rights, coerced Hill, or prohibited him from using a washroom or telephone. They further testified that when they left Area Five on the evening of January 18, 1990, Hill was seated in the unlocked interview room, neither handcuffed nor under arrest, and free to leave at any time. Brennan returned to Area Five shortly after 8 a.m. on January 19, 1990, and found Hill in the interview room. He and Detective Schak testified that after conversations with Hill, the Nowak investigation focused on a man named Darryl Washington. Brennan testified that police brought Washington to the station. He also testified that only he and Detectives Boyle, Smitka, and Schak had contact with Hill and Washington, and that no one told Hill of Washington’s presence or the substance of conversations with Washington. Detective Smitka testified that he arrived at Area Five at 8 a.m. and learned that Hill spent the night at the station at his own request. Smitka testified that his work on the Nowak case involved Washington. He testified that he did not mistreat Hill, Hill did not ask to leave the station, and Hill had no marks or injury on his body. Detective Schak testified that he saw Hill for the first time around noon on January 19, having heard from Detective Brennan that a potential witness to a year-old homicide spent the night at the station. Brennan testified that around noon, Hill changed his story slightly. Schak testified that Brennan pointed out that some of Hill’s statements were inconsistent. The inconsistent statements led the detectives to broaden the investigation to include Hill as a suspect rather than a witness, and Schak read Hill his Miranda rights. Schak then placed Hill under arrest. Brennan and Schak testified that Hill understood his rights and talked about the homicide until about 1:30 p.m. They then locked Hill in the interview room, still unrestrained, until the assistant State’s Attorney arrived. Assistant State’s Attorney Thomas Lyons testified that he arrived at Area Five at 7 p.m. on January 19, 1990. He read the reports and introduced himself to Hill in the interview room. Lyons recalled that Hill was not handcuffed and appeared "in fine condition.” He explained the nature of his job to Hill and advised him of his constitutional rights. Hill said he would waive his rights and talk about the Nowak murder. Lyons and Hill talked for about 20 minutes, beginning at 8 p.m. Lyons testified that he then left the interview room and interviewed Washington. Lyons and Schak testified that Lyons returned to the interview room at 9 p.m. and asked Hill if he wished to have his statements reduced to writing. Lyons testified that Hill preferred a handwritten rather than a court-reported statement. Lyons spent about 30 minutes writing Hill’s statement and another 30 minutes with Hill reviewing the document line by line with him. Lyons said Hill signed the statement at 10 p.m. Lillian Hill, Hill’s sister, testified that on January 18, 1990, she was watching television in the Hill family home at 1457 North Leavitt in Chicago. Around 12:30 p.m., Hill left the house to wait for the mailman. Hill then came back in the house and got a coat and a sandwich and went back outside. Later, Lillian’s sister and boyfriend knocked on the door and when they entered they informed Lillian that "the police are taking Ricky.” Lillian testified that she then went to the door and saw the police searching Darryl Washington and a man named Dwight. After searching Dwight and Darryl, the officer handcuffed Hill and put him in a car and left. Hill testified that he was on his porch waiting for the mailman with Darryl Washington. Hill then went into the house to get a sandwich and a coat and when he returned to the porch, a detective was searching Darryl and Dwight. The detective then searched him, handcuffed him, and took him to the police station. Hill testified that the police said they had a warrant for his arrest. Once at the police station, two detectives arrived and asked him if he knew anything about a murder to which Hill replied "No.” The detectives then took him to Area Five in handcuffs and put him in an interview room. Hill said the detectives again asked him if he knew anything about a murder and also threatened him. Hill told them that he knew nothing about the murder. Hill said he was never fed, was not allowed to contact his family, and was locked in the interview room overnight. He said no one struck or threatened him on January 18, 1990. The next day, Hill said he was questioned again. According to Hill, another detective, who did not testify at the suppression hearing, pulled a chair from under Hill and grabbed him by the neck. He then twisted Hill’s arm back and slammed him back into the chair and asked Hill if he wanted to make a statement. Hill told him he did not. The detective then slapped Hill and left. Hill then testified that an assistant State’s Attorney arrived and asked him if he wanted to make a statement. Hill declined. Hill testified that he signed the statement because the assistant State’s Attorney told him it would help him. Hill claimed that the statement was covered when he signed it and that he never read the statement. OPINION Initially, the State contends on appeal that Hill waived the issue of an illegal arrest when he failed to file a pretrial motion to quash arrest and raised it for the first time on appeal. When a party raises a question for the first time on appeal it is generally considered waived. People v. Enoch (1988), 122 Ill. 2d 176, 522 N.E.2d 1124. The document filed by defense counsel that triggered the hearing in this case was headed "Motion to Suppress Statements.” At one point in the hearing, a question arose about the nature of the motion. It is clear that the trial court conducted a hearing on a motion to suppress. The court properly apportioned the burden of proof and properly ruled that the State had met its burden of showing that no improper inducement existed at the time the confession was made. But it is also clear that the court allowed into evidence all essential facts necessary to rule on a motion to quash Hill’s arrest.  The waiver rule is rooted in the reluctance of reviewing courts to consider a question where no exceptions were preserved or the question was improperly presented, but waiver should not be invoked to deprive a defendant of his right to due process. (People v. Burson (1957), 11 Ill. 2d 360, 143 N.E.2d 239.) Here, there is no question that a due process right is implicated, nor does the record, which covers the chronology of Hill’s first encounter with the police through the time he made a statement 23 hours later, imperfectly present the issue. As the supreme court stated in Burson, "[waiver] is a rule of administration and not of jurisdiction or power, and it will not operate to deprive an accused of his constitutional rights of due process. 'The court may, as a mattér of grace, in a case involving deprivation of life or liberty, take notice of errors appearing upon the record which deprived the accused of substantial means of enjoying a fair and impartial trial, although no exceptions were preserved or the question is imperfectly presented.’ ” (Burson, 11 Ill. 2d at 370-71, 143 N.E.2d at 245, quoting 3 Am. Jur. Appeal & Error § 248, at 33 (1936).) The record in the present case contains ample evidence for this court to address the issue of whether Hill’s statements were a product of an illegal arrest, and this court will consider the issue despite the alleged waiver. The test to determine whether a person is under arrest is whether a reasonable person in Hill’s position, innocent of any crime, would believe that he was not free to leave. (People v. Wipfler (1977), 68 Ill. 2d 158, 368 N.E.2d 870.) If a reasonable person would so conclude, the detention is unlawful. (People v. Hardway (1987), 163 Ill. App. 3d 596, 516 N.E.2d 830.) Reviewing courts will not overturn a trial court’s ruling on a motion to quash an arrest and suppress evidence unless that ruling is manifestly erroneous. (People v. Winters (1983), 97 Ill. 2d 151, 454 N.E.2d 299; People v. Graham (1991), 214 Ill. App. 3d 798, 573 N.E.2d 1346.) On review, we have considered only the testimony of the police officers so that we do not interfere with the trial court’s judgment on issues of credibility. People v. Dowdell (1980), 81 Ill. App. 3d 266, 401 N.E.2d 295. Hill contends that he was under arrest from the time he was taken off the street until the time he made his statement 23 hours later. The State concedes that there was no probable cause to arrest Hill until he was read Miranda warnings the afternoon after he was stopped on the street, but the State argues that Hill’s presence at the station was voluntary, noncustodial police contact. Defendant argues that the facts and inferences under the broad directions of Dunaway v. New York (1979), 442 U.S. 200, 60 L. Ed. 2d 824, 99 S. Ct. 2248, and with the guidance of People v. Gordon (1990), 198 Ill. App. 3d 791, 556 N.E.2d 573, and People v. Young (1990), 206 Ill. App. 3d 789, 564 N.E.2d 1254, require the reversal of the trial court’s ruling. Defendant argues that the police conduct in this case reveals the " 'quality of purposefulness’ ” criticized in Dunaway, and that the circumstances echo those that led to the reversal of convictions in Gordon and Young. (Dunaway, 442 U.S. at 218, 60 L. Ed. 2d at 839, 99 S. Ct. at 2259, quoting Brown v. Illinois (1975), 422 U.S. 590, 605, 45 L. Ed. 2d 416, 428, 95 S. Ct. 2254, 2262.) We disagree. In Gordon, the defendant stayed overnight at the police station to insure his sobriety for a polygraph examination. The court in Gordon noted that the police went to defendant’s house in the middle of the night to get information they already had and that neither the idea to take a polygraph examination nor the idea to sober up at the police station was defendant’s idea. The court held that the police conduct in requesting defendant’s presence at the police station at 12:30 a.m. to provide a better environment to question defendant and the "absurd” notion that defendant would rather sleep in the police station than at home to insure his sobriety violated the defendant’s fourth amendment protections. Gordon, 198 Ill. App. 3d at 798, 556 N.E.2d at 577. Here, the record shows that Hill voluntarily went to the police station during the early afternoon of January 18, 1990. At 6 p.m., Hill was asked to take a polygraph examination to verify his story. The detectives testified that Hill was free to leave, but that he asked to stay in the police station for fear of "gang retaliation.” Both detectives testified that it was Hill who initially asked to stay at the station. Young is also distinguishable. In Young, the defendant voluntarily went to the police station where he was briefly questioned and then left in an interview room for 16 hours. The State offered no reason for defendant’s presence in the station. The court rejected the detective’s testimony that the defendant was at the station for questioning when defendant was only questioned briefly at the commencement of his 16-hour stay. The court said "[i]f mere questioning was the goal, he would not then have been ignored and left to spend the entire night in a small, windowless room, lacking in basic facilities, with the door closed. There is no indication that defendant ever was told he was free to leave that small interview room that night.” Young 206 Ill. App. 3d at 801, 564 N.E.2d at 1263. The detectives in this case questioned Hill on three occasions, one lasting an hour. Meanwhile, the detectives searched for police reports on the incident Hill purportedly witnessed. At 6 p.m., the detectives asked Hill to submit to a polygraph and Hill agreed. Upon learning that no examination could be given until the following day, the detectives told Hill "that nothing was going to be accomplished that evening, and we told him we were going to have to do it tomorrow.” Hill then requested to stay at the station. The credibility of witnesses and resolution of any conflict in their testimony are the functions of the trial court. (People v. Redd (1990), 135 Ill. 2d 252, 553 N.E.2d 316.) A trial court’s ruling will be given great deference and is not manifestly erroneous unless the error is clearly evident, plain, and indisputable. (People v. Murray (1990), 137 Ill. 2d 382, 560 N.E.2d 309; People v. Sanders (1991), 209 Ill. App. 3d 366, 568 N.E.2d 200.) A reviewing court will give great deference to the trial court’s factual findings because the court stands in the best position to weigh the credibility of all the witnesses. (People v. Garriott (1993), 253 Ill. App. 3d 1048, 625 N.E.2d 780.) When faced with contradictory evidence, reviewing courts will not substitute their assessment of the credibility of the witnesses for that of the trial judge. Winters, 97 Ill. 2d 151, 454 N.E.2d 299; see also People v. Enis (1994), 163 Ill. 2d 367, 645 N.E.2d 856.  Here, the court believed the testimony of the detectives that Hill asked to stay at the police station for his own safety. We are not prepared to find that the testimony of the six police officers and one assistant State’s Attorney in this case was so patently absurd that it could not be believed. Therefore, the findings of the trial court that defendant voluntarily went to the police station and voluntarily remained there overnight are not manifestly erroneous. Hill also argues that the court erred in denying his motion in limine regarding evidence of other crimes. The evidence consisted of a prior robbery which involved Hill and Darryl Washington. At trial, Anna Martinez testified that in March 1985 her purse and groceries were taken by a group of youths. Officer Xavier Castro testified that defendant confessed he acted as a lookout in that crime. Evidence of other crimes is generally not admissible if it is relevant merely to establish the defendant’s propensity to commit crime (People v. McKibbins (1983), 96 Ill. 2d 176, 449 N.E.2d 821); however, evidence of other crimes committed by defendant may be admitted if relevant to establish any material question other than the propensity to commit crime (People v. Stewart (1984), 105 Ill. 2d 22, 473 N.E.2d 840). Other crimes which are similar to the crime charged increase the relevance of the evidence and ensure that its use is not improper. People v. Bartall (1983), 98 Ill. 2d 294, 456 N.E.2d 59.  Here, the court allowed the State’s use of other crimes evidence to establish Hill’s common scheme and design. The evidence showed that Hill and Washington had assumed similar roles in a prior robbery — Washington acted as the primary robber and Hill as the lookout. The evidence was also relevant to refute defendant’s statement that he "chickened out” of committing the crime and then innocently acted as a lookout. The evidence was therefore relevant for a purpose other than propensity to commit crime and was admissible. McKibbins, 96 Ill. 2d 176, 449 N.E.2d 821. Hill also argues that the court abused its discretion when it sentenced him to 32 years in prison. We disagree. The trial court’s determination of the appropriate sentence in a given case is within the sound discretion of the trial judge and his decision will not be overturned absent an abuse of that discretion. (People v. Wilson (1991), 143 Ill. 2d 236, 572 N.E.2d 937.) The weight attributed to each factor in aggravation and mitigation in setting a sentence depends on the particular circumstances of each case. (People v. Perruquet (1977), 68 Ill. 2d 149, 368 N.E.2d 882.) The sentencing judge is in the best position to consider all factors relating to sentencing and is vested with wide discretion in making a reasoned judgment concerning the appropriate penalty. People v. O’Neal (1988), 125 Ill. 2d 291, 531 N.E.2d 366.  We find that the trial judge did not abuse his discretion in sentencing defendant to a term of 32 years in prison. The sentencing hearing included testimony from both the State and defense witnesses. The record reveals that factors in mitigation, which included that Hill was only 19 years old, he did not physically harm the victim, his rehabilitative potential, and his lack of a criminal record, were argued before the court and that the court considered them. Affirmed. S. O’BRIEN, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9737918 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:36:56.3822+00 ===

JUSTICE CAHILL, dissenting: Dunaway concludes with these words: "To admit petitioner’s confession in such a case would allow 'law enforcement officers to violate the Fourth Amendment with impunity, safe in the knowledge that they could wash their hands in the "procedural safeguards” of the Fifth.’ ” (Dunaway, 442 U.S. at 219, 60 L. Ed. 2d at 840, 99 S. Ct. at 2260, quoting Comment, Criminal Procedure — Fourth Amendment Exclusionary Rule — Miranda Warnings Do Not Per Se Render Admissible A Confession Following An Arrest Which Violates Fourth Amendment Rights, 25 Emory L.J. 227, 238 (1976).) A little later, in a concurring opinion, Justice Stevens writes: "The justification for the exclusion of evidence obtained by improper methods is to motivate the law enforcement profession as a whole — not the aberrant individual officer — to adopt and enforce regular procedures that will avoid the future invasion of the citizen’s constitutional rights.” Dunaway, 442 U.S. at 221, 60 L. Ed. 2d at 841, 99 S. Ct. at 2261 (Stevens, J., concurring). With the majority, I defer to the credibility findings of the trial court. That disposes of the voluntary nature of Ricky Hill’s confession as an issue under the fifth amendment, but it is only a threshold issue under the fourth amendment. Dunaway, 442 U.S. at 217, 60 L. Ed. 2d at 839, 99 S. Ct. at 2259; Brown v. Illinois (1975), 422 U.S. 590, 604, 45 L. Ed. 2d 416, 427, 95 S. Ct. 2254, 2262. The difficulty we face in this case is created by the testimony in support of voluntary behavior dating back to the moment the police officers encountered Hill on the street. The majority accepts the elapsed time and circumstances as allowable under a fourth amendment analysis because Hill’s presence was voluntary. I do not. We part company because I believe the circumstances of Hill’s interrogation require us, under Dunaway, to examine the conduct of the police independently of Hill’s cooperation. So examined, I believe the conduct of the police officers falls far short of the "regular procedures” urged by the concurrence in Dunaway and is a good example of the "purposefulness” of police conduct criticized in the Dunaway majority opinion. I reach the same conclusion here that the United States Supreme Court reached in Brown v. Illinois: "The detectives embarked upon this expedition for evidence in the hope that something might turn up.” Brown, 422 U.S. at 605, 45 L. Ed. 2d at 428, 95 S. Ct. at 2262. We do no violence to effective law enforcement, even in cities troubled by crime, nor to the right of police officers to conduct reasonable interrogations, even in murder cases, if we conclude that 23 hours in a police station and an overnight stay in a bedless interrogation room are unacceptable procedures in a democracy that honors the fourth amendment. I respectfully dissent.

=== CASE 9737919 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:36:58.005253+00 ===

Michael J. Kelly, J.
Defendant-appellant appeals as of right two provisions of a judgment of divorce entered on September 3, 1988, by the Kent Circuit Court. We affirm in part and reverse in part.
i
The first issue is whether the trial court’s award of alimony was proper. We find that it was. The award of alimony is discretionary. Pelton v Pelton, 167 Mich App 22; 421 NW2d 560 (1988). It is to be based on what is just and reasonable under the circumstances. Ackerman v Ackerman, 163 Mich App 796; 414 NW2d 919 (1987). We reject defendant’s argument that the trial court’s consideration of the parties’ ability to work was not supported by the evidence. Ability to pay alimony includes the unexercised ability to earn if income is voluntarily reduced to avoid paying alimony. Healy v Healy, 175 Mich App 187; 437 NW2d 355 (1989). This Court will not substitute its judgment for that of the trial court in a decision to award alimony unless there was an abuse of discretion or this Court is convinced it would have reached a different result. Kurz v Kurz, 178 Mich App 284; 443 NW2d 782 (1989). We find no abuse of discretion in the alimony award.
*499II
The second issue is whether the proffered settlement award was fair and just in light of the evidence and the trial court’s findings of fact. We find that the trial court’s disparate property division was error. We are left with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made.
At oral arguments the parties agreed that the property division was divided seventy percent to plaintiff wife and thirty percent to defendant husband. The only possible justification for such a marked disparity would be a well-grounded finding of fault. Since the trial court found fault arising out of conduct which occurred subsequent to the breakdown of the marriage relationship, that finding is erroneous as it is post hoc, ergo propter hoc —the obvious fallacy of finding causation from consequence.
The trial court awarded defendant husband the inheritance from his mother which occurred after the divorce was started. Charlton v Charlton, 397 Mich 84; 243 NW2d 261 (1976). The court then stated it was finding fault and divided the marital assets, $109,951.75 to the plaintiff wife, $49,451.75 to the defendant-husband (sixty-nine percent to thirty-one percent).1 Instead of exercising its discretion to independently apportion the assets, the court accepted the proposed division submitted by plaintiff’s attorney and described it as "fairest under the circumstances.”2 The only explanation for this division was the court’s statement that it was based upon defendant’s "relative fault.”_
*500The only "relative fault” we find in this record was amplified as follows:
The Court: The Court doesn’t often consider fault, but in this case I did. I think there is sufficient evidence here of a relatively recent affair with a lady in California. Now, I understand Mr. Knowles’ contention, but again, I didn’t particularly find his evidence to be entirely credible. I did have the name on the resume and the fact he went out there, the Court is convinced that there was some, if I can use the word "sneaking around,” to go out there because of a purported trip to visit his brother and then we have instead of a trip to California, the flowers, and the other evidence I have has convinced me here that that is one of the things which led directly to the breakdown of the marriage, and the Court did consider fault as a factor in arriving at the property settlement.
The Court is also aware that Mrs. Knowles admitted to an affair back sometime, but apparently that affair occurred at a time when the parties were separated and apparently at that time divorce proceedings were pending, if I recall from my notes, which I reviewed last night, so I did consider relative fault in breaking up the assets.
The record indicates that the trip to California which evidenced the "relatively recent affair” took place four months after the filing of the complaint for divorce. We believe it was improper for the trial court to hold divorcing parties to a standard of morality or behavior appropriate for marital partners. The court seemed to reverse the so-called double standard attributed to earlier generations. In any event the court employed a standard known only to itself that a "relatively recent affair” constituted fault to be assessed against defendant husband while an affair "back some *501time” involving plaintiff wife was discounted. This is neither equitable nor appropriate. Furthermore, we do not think the evidence of defendant’s "recent affair” was relevant since it took place after the breakdown of the marital relationship and after the plaintiff had filed her complaint for divorce. It is inappropriate to assess such conduct as a cause rather than an effect without a clear revelation of the trial court’s reasoning and record support indicating facts on which it relied.
We reverse as to the property division and remand for equitable distribution of the marital assets, which means roughly congruence. McDermott v McDermott, 84 Mich App 39; 269 NW2d 299 (1978). Any significant departure from that goal should be supported by a clear exposition of the trial court’s rationale.
We affirm the judgment of divorce.3
Affirmed in part, reversed in part, and remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. We do not retain jurisdiction.
Cynar, J., concurred.
Counsel at oral argument in this Court described the division as seventy/thirty.
Query: Does such a methodology indicate a process of choice between alternative proposals as in baseball arbitration? Here the record is unenlightening. However, such a process would undoubtedly be a lightning rod for appellate scrutiny.
Bifurcation is agreeable to both parties.

=== CASE 9737920 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:36:58.009226+00 ===

Brennan, P.J.
(dissenting). I adopt the findings and decision of this Court’s majority which affirmed the trial court’s alimony award.
The defendant contends that the property division contained in the judgment constituted an abuse of discretion by the trial court. I disagree. I acknowledge that the trip to California by defendant occurred after the divorce was in progress. This fact is principally relied on by the majority opinion. The trial court was somewhat limited in its allocution on the record reciting only the California sojourn to support its opinion. However, *502there was ample further evidence in the record to justify the disparity in the awards.
While the trial judge emphasized the fault of the defendant, the record as a whole adequately justifies other equitable considerations. The defendant husband’s future earning potential far surpasses that of the plaintiff. In addition, a substantial portion of the plaintiff’s award consisted of the marital home, which will allow her greater ability to rear her daughter, of whom she was awarded custody. More importantly, the total evidence supports a finding that the defendant’s "affair” predates the filing for divorce by more than a year. Thus, the conduct by the defendant clearly contributed to the breakup of the marriage.
I do not find that the trial judge abused his discretion. I would affirm.

=== CASE 2212418 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:19.602677+00 ===

222 Cal. App. 2d 79 (1963)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
ROBERT GUTIERREZ LOVIO, Defendant and Appellant.
Crim. No. 8674.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. One.
Nov. 5, 1963.
David C. Marcus for Defendant and Appellant. *80
Stanley Mosk, Attorney General, William E. James, Assistant Attorney General, and David M. Rothman, Deputy Attorney General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
FOURT, J.
This is an appeal from a judgment of conviction of violating section 11530, Health and Safety Code (possession of marijuana).
In an information filed in Los Angeles County on February 20, 1962, appellant was charged with four codefendants with possessing marijuana on January 13, 1962. A prior conviction of a felony was charged against appellant and he pleaded not guilty and denied the truth of the allegation with reference to the prior conviction. A jury trial was waived and appellant was found guilty as charged and the allegation with reference to the prior felony conviction was found to be true. The appeal is from "the judgment and sentence" "and from the denial of the defendant's motion for a new trial." The last mentioned motion is nonappealable (Pen. Code,  1237).
A resume of some of the facts is as follows: Officers Dorris and Salazar of the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Office were patroling about 4 a.m., January 13, 1962, in the 500 block of Sadler Avenue where they observed a parked automobile. One of the doors of the observed car was open and a man was standing next to it. Another man was getting out of the car. The high beam lights on the police car were turned on in order that the officers could see better and as this was done two men ran across the street. The police car was then stopped, the overhead red light was turned on and one of the officers called out to the men who were running to stop. One of the men, Roybal, stopped and the other, Ochoa, continued running onto the porch of the house at 516 Sadler Avenue, it being the house directly across the street from where the observed car was parked.
Officer Dorris ran toward the porch. Ochoa took an object out of his jacket and threw it over the side of the porch to the ground. Dorris ran onto the porch where Ochoa had been and with the aid of a flashlight saw three brown rolled paper cigarettes upon the ground. Ochoa was placed under arrest. The door to the house was opened by one of the Contreras who occupied the place and when the officers were observed the door was immediately closed. Dorris retrieved the cigarettes thrown upon the ground by Ochoa and returned to the vicinity of the police car with Ochoa. Roybal also was placed under arrest. *81
During the time Dorris was chasing Ochoa, Officer Salazar had crossed the street to the parked automobile from which Ochoa and Roybal had run. With the aid of a flashlight, Salazar observed Fred Barela in the driver's seat of the parked car and appellant on the passenger's side. A tinfoil package was on the seat between them with what resembled marijuana cigarettes in it. Salazar ordered the men out of the parked automobile. At the rear of the car the deputy requested some identification and Barela produced a driver's license. Appellant began searching in his pockets and produced a wax paper package which he dropped to the ground. Salazar picked it up and observed that it contained what appeared to be marijuana. The officer picked up two cigarettes from the front seat of the parked car. Assistance from other officers was requested and such assistance soon arrived.
Dorris and Salazar approached the Contreras house and knocked on the door and Mrs. Contreras answered. She was told that the officers wanted to talk to Mr. Contreras. She inquired as to whether the officers had a search warrant and the officers answered in the negative. Mrs. Contreras shut the door and shortly thereafter reopened it and told the officers that Mr. Contreras was in the bedroom and that they could come in. The deputies entered the house, saw a coffee table in the living room upon which were partly filled glasses and a piece of wax paper upon which was a leafy substance resembling marijuana. The wax paper and the leafy material were taken into the possession of the deputies. Contreras was placed under arrest.
It was stipulated in effect that the cigarette and the leafy material heretofore mentioned contained marijuana.
Appellant now asserts that there was an unlawful search and seizure, that the evidence was insufficient to support the conviction and further that the proof of the alleged prior conviction was not proper. No useful purpose would be served in repeating all of that which made up the evidence. Suffice it to say that the officers acted properly and lawfully. [1] In People v. Ellsworth, 190 Cal. App. 2d 844, 846-847 [12 Cal. Rptr. 433], it is stated: "The courts of this state consistently have adhered to the proposition that a police officer may question a person outdoors at night when the circumstances are such as would indicate to a reasonable man in like position that such a course is necessary to the discharge of his duties. ... Such a procedure does not constitute an arrest even though the person interrogated may be detained *82 momentarily ... and the existence of facts constituting probable cause to justify an arrest is not a condition precedent to such an investigation. ... The reasonableness of an officer's decision to make an investigation is determined in the light of the facts and circumstances as they appeared to him at the time he was required to act."
[2] Here Officer Salazar would have been derelict in his duty had he not gone to the parked automobile and observed who was in it and what they were doing. One of the first things he saw was the package upon the seat which he thought was marijuana--he asked the appellant to get out of the parked automobile and when appellant did so, and was looking through his own wearing apparel for an identification item, he dropped a package which contained marijuana to the ground. Salazar was not conducting a search--he was simply observing that which was in his plain sight. (People v. Hyde, 51 Cal. 2d 152, 157 [331 P.2d 42].)
[3] A crime was being committed in the immediate presence of Officer Salazar and under such circumstances it was not required that he have a warrant of arrest for arresting appellant.
[4] The appellant was charged with a prior felony conviction (possessing heroin)--in fact the record disclosed that appellant was on probation for a previous narcotic offense at the time of the occurrence of the events heretofore related. Appellant denied the prior conviction; however, when testifying while under cross-examination he readily admitted a prior felony conviction with reference to possessing heroin, he stated that he recognized and knew what marijuana cigarettes looked like. This, of course, would not in and of itself constitute sufficient proof of the prior conviction. However, the superior court file case number 222022, People v. Lovio, with reference to the prior conviction was presented as an exhibit, the probation officer to whom appellant's case was assigned as a result of the prior conviction identified appellant as being the person named in the superior court case number 222022, People v. Lovio, and the file was thereupon admitted into evidence. The name of the defendant in case number 222022, and the name of the defendant in the present case are identical. Identity of persons is presumed from identity of names. (Code Civ. Proc.,  1963, subd. 25.) The proof of the prior conviction was sufficient. (People v. Ahouse, 162 Cal. App. 2d 586, 588 [328 P.2d 227].)
The appeal from the sentence is in effect an appeal from *83 the judgment.
The attempted appeal from a nonappealable order denying the motion for a new trial is dismissed. The judgment is affirmed.
Wood, P. J., and Lillie, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9737921 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:37:00.979735+00 ===

JUSTICE FREEMAN delivered the opinion of the court: This appeal lies to this court on a certificate of importance from the appellate court (Ill. Const. 1970, art. VI, § 4(c); 134 Ill. 2d R. 316). The issue, as framed by the appellate court, is whether the "plain touch” doctrine recognized by the United States Supreme Court in Minnesota v. Dickerson (1993), 508 U.S. 366, 124 L. Ed. 2d 334, 113 S. Ct. 2130, violates article I, section 6, of the Illinois Constitution. FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND In July 1992, Officer Edward King observed defendant, Curtis Mitchell, driving a 15-year-old Oldsmobile southbound in the alley of Orleans Street in Chicago. The car’s lights were not on, and King could not see any license plates. Because that area of the city had a high incidence of auto theft, King kept the Oldsmobile under surveillance. After being followed for a few blocks, defendant pulled over and parked the car. Defendant exited the vehicle as King approached. King identified himself to defendant and began questioning him concerning ownership of the car and his reason for driving without lights. As King stood next to the vehicle, he was able to observe that the steering column on the car had been "peeled.” He also saw "crack pipes” and small pieces of copper scouring pads on the front seat of the car. In King’s experience as a police officer, he had seen pipes used to smoke cocaine and scouring pads used as filters inside those pipes. King conducted a patdown search of defendant "primarily” for weapons. During the patdown, he felt a foreign object inside defendant’s shirt pocket. King did not believe that what he felt was a weapon; it felt, instead, like a piece of rock inside a small baggie. King reached inside defendant’s pocket and pulled out the object. He observed it to be what he believed was rock cocaine. King then placed defendant under arrest for possession of narcotics. Prior to trial, defendant filed a motion to quash the arrest and to suppress the evidence. In his motion, defendant maintained that the officer’s seizure of the cocaine went beyond the scope of a Terry patdown. See Terry v. Ohio (1968), 392 U.S. 1, 20 L. Ed. 2d 889, 88 S. Ct. 1868. The trial court found the Terry stop and patdown to have been proper. However, the court held that seizure of the drugs exceeded the scope of Terry. The court, therefore, granted defendant’s motion and entered an order to quash the arrest and suppress the evidence. The State filed a motion for reconsideration. In its motion, the State argued that the search and seizure could be upheld either as incident to an arrest or under the "plain touch” doctrine. The State’s motion was denied. The State appealed the trial court’s order. During the pendency of the appeal, the United States Supreme Court decided Minnesota v. Dickerson (1993), 508 U.S. 366, 124 L. Ed. 2d 334, 113 S. Ct. 2130, in which the Court held that the "plain touch” doctrine did not violate the fourth amendment proscription against unreasonable searches and seizures. Noting this court’s predisposition to interpret section 6 of the Illinois Bill of Rights consistently with the Supreme Court’s interpretation of the fourth amendment, the appellate court adopted Dickerson’s "plain touch” doctrine. The court, finding the seizure proper under the doctrine, reversed the circuit court. The appellate court subsequently granted defendant’s motion to issue a certificate of importance to this court. Ill. Const. 1970, art. VI, § 4(c); 134 Ill. 2d R. 316. MINNESOTA v. DICKERSON In Dickerson, the Supreme Court granted certiorari to resolve a conflict among the State and Federal courts over whether contraband detected through the sense of touch during a patdown search is proper and admissible evidence. The Court noted that under certain circumstances, police officers may seize contraband detected during the lawful execution of a Terry search. In its analysis, the Court placed particular reliance on its decision in Michigan v. Long (1983), 463 U.S. 1032, 77 L. Ed. 2d 1201, 103 S. Ct. 3469, which sanctioned "plain view” seizures of items other than weapons in the context of a Terry search of automobiles. Specifically, the Court stated, " 'If while conducting a legitimate Terry search of the interior of the automobile, the officer should, as here, discover contraband other than weapons, he clearly cannot be required to ignore the contraband, and the Fourth Amendment does not require its suppression in such circumstances.’ ” Dickerson, 508 U.S. at 374, 124 L. Ed. 2d at 345, 113 S. Ct. at 2136, quoting Long, 463 U.S. at 1050, 77 L. Ed. 2d at 1220, 103 S. Ct. at 3481. Expounding on the "plain view” doctrine, the Court stated that, if police officers are lawfully in a position from which they view an object, if its incriminating character is immediately apparent, and if the officers have a lawful right of access to the object, they may seize it without a warrant. If, however, the police lack probable cause to believe that an object in plain view is contraband without conducting some further search of the object — i.e., if " 'its incriminating character [is not] "immediately apparent” ’ [citation] — the plain-view doctrine cannot justify its seizure.” Dickerson, 508 U.S. at 375, 124 L. Ed. 2d at 345, 113 S. Ct. at 2137. The Court noted that the "plain view” doctrine has obvious application by analogy to cases in which an officer discovers contraband through the sense of touch during an otherwise lawful search. "If a police officer lawfully pats down a suspect’s outer clothing and feels an object whose contour or mass makes its identity immediately apparent, there has been no invasion of the suspect’s privacy beyond that already authorized by the officer’s search for weapons; if the object is contraband, its warrantless seizure would be justified by the same practical considerations that inhere in the plain-view context.” Dickerson, 508 U.S. at 375-76, 124 L. Ed. 2d at 345-46, 113 S. Ct. at 2137. Applying these principles to the facts before it, the Court held that the officer’s seizure of the crack cocaine exceeded the bounds of Terry. The Court held that although the officer was lawfully in a position to feel the lump in the defendant’s pocket, the court below determined that the incriminating character of the object was not immediately apparent to him. Rather, the officer determined that the item was contraband only after conducting a further search — squeezing, sliding and otherwise manipulating the contents of the defendant’s pocket. Because the further search of the defendant’s pocket was constitutionally invalid, the seizure of the cocaine that followed was unconstitutional. Dickerson, 508 U.S. at 377, 124 L. Ed. 2d at 347-48, 113 S. Ct. at 2138-39. DISCUSSION The Supreme Court’s decision in Dickerson resolves any conflict concerning whether the "plain feel” doctrine offends fourth amendment guarantees. The question presented for our resolution is whether the doctrine comports with Illinois’ article I, section 6, protections. The appellate court, although presented with an alternative basis upon which to uphold the validity of the seizure, rested its decision on the "plain touch” doctrine. Although we need not do so (see Nowicki v. Union Starch & Refining Co. (1973), 54 Ill. 2d 93, 100 (Goldenhersh, J., dissenting) (certification does not require that we find the question certified to be the controlling issue in the case)), we confine our analysis to the consideration and application of the doctrine. At the outset, however, we must address defendant’s assertion that we are not required to follow the Supreme Court’s interpretation of Federal protections in "lockstep.” We acknowledge that we are not bound to follow the Supreme Court’s interpretation of Federal constitutional law. Indeed, this court has often stated that we may construe provisions of our State constitution to provide more expansive protections than the comparable Federal constitutional provisions. (See In re May 1991 Will County Grand Jury (1992), 152 Ill. 2d 381, 390; People v. Perry (1992), 147 Ill. 2d 430, 436; People v. Tisler (1984), 103 Ill. 2d 226, 243.) Certain judicially crafted limitations, however, define the exercise of that right. In Tisler, 103 Ill. 2d at 245, in response to the defendant’s entreaty for a broader construction of our search and seizure provision, this court stated that "[w]e must find in the language of our constitution, or in the debates and the committee reports of the constitutional convention, something which will indicate that the provisions of our constitution are intended to be construed differently than are similar provisions in the Federal constitution.” See, e.g., People v. Fitzpatrick (1994), 158 Ill. 2d 360; People v. McCauley (1994), 163 Ill. 2d 414. Prior to 1970, section 6 of our Bill of Rights mirrored the language of the fourth amendment. As it currently reads, section 6 provides: "The people shall have the right to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and other possessions against unreasonable searches, seizures, invasions of privacy or interceptions of communications by eavesdropping devices or other means.” (Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, § 6.) The addition of express provisions for invasions of privacy and interceptions of communication is a product of the 1970 Constitutional Convention. No similar provisions are expressed in the Federal fourth amendment. In all other respects, however, the language of section 6 continues, nearly, to parallel that of the Federal fourth amendment. Cf. U.S. Const., amend. IV; see Tisler, 103 Ill. 2d at 235-36. Defendant views the additional language in section 6 as evidencing the drafters’ intent that Illinois’ search and seizure clause provide more expansive protections than its Federal counterpart. Then, as a further attempt at satisfying the requirements announced in Tisler, he offers the verbatim transcript of the convention debates on section 6. This issue of the expansiveness of section 6 was considered and correctly decided in Tisler and no purpose is served by our reconsideration. We would simply add that the comments of committeeman Dvorak, in his address to the convention on the proposed changes to section 6, are particularly pertinent on this point. Dvorak stated: "There is nothing new or no new concepts that the Bill of Rights Committee intended to provide insofar only as the search and seizure section — or the search and seizure concept — is concerned if, in fact, we break [section 6] down in three concepts — as I originally stated.” 3 Record of Proceedings, Sixth Illinois Constitutional Convention 1523-24. Given the express intent of the drafters to leave unaltered the search and seizure clause of section 6, the additional language in our section 6 provides no basis for an interpretation different from the Federal search and seizure clause. In the face of Dvorak’s clear statement of the drafters’ intent, defendant, nonetheless, seeks support for his argument by focusing on other of Dvorak’s comments. Specifically, defendant cites to Dvorak’s statement that the committee "did not intend in any way to legalize or deal with or make legally constitutional — or constitutionally — a constitutional question, the 'stop and frisk’ concept, for instance.” 3 Record of Proceedings, Sixth Illinois Constitutional Convention 1524. The import of this statement is not entirely clear. Nevertheless, we do not understand it to negate Dvorak’s prior statement of the drafters’ intent concerning the search and seizure clause. Consistent with Tisler, we find nothing, either in the language of the provision or in the debates, to support a divergence in interpretation of our section 6 search and seizure clause from the Federal fourth amendment interpretation. Indeed, the court in Tisler stated that after having accepted the pronouncements of the Supreme Court in deciding fourth amendment cases as the appropriate construction of the search and seizure provisions of the Illinois constitution for so many years, absent some substantial grounds, we should not suddenly change course. Tisler, 103 Ill. 2d at 245. Defendant next asserts that the concept of search and seizure incorporates the right to privacy. Proceeding from that premise, he argues that the police conduct involved in this case, that is, the touching of his body, falls within the personal privacy clause of section 6 as opposed to the search and seizure clause. Defendant then notes that our constitution, unlike the fourth amendment, makes an express provision for the right to privacy. Relying on In re May 1991 Will County Grand Jury (1992), 152 Ill. 2d 381, he asserts that section 6 goes beyond Federal constitutional guarantees with respect to that right. It is his contention that he is entitled to the greater protections afforded under our right-to-privacy clause. The State initially responds that the right-to-privacy clause of section 6 does not provide greater protections than does the fourth amendment. Consistent with that position, the State urges our reevaluation of language in Will County Grand Jury to that effect. Alternatively, the State argues that the section 6 personal privacy right is confined to invasions into highly personal matters and does not apply to the conduct at issue here. We first consider under which clause of section 6 the conduct involved here falls. We do not disagree with defendant’s basic premise concerning the relationship of search and seizure and the right to privacy. Clearly, not just search and seizure, but each of the three clauses included in section 6 shares a commonality of purpose— the protection of an individual’s privacy interests. Notwithstanding that commonality, each clause differs with respect to the conduct it was designed to prohibit. The scope of Terry, as well as the "plain view” doctrine, out of which "plain touch” was born, has traditionally been tested against the bounds of the search and seizure clause of section 6. We do not perceive that the recent addition of a right-to-privacy clause effected any change in that regard. Thus, even though the conduct here triggers right-to-privacy concerns generally, such conduct is more particularly a search and seizure issue. Dvorak’s comments concerning the privacy clause provide insight into the drafters’ perceptions of the nature of the conduct covered by that clause. He commented: "We have now the concept of a general information bank whereby the state government or the federal government can take certain pertinent information about each and every one of us based on, for instance, our social security number — know our weight, height, family ages, various things about us — and this is not acceptable to — was not acceptable — or the theory or the thought of such a thing— was not acceptable to the majority of our committee in approving section 6.” Later, when asked specifically what is meant by invasions of privacy, Dvorak added that peeping into the women’s washroom through a peephole could be considered an invasion of one’s privacy. (3 Record of Proceedings, Sixth Illinois Constitutional Convention 1530.) The clause has subsequently been interpreted to cover the seizure of pubic or head hair and physical evidence of a noninvasive nature, such as an in-person appearance in a lineup, fingerprints or palmprints (see Will County Grand Jury, 152 Ill. 2d 381), as well as chemical tests of breath, blood and urine (see King v. Ryan (1992), 153 Ill. 2d 449). See also People v. Lurie (1968), 39 Ill. 2d 331 (right extended to cover an individual’s privacy in books and records). The Bill of Rights Committee merely "felt that [it] would be very progressive and very thorough and very proper [to] include all three theories into section 6 of [the] bill of rights.” 3 Record of Proceedings, Sixth Illinois Constitutional Convention 1525 (comments of committeeman Dvorak); see also Con Con, Issues for the Illinois Constitutional Convention 46 (V. Ranney ed. 1970). Apparent from the convention debates is that the drafters intended no change in the categorization of conduct traditionally covered by the search and seizure clause. By adding the right-to-privacy clause, the drafters merely intended to make our constitution a more progressive and contemporary document. We note additionally that it is not generally held that privacy clauses are an additional source of protection in the criminal context beyond those rights already afforded by more specific clauses governing search and seizure. J. Friesen, State Constitutional Law 2 — 4 n.4 (1994). We conclude that the section 6 right-to-privacy clause does not cover the conduct at issue here. Rather, the conduct, as always, continues to fall within the bounds of the search and seizure clause. Having so concluded, we decline the State’s invitation to reconsider the language in Will County Grand Jury concerning the breadth of our right-to-privacy clause. We now return to the question presented to us by the appellate court. In light of this court’s stated election to construe our section 6 guarantees consistently with the Supreme Court’s interpretation of the fourth amendment, the answer to the question certified to us seems clear. The "plain touch” doctrine does not violate our section 6 guarantees. In so concluding, we are mindful that, in interpreting the warrant requirement of our State constitution, we are charged with the duty to "carefully balance the legitimate aims of law enforcement against the interest of all our citizens in preventing unreasonable intrusions on their privacy.” (People v. Smith (1983), 95 Ill. 2d 412, 422.) Significantly, the Supreme Court is charged with a comparable mandate with respect to its interpretation of fourth amendment guarantees. (See United States v. Place (1983), 462 U.S. 696, 703, 77 L. Ed. 2d 110, 118, 103 S. Ct. 2637, 2642.) We accept that the Court’s adoption of the "plain touch” doctrine strikes the proper balance between the relevant competing interests. Also, and significant to our acceptance, is that "plain touch” is not a newly created exception to the warrant requirement. The doctrine merely flows out of the existing "plain view” doctrine which has been, in some form, operational in this State since this court’s decision in People v. Exum (1943), 382 Ill. 204. Heretofore, when confronted with a question concerning search and seizure guarantees on which the Supreme Court has spoken, we have not done substantially more than reiterate our election to follow the Court’s interpretation. (See, e.g., Tisler, 103 Ill. 2d at 245; Smith, 95 Ill. 2d at 422; People v. Jackson (1961); 22 Ill. 2d 382, 387.) In light of the Court’s comparable mandate to balance the competing interests (see Place, 462 U.S. at 703, 77 L. Ed. 2d at 118, 103 S. Ct. at 2642), such approach has been both expedient and appropriate. We are not, however, precluded from engaging in our own independent analysis, particularly when confronted, as we are here, with issues not addressed in the Court’s Dickerson opinion. Thus, having concluded concerning the constitutionality of the doctrine, we nevertheless consider the nature of the doctrine and defendant’s several challenges to its propriety. The "Plain Touch” Doctrine Generally, courts which have upheld seizures under the "plain touch” exception have done so by analogy, merely substituting the officer’s sense of touch for the officer’s sense of sight. Those courts which have rejected the doctrine, however, view it as an improper expansion of Terry and its supporting rationale. (See Note, The ”Plain Feel” Exception — A Fourth Amendment Rendition of the Princess and the Pea: State v. Dickerson, 62 U. Cinn. L. Rev. 321, 331-34 (and cases cited therein).) Given the Court’s holding in Long, however, rejection of the doctrine on that basis is insupportable. As stated earlier in this opinion, Long extended the scope of Terry to permit the seizure of items other than weapons in the context of automobile searches. (See 3 W. LaFave, Search & Seizure § 9.4(f) (2d ed. 1987).) Notably, even prior to Long, this court read Terry and Illinois’ codification of its holding to permit such seizures. See People v. Lee (1971), 48 Ill. 2d 272; see also Ill. Rev. Stat. 1971, ch. 38, pars. 107 — 14, 108 — 1.01. The notion of "plain touch” is not foreign to Illinois. In People v. Wright (1968), 41 Ill. 2d 170, 174, the court was confronted with the propriety of admitting evidence discovered through an officer’s use of vision and hearing. In its discussion, the court noted that the "plain view doctrine has been applied to anything which an officer becomes aware of by use of his five senses while in a lawful position.” (Emphasis added.) See also People v. Eichelberger (1982), 91 Ill. 2d 359 (holding that an offense is committed in an officer’s presence when knowledge of the commission of an offense is acquired through any of his senses). Subsequent to Wright, this court decided Lee, 48 Ill. 2d 272. The parties have not cited Lee. Yet, Lee is, in effect, an early application of what has now come to be characterized as the "plain touch” doctrine. In Lee, the court upheld the police officers’ tactile identification and seizure of shotgun shells and a gun shoulder holster as properly within the bounds of Terry. Specifically, in Lee, the defendants were subjected to a "pat search.” The search revealed that one defendant was wearing an empty shoulder holster beneath his outer coat and carrying a shotgun shell in his coat pocket. The other defendants were then searched for the purpose of locating the gun which the officers believed was in the possession of one of them. No gun was found, but gun shells were discovered in the possession of some of the defendants. The defendants were subsequently convicted of unlawful possession of firearms ammunition. As if presaged, the analysis now articulated by the Court in Dickerson for "plain touch” purposes parallels the Lee court’s analysis in upholding the seizure. Specifically, in Lee, as required in Dickerson, the court first determined the propriety of the stop and pat search under Terry. Next, as is also required by Dickerson, the court in Lee considered whether the search exceeded the scope of Terry. In so doing, the court determined that, after detecting the holster and shell from the pat search, the officer had reached inside the defendant’s outer coat and seized the items. Significantly, the court stated, "[t]he objects were hard and of appreciable size and their presence apparent from touching the outer clothing. The shell could be reasonably identified by the officer in his pat search as some object capable of being used as a weapon. The shape of the holster and the location permitted its ready identification.” Lee, 48 Ill. 2d at 278. Lee fits neatly within that category of cases that have adopted "plain touch” by analogy to "plain view.” However, the court in Lee simply accepted, without resort to supporting rationale, that the officers’ tactile perceptions were both reliable and proper. Because we agree with the rationale in Dickerson, we now adopt its reasoning to reaffirm the holding in Lee. Defendant’s Challenges to the Doctrine Defendant’s challenges to the "plain touch” doctrine afford us the opportunity to further set out the supporting rationale for the doctrine and, to the extent necessary, clarify its operation in Illinois. Defendant first argues that the Court, in adopting the "plain feel” doctrine, failed to consider the individual’s reasonable expectation of privacy in those items which he seeks to keep private. Defendant has apparently overlooked that portion of the Dickerson opinion which addressed this issue. In Dickerson, the Court reasoned that if a police officer lawfully pats down a suspect’s outer clothing and feels an object whose contour or mass makes its identity immediately apparent, there has been no invasion of the suspect’s privacy beyond that already authorized by the officer’s search for weapons. See Dickerson, 508 U.S. at 376, 124 L. Ed. 2d at 346, 113 S. Ct. at 2137. Defendant next argues that the doctrine conflicts with the inadvertency requirement of the "plain view” doctrine. He asserts that under the "plain view” doctrine, only items which are inadvertently discovered during an otherwise lawful search may be seized. (See Coolidge v. New Hampshire (1971), 403 U.S. 443, 29 L. Ed. 2d 564, 91 S. Ct. 2022.) He maintains that the inadvertency requirement is not met when the police know in advance the location of the evidence and thus intend to seize it. Any inadvertency requirement for "plain view” purposes was rejected in Horton v. California (1990), 496 U.S. 128, 110 L. Ed. 2d 112, 110 S. Ct. 2301. In Horton, the Court noted that an inadvertency requirement had been earlier offered as necessary to avoid a violation of the constitutional requirement that a valid warrant particularly describe the things to be seized. In now rejecting the requirement, the Court noted that if an officer expects to find an item in the course of a search, his expectation should not serve to invalidate a subsequent seizure of that item. The relevant consideration is whether the search had gone beyond the area and duration defined by the terms of the warrant or a valid exception to the warrant requirement. Additionally, the Court in Horton noted that the inadvertency requirement is not necessary to prevent police from conducting general searches. This is so, the Court held, because those concerns are already addressed by requiring that no warrant issue unless it particularly describes the place to be searched and persons to be seized. In the case of a warrantless search, the extent of the search is circumscribed by the exigencies which justify its initiation. If the scope of the search exceeds that permitted by the terms of the warrant or the character of the relevant exception from the warrant requirement, the subsequent seizure is unconstitutional without more. Consistent with Horton and the "plain view” doctrine, no inadvertency requirement is articulated in Dickerson for "plain touch” purposes. Defendant raises additional questions concerning the reliability of tactile perceptions. He urges that the sense of touch is inherently less reliable and, further, that it is more intrusive than sight. This issue was also addressed by the Court in Dickerson. Incidentally, we note that of all of the challenges asserted in opposition to the "plain touch” doctrine, this one is most frequently asserted. As the Court in Dickerson pointed out, however, Terry itself was based upon the supposition that the sense of touch is capable of revealing the identity of an object with enough reliability to justify a weapon’s seizure. See Dickerson, 508 U.S. at 376, 124 L. Ed. 2d at 346, 113 S. Ct. at 2137. We note also that not even all weapons are of easily discernable shape, particularly when covered by a layer of heavy clothing. However, in the context of a Terry stop and frisk, where an officer’s training and experience have led him reasonably to conclude that a perceived object is a weapon, seizure of that object has been upheld as valid. (See, e.g., People v. Gunsaullus (1979), 72 Ill. App. 3d 440; see also 5 L. Pieczynski, Illinois Practice § 13.1 et seq. (1989).) It is the officer’s "plain touch” of the object which elevates his reasonable suspicion that the suspect might be armed to the necessary probable cause to believe that the suspect is concealing a weapon. See Holtz, The "Plain Touch” Corollary: A Natural and Foreseeable Consequence of the Plain View Doctrine, 95 Dick. L. Rev. 521 (1991). The same may be said of the officer’s tactile perception of contraband. When objects have a distinctive and consistent shape that an officer has been trained to detect and that officer has had previous experience in detecting such objects, his tactile perceptions can provide him with the same recognition that his sight would have provided. (See United States v. Pace (C.D. Cal. 1989), 709 F. Supp. 948; see also United States v. Williams (D.C. Cir. 1987), 822 F.2d 1174.) We caution that the officer’s belief must be objectively reasonable, in light of his past experience and training, and capable of verification. (See Pace, 709 F. Supp. 948.) However, probable cause is probable cause, regardless of whether it develops from sight or touch. Further, as the Dickerson Court reasoned, if in fact touch is less reliable than sight, that only means that fewer seizures will be justified by "plain touch.” Because the fourth amendment requires that officers have probable cause to believe that an object is contraband before seizing it, excessively speculative seizures will be prevented. (See Dickerson, 508 U.S. at 377, 124 L. Ed. 2d at 346, 113 S. Ct. at 2137.) Where an object is not readily identifiable, probable cause is absent, and "plain touch” provides no support for its seizure. Finally, we note that tactile evidence can be preserved for trial to assure courts of an opportunity to evaluate the object the officer claims justified the seizure. See, e.g., Commonwealth v. Marconi (1991), 408 Pa. Super. 601, 597 A.2d 616 (in rejecting "plain touch” as basis for seizure of drugs, court held that minute amount of drugs found could not have been identified through sense of touch; object was as consistent in feeling with a button or an aspirin as it was with methamphetamine). Regarding the greater intrusiveness of "plain touch,” Dickerson noted that the concern was inappropriate because the feared intrusion would already be authorized by Terry. "The seizure of an item whose identity is already known occasions no further invasion of privacy,” and the suspect’s privacy interests are not enhanced by a rule banning the seizure of contraband "plainly detected through the sense of touch.” Dickerson, 508 U.S. at 376, 124 L. Ed. 2d at 346-47, 113 S. Ct. at 2137-38. The doctrine does not permit the search to exceed the initial intrusion. As soon as the officer is satisfied that an object is not a weapon, a further search to determine the nature or identity of that object is impermissible.. See Dickerson, 508 U.S. at 378, 124 L. Ed. 2d at 347-48, 113 S. Ct. at 2138-39 (where officer manipulated object to determine its identity, such conduct constituted a further search not permissible under Terry). Defendant next argues that "plain touch” impermissibly expands the scope of Terry to permit the search for evidence and blurs its clear limits. Defendant misperceives the operation of the doctrine. As we have already stated, the scope of the search is defined by Terry. Once the officer determines that the object felt is not a weapon, he is not authorized to proceed with a further search. The doctrine neither countenances nor promotes unfettered searches of the suspect’s person beyond that which is permissible in the search for weapons. In a related argument, defendant contends that "plain touch” constitutes an unwarranted extension of Terry because the underlying State interest which the doctrine promotes is the search for and preservation of evidence. Such justification, he also argues, is not outweighed by an individual’s privacy interests. When "plain touch” operates in the context of a Terry stop and frisk, the interest or justification for the intrusion is, nonetheless, the protection of the investigating officer. True, preservation of evidence may, in fact, result from an application of "plain touch.” However, the State’s interest is to be found in the prior legal justification supporting the intrusion. It is simply that, under the "plain touch” doctrine, where in the conduct of that Terry stop and frisk, the officer discovers contraband, he is not required to avert his attention from such evidence. The same practical considerations that justify the "plain view” doctrine also justify "plain touch.” (See Coolidge, 403 U.S. at 467-68, 29 L. Ed. 2d at 583-84, 91 S. Ct. at 2038-39; see also Macintosh, Fourth Amendment — The Plain Touch Exception to the Warrant Requirement, 84 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 743, 755 (1994).) "Plain touch” merely operates to supplement the prior legal justification. Cf. Coolidge, 403 U.S. at 466, 29 L. Ed. 2d at 583, 91 S. Ct. at 2038. Defendant’s final challenge to the doctrine is that it improperly allows the fruit of the search to serve as the justification for the seizure of the contraband. In support, he notes the appellate court’s reasoning that when the officer felt the plastic baggie he had probable cause to believe that the object he felt was contraband and, therefore, the seizure was proper. Defendant maintains that such reasoning is faulty and conflicts with decisions defining the scope of search incident to arrest. We do not here consider whether this seizure may be justified as resulting from a search incident to a valid arrest. We, therefore, decline consideration of this issue. Application of the "Plain Touch” Doctrine The only matter remaining for our consideration is application of the doctrine to the particular facts of this case. Before proceeding, we note that a trial court’s ruling on a motion to suppress evidence is subject to reversal only if manifestly erroneous. De novo review by this court is appropriate, however, when, as here, neither the facts nor the credibility of witnesses is questioned. People v. Foskey (1990), 136 Ill. 2d 66, 76. We reiterate those facts necessary to our analysis and application of the doctrine. Initially, we note that there is no contention that either the stop or the frisk of this defendant was improper under Terry. Thus, as required for "plain touch” purposes, there was a prior legal justification for the intrusion. Proceeding, then, from the time of the Terry stop, the record reveals that King observed crack pipes and scouring pads on the front seat of the automobile. He described the patdown as starting with the defendant’s wrists and making his way up defendant’s upper body, "just feeling.” When he felt defendant’s chest, by his pockets, he felt a foreign object inside his shirt pocket. The object felt to King like a piece of rock inside a small baggie. Prior to seizing the object, King believed it was a controlled substance, "more specifically [he] felt that it was probably rock cocaine.” There is nothing in the record to suggest that King manipulated the object in order to determine its identity. King has been a Chicago police officer for about 17 years. In his experience as a police officer he has seen pipes used to smoke crack cocaine over one hundred times and has also recovered narcotics. Based upon these facts, we find that the requirements for seizure under the "plain touch” doctrine have been met and seizure of the illegal contraband was, therefore, proper. Defendant argues, however, that given the size of the substance recovered from his person, it was not possible that King could have immediately identified the object as a narcotic. He relies on Commonwealth v. Marconi (1991), 408 Pa. Super. 601, 597 A.2d 616, as support for the proposition that given the size of the object, any claimed identification of the object could not be certain. We disagree with defendant’s impossibility argument. Given that King observed the drug paraphernalia on the seat of the car, he likely suspected that drugs were present, either on defendant’s person or in the vehicle. Thus, it is conceivable that King’s prior police experience with drugs, coupled with his observation of drug paraphernalia on the seat and his tactile perceptions of the object in defendant’s pocket, enabled his ready tactile identification of the object. Further, we note that although the court in Marconi rejected "plain touch” on the particular set of facts before it, the court announced no wholesale rejection of the doctrine. In a footnote to the opinion, the court stated that it was not holding that under certain circumstances the sense of touch could not be used as an accurate technique of identity. The court acknowledged that "[a]t times, perception through touch is a tool as definitive as perception through the other senses.” See Marconi, 408 Pa. Super, at 615 n.17, 597 A.2d at 623 n.17. Defendant additionally argues that the appellate court erroneously assumed that King was readily able to discern the presence of narcotics from his "search” of defendant’s pocket. He maintains the record does not clearly show that when King felt the object, it was immediately apparent to him that the object was contraband. Thus, King did not have probable cause to seize the item. The Court in Dickerson appears to use the phrases "immediately apparent” and "probable cause” interchangeably. That notwithstanding, we notice that in fashioning the requirements for "plain touch,” the Court adopted the requirements of the "plain view” doctrine. "Plain view” requires probable cause to permit a seizure. (See Arizona v. Hicks (1987), 480 U.S. 321, 326, 94 L. Ed. 2d 347, 355, 107 S. Ct. 1149, 1153; see also Texas v. Brown (1983), 460 U.S. 730, 75 L. Ed. 2d 502, 103 S. Ct. 1535 (acknowledging that the phrase "immediately apparent” for "plain view” purposes was a poor choice of words).) Thus, it is reasonable and consistent to conclude that probable cause is sufficient to justify seizure in the "plain touch” context. (See MacIntosh, Fourth Amendment — The Plain Touch Exception to the Warrant Requirement, 84 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 743, 760-63 (1994).) Regardless of whether the officer detects the contraband by sight or by touch, he must have probable cause to believe that the item is contraband before seizing it. See Dickerson, 508 U.S. at 377, 124 L. Ed. 2d at 346, 113 S. Ct. at 2137. Probable cause exists when police " 'have knowledge of facts which would lead a reasonable man to believe that a crime has occurred and that it has been committed by the defendant.’ ” (People v. Wright (1985), 111 Ill. 2d 128, 145, quoting People v. Eddmonds (1984), 101 Ill. 2d 44, 60.) Relevant to this determination is the officer’s factual knowledge, based on his prior law enforcement experience. People v. Smith (1983), 95 Ill. 2d 412, 419-20. Those facts, as we have recited them above, would lead a reasonable person to believe that drugs were present either in the vehicle or on the person of the defendant. Further, it was King’s testimony that when he felt the object he believed it to be crack cocaine. King’s visual observation, along with his touch of the rocky substance, properly support a conclusion that King had probable cause to believe that the object he felt was rock cocaine. In sum, as King was justified by Terry to stop and frisk defendant and, further, as he had probable cause to believe the object felt in defendant’s pocket was rock cocaine, seizure of the substance was proper under the "plain touch” doctrine. Thus, we conclude that defendant’s motion to suppress should have been denied. We therefore affirm the judgment of the appellate court, which reversed the trial court and remanded the cause for further proceedings. Affirmed.

=== CASE 9737922 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:37:00.986609+00 ===

JUSTICE HEIPLE, dissenting: Because I believe that the so-called "plain touch” doctrine violates article I, section 6, of the Hlinois Constitution, which protects citizens against unreasonable searches, I respectfully dissent. Before turning to the merits of the "plain touch” doctrine, I note my disagreement with the majority’s conclusion that the Hlinois Supreme Court, in interpreting the search and seizure clause of the Hlinois Constitution, is bound to follow the decisions of the United States Supreme Court which interpret the search and seizure clause of the Federal Constitution. There is no reason for deference in this area of constitutional interpretation. It would be similarly unsupportable to suggest that the United States Supreme Court, in interpreting a provision of the Federal Constitution, is bound by decisions of the Illinois Supreme Court which interpret a similar provision of the Illinois Constitution. Regardless of the language employed in the two documents, they are separate and distinct. The United States Supreme Court has the responsibility to interpret the Federal Constitution; the Illinois Supreme Court has the responsibility to interpret its State constitution. These are nondelegable duties. The "plain touch” doctrine, a purported extension of the "plain view” doctrine, cannot withstand scrutiny. The "plain view” doctrine permits a law officer to seize contraband in plain view. The "plain touch” doctrine, on the other hand, permits a law officer to seize contraband detected through the sense of touch during the course of a weapons patdown search. It thus allows a law officer to seize anything as long as he is able to contend that he could identify the contraband by merely touching the suspect’s clothing. Realistically, no matter how absurd or unsupportable such a contention may be, a defendant will not be able to successfully challenge it. The "plain touch” doctrine will encourage officers to investigate any lump or bulge in a person’s clothing or pockets that arouses their curiosity during the course of a patdown search. If the item turns out to be contraband, then its seizure can be retrospectively justified. If it turns out to be something else, then there is no case and the matter ends there. In the interim, a citizen is subject to an unwarranted intrusion into his personal privacy far beyond the intrusion contemplated by the weapons patdown search. Governance involves choices. Every expansion of government power is a diminution of individual liberty. A balance must be struck between lawlessness and personal freedom. Some restrictions on liberty are necessary in order to have a society that is relatively free from crime and predation. The current obsession is to eliminate illicit drug use. There is no question, however, that under the so-called war on drugs, personal freedoms and liberties are being trampled. While I may deplore the marketing and use of illicit drugs, as well as the undesirable personal and social problems that flow therefrom, I believe that the pendulum has swung too far in the area of law enforcement and that the assault on our basic liberties and freedoms by government itself has become a far more serious and potentially destructive social problem.

=== CASE 2212437 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:19.852667+00 ===

222 Cal. App. 2d 187 (1963)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
RICHARD LEWIS NEWTON, Defendant and Respondent.
Crim. No. 3457.
California Court of Appeals. Third Dist.
Nov. 8, 1963.
Stanley Mosk, Attorney General, Doris H. Maier, Assistant Attorney General, and Raymond M. Momboisse, Deputy Attorney General, for Plaintiff and Appellant.
Michael T. Hennessy and Hurley & Bigler for Defendant and Respondent.
VAN DYKE, J.  [fn. *]
The People appeal from an order of the Superior Court of Siskiyou County dismissing an indictment. [1a] On February 14, 1963, the Grand Jury *188 of Siskiyou County filed an indictment against respondent herein which, on its face, allegedly charged a violation of section 136 1/2 of the Penal Code of this state in that on or about January 30, 1963, respondent gave a bribe of $20 in money and a bus ticket from Redding, California, to Reno, Nevada, to one Ted Haley Robinson, then and there a witness and a person about to be called as a witness "in a certain action entitled The People of the State of California v. Charles O'Donnell, then pending in the Yreka Justice Court, in and for the County of Siskiyou," the bribe having been given and accepted upon an understanding and agreement that said Ted Haley Robinson would not attend upon the trial and hearing of said action and proceeding.
Respondent herein moved for dismissal upon the ground that the evidence before the grand jury did not disclose probable cause for the indictment. That evidence, stated briefly, was as follows:
Shortly prior to January 30, 1963, a complaint had been sworn to by Robinson before the judge of the judicial district court in Redding, charging one Charles O'Donnell with a felony. Upon warrant, O'Donnell was arrested. His preliminary hearing was set for January 31. O'Donnell retained respondent here, whose business was that of private investigator, to aid him in the matter of the charge against him. Respondent, the day before the preliminary hearing, visited Robinson, who was in jail under a petty theft charge, and then proceeded to post bail for him and secure his release. Respondent then transported Robinson from Yreka to Redding, where he purchased a bus ticket to Reno for him and gave him $20 in money. He saw Robinson on board the bus bound for Reno and told him to get out of California and stay out. It is certain from the record that respondent gave the bus ticket and the money to Robinson upon Robinson's agreement to absent himself from the preliminary hearing on the following day. It is also readily inferable from the evidence before the grand jury that the understanding between respondent and Robinson was to the further effect that Robinson would stay out of California until the felony charge against O'Donnell had been disposed of. It appears that the superior court's order dismissing the indictment was based upon the proposition that a preliminary hearing was not a "trial" within the meaning of that word as used in the statute and, since the charge in the indictment was specifically directed to the bribing of Robinson to stay away from *189 the preliminary examination, no crime had been charged and the indictment ought to be dismissed.
We agree that a preliminary hearing is not a trial within the meaning of that word as used in the statute. And further that since the charge was specifically directed at that one hearing, no public offense was charged and the order appealed from should be affirmed.
Although the indictment charged that the proceeding against O'Donnell was an action pending in the Yreka Justice Court, such was not the case. While it appeared that the judge of the judicial district would officiate at the hearing, he could not do so as a judge of a court for the reason that his entire authority arose because, by virtue of his office, he was a magistrate. [2] Magistrates presiding at preliminary hearings do not sit as judges of courts, and exercise none of the powers of judges in court proceedings. Justices of appellate courts, judges of superior courts, justices of the peace and police magistrates in cities and towns are each and all by the statute made magistrates. [3] The office is purely a statutory one and the powers and duties of the functionary are solely those given by the statute; and those powers are precisely the same whether exercised by virtue of one office or that of another. (People v. Cohen, 118 Cal. 74, 78 [50 P. 20]; Wells v. Justice Court, 181 Cal. App. 2d 221 [5 Cal. Rptr. 204]; People v. Brite, 9 Cal. 2d 666, 685 [72 P.2d 122]; People v. Storke, 39 Cal. App. 633, 636 [179 P. 527]; People v. Velarde, 59 Cal. 457.) We quote the following from People v. Brite, 9 Cal. 2d 666, 683- 684 [72 P.2d 122]: "A justice of the peace, when acting as a court, is given the power of trying causes and rendering judgments of imprisonment upon conviction, but, when acting as a magistrate in a preliminary examination of a person accused by deposition of a public offense, he has no such power. The full limit of his power is, after examination, to hold the accused to answer at trial, unless from the examination it appears that no offense has been committed or there is not sufficient cause to believe the defendant guilty of a public offense, in which event the magistrate must order the accused discharged." By initiating proceedings before magistrates no trial jurisdiction of any court is invoked. (Wells v. Justice Court, supra, 181 Cal.App.2d at p. 225.)
[1b] Section 136 1/2 of the Penal Code is one of a number of code sections having to do with acts interfering with the administration of justice. The section is found in *190 chapter 6 of part I, title 7, of the code and the chapter contains eight sections, all having generally the same wholesome purpose. All but section 136 1/2 were enacted in 1872, are assertedly based on Field's Draft New York Penal Code and New York Penal Code and have remained unchanged save that in Statutes of 1873-1874 the penalty under sections 137 and 138 was raised from misdemeanor to felony. Section 132 denounces the offering in evidence as genuine or true "upon any trial, proceeding, inquiry, or investigation whatever, authorized or permitted by law," of false documents. Section 133 prohibits the deceiving of a witness or person about to be called as a witness "upon any trial, proceeding, inquiry, or investigation whatever, authorized by law, with intent to affect the testimony of such witness." Section 134 denounces the preparing of false evidence for use "upon any trial, proceeding, or inquiry whatever, authorized by law." Section 135 denounces the destroying of evidence about to be produced "upon any trial, inquiry, or investigation whatever, authorized by law." Section 136 denounces the prevention or dissuasion of any person about to become a witness from attending "upon any trial, proceeding, or inquiry, authorized by law." Section 137, which uses broader language than any other section, prohibits the bribery or attempted bribery of any "witness." Section 138 prohibits the taking of bribes by witnesses upon any understanding that testimony shall be influenced thereby or that they will absent themselves from the "trial or proceeding" upon which their testimony is required. It is to be noted that all of the contemporaneous code sections use broad language, such as "trial, proceeding, inquiry, or investigation whatever, authorized by law" or "trial or proceeding," and so by their language specifically apply to proceedings other than trials as well as to trials. But the later section with which we are here concerned, enacted in 1937, is limited to "trials." We think the distinction is clear and material. Why the Legislature sought to limit the later enactment in its application we do not know, but the limitation is there, the statute is highly penal, and the limitation cannot be ignored. (We note that, after occurrences here related, the Legislature amended  136 1/2 by adding after the word "trial" the words "or other judicial proceeding." We think the amendment is of no substantial aid in construing the statute as it stood before the amendment.)
The text of section 136 1/2 as it stood at the time of the *191 occurrences with which we are here concerned, reads as follows:
"Every person who gives or offers or promises to give to any witness or person about to be called as a witness, any bribe upon any understanding or agreement that such person shall not attend upon any trial, or every person who attempts by means of any offer of a bribe to dissuade any such person from attending upon any trial, is guilty of a felony."
In charging an offense against this statute, it is essential that the accusatory pleading state what was the understanding or agreement in consideration of which the bribe was given. Here the indictment charged that the bribe was given "upon an understanding and agreement that said Ted Haley Robinson would not attend upon the trial and hearing of said action & proceeding." (Italics added.) These closing words refer to that part of the indictment which described the action and proceeding as being a certain action "entitled The People of the State of California v. Charles O'Donnell, then pending in the Yreka Justice Court, in and for the County of Siskiyou, State of California." Under the facts before the grand jury this language, though inept and mistaken in material part, could only refer to the proceedings pending before the magistrate. That was the extent of the understanding and agreement alleged to have existed between respondent and Robinson and upon which the bribe was charged to have been given. In short, the charge is that Robinson was bribed to absent himself from the preliminary hearing. Reading these things into the indictment as we must, in view of the testimony before the grand jury, no public offense was charged.
It appears that when the motion to dismiss was presented to the trial court, the position of the assistant district attorney opposing the motion was that Robinson had been bribed by respondent to absent himself from the preliminary hearing and that the preliminary hearing constituted a trial within the meaning of that word as used in the section; that therefore the indictment stated a public offense. Said the assistant district attorney to the trial court, "At the time the matter first came to my attention I read the code section and then I wondered, as counsel has also, whether the word trial as used in section 136 1/2 means among other things a preliminary examination, ... we came to the conclusion that the word trial as used in section 136 1/2 of the Penal Code does *192 include a preliminary examination. ... We also have to take into consideration if the word trial does not apply to a preliminary examination, then what was done in this instance ... could be done with impunity. In other words, it is no criminal offense at all, ... if a preliminary examination is not a trial ... the defendant is entitled to be discharged; there is no crime committed at all." From the brief on appeal here it appears that a somewhat different position is now taken. Here appellant contends the purpose of the law is to go back as far as necessary and say, in effect, that any attempt to so influence prospective witnesses that the truth will not be presented in anticipated litigation is felonious; that it is the intent of the person interested and his purpose and design that is decisive; that while a person cannot be a witness unless there is an action pending, yet a person may be "about to be called as a witness" even though no action is pending; that if a bribe is given to one to withhold evidence or absent himself from an anticipated or probable trial, the crime is complete. In support of the foregoing the People cite People v. McAllister, 99 Cal. App. 37 [277 P. 1082]; People v. Martin, 114 Cal. App. 392, 395 [300 P. 130]; Evans v. Superior Court, 96 Cal. App. 2d 187, 189 [214 P.2d 579]; People v. McGee, 24 Cal. App. 563, 566, 567 [141 P. 1055]. Applying this theory to the facts, appellant says: "The respondent then supplied Mr. Robinson with a bus ticket to take him from Redding to Reno and gave him $20 in cash. Respondent's intent is clearly established by the declaration made at the time he made the bribe. He asked the prospective witness if he were given a bus ticket and some money and were out of jail, 'Would you be willing to disappear?' ... It is apparent from this evidence that the [respondent] ... gave a bribe to a person about to be called as a witness upon the agreement that such witness would permanently absent himself from the State."
We have no quarrel with the rules announced in these cases but they have no application here. The indictment cannot be read as charging that Robinson was bribed upon an understanding and agreement that he would not testify in any proceeding or trial against O'Donnell arising out of the matters referred to in the complaint before the magistrate. On the contrary, as we have said, the understanding and agreement alleged to have been made in consideration of the bribe were that Robinson would absent himself from the preliminary *193 hearing. The indictment goes no farther and that was not far enough.
For the reasons given, the order appealed from is affirmed.
Pierce, P. J., and Schottky, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. *]  *. Assigned by Chairman of Judicial Council.