=== CASE 9739525 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:16:53.131154+00 ===

SULLIVAN, Judge,
concurring in part and dissenting in part.
I
I concur in Part I, Standing.
II
I concur in result with respect to Part II, Notice. The majority opinion implies that the giving of notice pursuant to IC 8-1-2-59 and 8-1-1-8 are condition precedents to the acquisition of subject matter jurisdiction. I respectfully disagree. See L.S. Ayres & Co. v. Indianapolis Power & Light Co. (1976) 2d Dist. Ind.App., 169 Ind. App. 652, 351 N.E.2d 814, 846 (Sullivan, J. concurring). But because HBAI did attend the hearing and participated therein, at least to a limited degree, any notice defect attributible to the scheduling of the hearing has not been shown, of itself, to have caused prejudice.
III
I respectfully dissent from the majority decision under Issue IIH, Pre-Filing.
The Commission Order of April 21, 1987, which set the May 13 hearing date and which established the procedural rules to govern the matter, clearly provided for and contemplated that intervenors as well as respondent utilities should be permitted to submit direct evidence. Record at 28. The order, however, stated that "parties [presumably including intervenors] desiring to submit evidence ... must prefile such evidence ... by May 4, 1987." Record at 24.
HBAI's Petition to Intervene asserted that no party of record could represent its interests. The order granting intervention placed no restrictions or limitations upon the right of HBAI to present its position.
170 IAC 1-1-17(j) (1984 Ed.) does not authorize the Commission to restrict the *188submission of evidence to that which is prefiled. To be sure, the Rule requires parties to prefile prepared testimony and exhibits but if the period for the preparation and filing of such evidence is so short as to effectively deny the right to present evidence, it is contrary to law.
Furthermore, 170 IAC 1-1-17(d) contemplates the submission of evidence at the hearing in addition to any pre-filed evidence:
"The Presiding Commissioner, Deputy Commissioner or Examiner shall determine the order in which intervenors shall introduce their evidence."
As stated by the majority in L.S. Ayres & Co. v. Indianapolis Power & Light Co., supra, 351 N.E.2d at 826:
"Prefiled testimony and exhibits do not preclude or restrict the presentation of live testimony. The purpose of the pre-filing practice is to save hearing time and to assure accuracy. Hearings before the Commission necessarily require considerable expert testimony and complex accounting exhibits."
Here, however, HBAI was denied the opportunity to submit any testimony or evidence at the hearing. It was afforded only an opportunity to submit a post-hearing "statement [of its] interests ... as supported by the record." Record at 816. Quite clearly, since HBAI did not have an opportunity to prefile testimony or exhibits and since it did not have an opportunity to submit live testimony at the hearing, its position or interest was not likely to be supported by the record of evidence submitted by other entities.
The rulings which effectively denied HBAI the right to submit direct evidence, coupled with the extremely limited period for the prefiling of prepared testimony and exhibits, demonstrate sufficient prejudice to warrant reversal.
Although the Commission may have, in its discretion, denied intervention to HBAl, it did not do so. Having granted intervention the Commission was obligated to afford the intervenor, along with other participants, a meaningful opportunity to present its position. The Commission did not do so in this instance. I would reverse and remand upon this issue.
IV
I further dissent with respect to the basic decision of the Commission as set forth in its order of June 1, 1987. To the extent that it gives the wtilities the option to utilize the "gross-up" method of tax re-coupment, it is invalid. It is tantamount to putting the fox in charge of the henhouse.
It may be that the attack in this regard is directed against the "gross-up" method utilized by the utilities as a method of recovering taxes which the utilities construe as another cost of construction covered by 170 IAC 6-1-25 (1984 Ed.). In any event, to the extent that the June 1 order gives the Commission approval to this tax recovery method, it should be overturned.
I have not retreated from the position stated in City of Evansville v. Southern Indiana Gas and Electric Co. (1975) 2d Dist. Ind.App., 167 Ind.App. 472, 339 N.E.2d 562, 598, that a utility should not use consumer contributions as a cost of construction and to include that amount as part of the rate base, le., as a part of the utility's net investment, unless that contribution is entirely refunded to the applicant-consumer. Therefore, I also conclude that the second alternative authorized by the Commission, the Partial Tax Expense, is contrary to law.
The third option provided by the Commission order gives to the applicant (here the developer) a Hobson's Choice. Either the applicant must subject itself to the invalid gross-up collection method or must forego the refund now provided for applicants to recoup that portion of CIAC which represents three times the annual estimated revenue anticipated by virtue of the extension.
There is an additional reason why the alternatives authorized by the Commission are erroneous. In contemplating recovery of the tax upon contributions to costs of construction, the Commission authorizes charging the customer at the maximum tax rate of 34% whereas the utility might well pay the tax at a lesser rate. This eventual *189ity constitutes an unjustified windfall to the utility.
I would reverse and remand to the Commission with instructions to vacate its June 1, 1987 order.

=== CASE 9740404 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:34:39.020498+00 ===

North, C. J.
(concurring). In concluding that section 8, part 7, of the workmen’s compensation act (CL 1948, §417.8 [Stat Ann 1950 Bev §17.227]) should be applied in fixing the amovmt of plaintiff’s compensation, my Brothers Boyles and Sharpe have lifted out of the commission’s opinion a single sentence, which I think they have overemphasized, and possibly misconstrued. This is the sentence:
“We find that plaintiff is totally disabled from silicosis complicated by tuberculosis.”
At the time this sentence was written in the commission’s opinion it was then literally true that plaintiff was “totally disabled from silicosis complicated by tuberculosis.” It was not only a true statement, but it was a proper fact finding bearing upon the permanency of plaintiff’s total disability. However, from the commission’s opinion, read as a whole, it appears there is no justification for minimizing plaintiff’s compensation under section 8, part 7, except in the manner hereafter noted. Our decision should be controlled by the following findings of the commission, which are supported by competent testimony:
“He (plaintiff) finally had to quit work because of his condition. * * * There can be no doubt that plaintiff contracted silicosis as a result of exposure to free silica during the course of his employment in defendant’s foundry. It is equally clear that plaintiff has been totally disabled as a core maker, the employment in which he was engaged when he contracted the disease, since he left defendant’s employ in the month of November, 1945. * * *
*181“We further find that the disease (silicosis) is due to causes and conditions which are characteristic of and peculiar to the business of the defendant and which arose out of his employment by defendant. We find November 23,1945, to be the date of disablement.”
Since, as found by the commission, plaintiff was totally disabled from performing the skilled labor in which he was engaged on November 23, 1945, he was then and there entitled to an award of compensation on the basis of permanent total disability, subject only to the provision that if “such employee is able to earn wages at another occupation which shall be neither unhealthful nor injurious and such wages do not equal his full wages prior to the date of his disablement, the compensation payable shall be a percentage of full compensation proportionate to the reduction in his earning capacity.” CL 1948, §■ 417.3 (Stat Ann 1950 Rev § 17.222).
Surely if, as the record shows, it was only at a substantially later period that plaintiff became afflicted with tuberculosis, it cannot be said that plaintiff’s tuberculosis affliction had any causal relation to his total disability which he had suffered many months before. To hold otherwise would lead to an absurd result in cases of this character. If the employee’s silicotic condition is not later aggravated Icy tuberculosis, he will receive full compensation for his total disability; but if the employee has the greater misfortune of being also afflicted with tuberculosis after he became totally disabled from silicosis, he then must be awarded less than full compensation for total disability by reason of applying to his case section 8, part 7, of the workmen’s compensation act.
The case is remanded to the commission for entry of a modified award in accord with Mr. Justice Bush*182nell’s opinion, with the result of which I concur. Costs to appellee.
Dbthmers, Carr, and Reid, JJ., concurred with North, C. J.
Butzel, J., did not sit.

=== CASE 2220181 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:35.577987+00 ===

188 Ill. App.3d 334 (1989)
544 N.E.2d 90
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
MICHAEL E. CHANEY, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 3-88-0759.
Illinois Appellate Court  Third District.
Opinion filed September 5, 1989.
*335 Mark D. Fisher, of State Appellate Defender's Office, of Ottawa, for appellant.
Gary L. Spencer, State's Attorney, of Morrison (Walter P. Hehner, of State's Attorneys Appellate Prosecutor's Office, of counsel), for the People.
Affirmed in part and vacated in part.
PRESIDING JUSTICE WOMBACHER delivered the opinion of the court:
The defendant, Michael E. Chaney, pled guilty to one count of unlawful delivery of more than 30 but less than 500 grams of a substance containing cannabis (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 56 1/2, par. 705(d)). The trial court sentenced him to a term of five years in prison, ordered him to pay a mandatory fine plus court costs, and ordered him to pay $225 in restitution. The defendant filed a motion to withdraw his guilty plea, which the court denied. He now appeals, arguing that the trial court erred in ordering him to pay $225 in restitution.
The State agrees with the defendant's position. The only fact relevant to the issue is that the $225 restitution figure was the amount the Department of Criminal Investigation of the Illinois State Police paid the defendant for the cannabis its agent purchased from him.
 1-3 Section 5-5-6 of the Unified Code of Corrections (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 38, par. 1005-5-6) provides that the trial court may in certain instances order a convicted defendant to pay restitution to his victim in an amount not to exceed the actual out-of-pocket expenses or loss to the victim proximately caused by the defendant's conduct. However, where public money is expended in pursuit of solving crimes, the expenditure is part of the investigatory agency's normal operating costs and the agency is not considered a "victim" for purposes of restitution. (People v. Evans (1984), 122 Ill. App.3d 733, 461 N.E.2d 634.) A trial court's improper restitution order is void and may be attacked at any time. People v. Winchell (1986), 140 Ill. App.3d 244, 488 N.E.2d 620.
We agree with the defendant and the State that the instant restitution award to the department was improper, because an investigatory agency is not a victim for purposes of restitution. Further, as noted in Winchell, the defendant is not barred from attacking the order on appeal, despite his failure to object to it in the trial court. Accordingly, we vacate the $225 restitution order and affirm the remainder of the defendant's conviction and sentence.
*336 The judgment of the circuit court of Whiteside County insofar as it orders the defendant to pay $225 in restitution is vacated; the remainder of the circuit court's judgment is affirmed.
Affirmed in part and vacated in part.
HEIPLE and STOUDER, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9739526 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:16:58.019576+00 ===

SHEPARD, Chief Justice.
Appellant Norman Woodford and an accomplice robbed a Hook's drug store in Indianapolis. During the robbery, an Indianapolis police officer and Woodford's accomplice engaged in a gun battle. Both were killed. Subsequently, in November 1976, Woodford pled guilty to the murder of a police officer. Ind.Code § 85-13-4-1(b)(1) (Burns 1975). He was sentenced to life imprisonment. Five years and eleven months later in December 1982, Woodford filed a petition for post-conviction relief challenging the validity of the guilty plea. After an evidentiary hearing, the trial court found in favor of the State on the issue of laches and denied Wood-ford's petition.
Upon appeal, this Court reversed denial of Woodford's petition and remanded to the trial court for a new evidentiary hearing in light of our decision in Twyman v. State (1984), Ind., 459 N.E.2d 705, which held that the State has the burden of proof with regard to laches. Woodford v. State (1985), Ind., 484 N.E.2d 563. On remand, the trial court held a second evidentiary hearing on Woodford's petition. The record of the first hearing was introduced by stipulation, and the trial court again found for the State. The court entered extensive findings of fact and conclusions of law including a conclusion that Wood-ford's guilty plea was knowingly and voluntarily entered. The trial court did not specifically state that laches barred Wood-ford's claim. Woodford appeals again, alleging that the trial court erred on the issue of laches and in finding for the State on the merits of his post-conviction claim. We affirm.
I. Laches
Woodford argues that the State failed to carry its burden of proof on the issue of laches. For laches to bar relief, the State must prove by a preponderance of the evidence, first, that the petitioner unreasonably delayed seeking relief, and, second, that the State has been prejudiced by the delay. Perry v. State (1987), Ind., 512 N.E.2d 841. In reviewing claims that evidence is insufficient to show laches, we do not reweigh the evidence nor judge the credibility of the witnesses. Rather, we consider only that evidence most favorable to the judgment, together with all reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom. If the determination of the court is supported by substantial evidence of probative value, the judgment will be affirmed. Washington v. State (1987), Ind., 507 N.E.2d 239.
In this case, the evidence of prejudice presented by the State was not sufficient to sustain a finding of laches. After the second evidentiary hearing, the trial court issued the following findings of fact *1357relevant to the prejudice part of the laches test:
b. The bullets and fragments recovered at the autopsy of Officer Manly and Robbie Woods are no longer available to the State, but were destroyed within five months of the sentencing on November 5, 1976.
c. The Hooks Shopping bag containing cigarettes and a bottle of baby oil were destroyed in April of 1977, less tha[n] Five (5) months after the sentencing hearing in this cause.
d. The 38. cal weapon obtained from Norman Woodford was ordered disposed of in 1984 and the .357 cal. Magnum connected with this case was ordered sold at auction in December, 1985.
e. State's witnesses Lilith Healy, Thomas Finch, Albert Belt, and James Terrell are available to testify at a new trial. Robin Denise Brooks failed to appear as subpoenaed for the P.C.R. hearing.
f. Detective Larkins testified at the hearing that Norman Woodford made a statement admitting his guilt to Detective Larkins, Detective Jerry Campbell and Detective Harry Dunn at approximately 4:80 p.m. on the date of his arrest. There is no waiver of rights form. All three police officers are presently available.
(Record at 144-45). Although the findings make it clear that all of the physical evidence from this case was disposed of, the extent to which the loss of that evidence prejudices the State must be measured against what its presence would have resolved at trial. In this case, witnesses are available to testify about how the physical evidence related to the crime, and none of the disposed evidence was so essential that its loss would prejudice the State enough to require a finding of laches.
Lack of prejudice to the State's case is also shown by the fact that all but one of the State's witnesses are available to testify. At the second post-conviction hearing, Lilith Healy, the cashier in the Hook's drug store, identified Woodford as the man who robbed her. Detective Larkins, the police detective who conducted the original investigation, also testified. Larkins was questioned about the availability of the State's other witnesses. He stated that Albert Belt, the drug store security guard who had positively identified Woodford, no longer had a permanent address but generally frequented a gambling establishment and could have been subpoenaed to testify. Larkins also testified that James Terrell, an ambulance driver who was driving by the drug store and saw Woodford fleeing from the scene, was living in Evansville and remembered the crime. Terrell was not subpoenaed to testify. Finally, Larkin testified that Thomas Finch, who talked to Woodford shortly after the crime and received from him a Hook's shopping bag containing a bottle of baby oil and a package of cigarettes purchased prior to the robbery, was still living in Indianapolis and was available to testify. Finch was not subpoenaed.
The fact that Terrell, Belt and Finch were not called to testify supports Wood-ford's argument that the State failed to present sufficient evidence to support a finding of laches. The absence of the testimony of the three men, coupled with the relative unimportance of the physical evidence and Mrs. Healy's eyewitness testimony identifying Woodford lead us to conclude that the evidence presented by the State did not prove sufficient prejudice to its case. Rather than enter a finding on the State's affirmative defense of laches, the trial court addressed the merits of Woodford's case.
Woodford argues that the trial court erred by not making a finding on laches after the second evidentiary hearing. Many trial judges who had post-conviction petitions under advisement when this Court decided White v. State (1986), Ind., 497 N.E.2d 893, elected to pass over the State's customary affirmative defenses and go straight to the merits of the post-conviction claim. Judge Gifford's decision to do that in this litigation obviously did not harm Woodford, and given the evidence recited above, should not lead to a finding of lach-es anytime in the near future.
II. Voluntariness of the Guilty Plea
Woodford argues that the trial court's finding on the voluntary and intelli*1358gent nature of his guilty plea was erroneous for three reasons. First, Woodford argues that the trial court deprived him of due process and due course of law by applying standards for review of a guilty plea articulated in White v. State:
To decide a claim that a plea was not made voluntarily and intelligently, we will review all the evidence before the court which heard his post-conviction petition, including testimony given at the post-conviction trial, the transcript of the petitioner's original sentencing, and any plea agreements or other exhibits which are a part of the record.
A petitioner who claims that his plea was involuntary and unintelligent but can only establish that the trial judge failed to give an advisement in accordance with § 85-85-1-2 has not met his burden of proof. He needs to plead specific facts from which a finder of fact could conclude by a preponderance of the evidence that the trial judge's failure to make a full inquiry in accordance with § 35-85-1~-2(a) rendered his decision involuntarily or unintelligent. Of course, unless the record reveals that the defendant knew or was advised at the time of his plea that he was waiving his right to a jury trial, his right of confrontation and his right against self-incrimination, Boykin will require that his conviction be vacated.
497 N.E.2d at 905. We applied this standard to Randy White's claim and to everyone else. Buskirk v. State (1987), Ind., 511 N.E.2d 305. The trial court correctly applied the White standard to determine the validity of Woodford's guilty plea.
Next, Woodford argues that the trial court denied him due process and due course of law when it entered a judgment relying in part on a plea agreement and a petition to withdraw a plea of not guilty and enter a plea of guilty, documents that were never admitted into evidence. However, even if the trial court had not considered the documents, the rest of the available information under the White standard was adequate to support the court's conclusion that Woodford's guilty plea was voluntarily and intelligently entered. Consideration of the documents that were not in evidence was harmless error.
Finally, Woodford argues that the trial court erred in finding his guilty plea was knowingly and voluntarily entered. This argument fails under White. In the post-conviction hearing, Woodford claimed only that the judge who sentenced him failed to give him certain advisements.1 He did not plead and prove specific facts from which a finder of fact could conclude by a preponderance of the evidence that the sentencing judge's failure to make a full inquiry in accordance with the statute rendered his decision involuntarily or unintelligent. White, 497 N.E.2d at 905.
Stuck with the record of a post-conviction hearing held before White, counsel has argued as best one could that his client is entitled to relief under White. This Court recognized that doing so would be difficult and determined that a petitioner so situated should be entitled to file a new petition if he "has any other basis upon which to establish that his plea was not voluntary and intelligent." White, 497 N.E.2d at 906.
We affirm the judgment of the post-conviction court.
GIVAN, PIVARNIK and DICKSON, JJ., concur.
. Woodford claims, for example, that the judge failed to tell him that he had a right to a public and speedy trial by jury. Woodford was advised that he had a right to a trial by jury. Omitting the words public and speedy does not require vacating a plea. See Fisher v. State (1988), Ind., 519 N.E.2d 539, 540. Woodford also claims that he was not advised of the elements of the offense or that a plea of guilty admits the truth of the altegations in the indictment. The sentencing judge read the indict ment to Woodford in open court; it clearly listed all of the elements of the crime. Finally, Woodford claims that the trial court did not advise him of his right to confront and cross-examine the witnesses against him. Consequently, he argues that his guilty plea was not knowingly and voluntarily entered under the decision of the United States Supreme Court in Boykin v. Alabama, 395 U.S. 238, 89 S.Ct. 1709, 23 L.Ed.2d 274 (1969). The sentencing judge told Wood-ford that he had the right to "see and hear" the witness against him. That advisement was sufficient. See Johnson v. State (1984), Ind., 471 N.E.2d 1107.

=== CASE 9739527 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:16:58.024217+00 ===

*1359DeBRULER, Justice,
dissenting.
The Sixth Amendment provides that "[iJn all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right ... to be confronted with the witnesses against him." A major goal of this constitutional confrontation rule is to give the criminal defendant an opportunity to cross-examine the witnesses against him. Pointer v. Texas, 380 U.S. 400, 85 S.Ct. 1065, 18 L.Ed.2d 923 (1965). The governing Indiana guilty plea statute also views the right of confrontation as contemplating both a physical confrontation with witnesses and an opportunity to cross-examine them. I.C. 85-85-1-2(a)(2)(B). Boykin v. Alabama, 395 U.S. 238, 89 S.Ct. 1709, 23 L.Ed.2d 274 (1969), requires that a record of guilty plea proceedings show that the accused was offered a trial at which he would have the opportunity to cross-examine witnesses against him and that he intelligently and understandingly rejected the offer.
According to the findings of the trial court, a written plea agreement of unspecified date was filed at the time the plea was received in which the appellant was advised that he had the right to cross-examine witnesses, and at that time the judge advised him that he had the right to "see and hear" all of the witnesses, but did not mention the cross-examine aspect. There is no finding or conclusion at all that appellant rejected an offer of a trial at which he could cross-examine the witnesses against him. The standard set forth in White v. State (1986), Ind., 497 N.E.2d 893, does not affect the requirements of Boykin that the record at some point reflect that the defendant was offered a trial with confrontation and that he intelligently and understandingly rejected that offer. Herman v. State (1988), Ind., 526 N.E.2d 1183, 1185. This record does not so reflect. I would therefore reverse and remand with instruction to grant post-conviction relief in the form of permission to withdraw the plea of guilty.

=== CASE 9739528 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:17:00.965508+00 ===

PIVARNIK, Justice.
Following a jury trial in the Blackford Circuit Court Defendant-Appellant Lonnie K. Stephens was convicted of Attempted Rape, a Class B felony, and was sentenced to a term of twenty (20) years.
Two issues are presented in this direct appeal as follows:
1. preclusion of testimony based on the Rape Shield Statute; and
2. unreasonable imposition of the maximum sentence.
The facts show that on the evening of March 17, 1987, Stephens was drinking with his friend, Dave Stone. He asked Stone to drop him off at the victim's house trailer and Stone did so.
The victim was asleep on the couch when Stephens arrived, and her sister and brother-in-law were asleep in the guest room, which was a room off the kitchen. The victim's son and nephew were asleep in a bedroom off the hallway, along which hallway the bathroom was also located. The victim awoke to find Stephens standing in front of the door inside the trailer. She had fallen asleep without locking the door. He sat on the couch beside her and made sexual suggestions. She told him others were asleep in the trailer and called out for her sister. He stopped his advances momentarily but thereafter again attempted to force his intentions on her. After going down the hall to the bathroom area, Stephens returned and, in an angry manner, accused the victim of lying about her sister and brother-in-law being there. He then threw her on the couch and pressed his hand over her mouth to suppress a scream she was about to let out. He was on top of her, pressing his body against her, while he unfastened her bra and tore a button from her shirt. As he reached down to undo his trousers, the victim flipped him off of her and ran into the bedroom off the kitchen, shouting to wake her sister and brother-in-law. Stephens ran out the door and ran to the residence of his acquaintances, the Straits, who lived nearby.
Stephens told the Straits he had been at McHughs Pic Pac Food Store. He also told investigating Officer Allen Bell he had not been at the victim's trailer that night but had been at the Pic Pac. Stephen also told his friend Dave Stone to say if Stone was asked that he had dropped Stephens off at the Pic Pac. Stone testified at trial that he had let Stephens off at the Pic Pac but on cross-examination admitted he actually had let Stephens off at the victim's trailer and had previously said the Pic Pac because Stephens told him to say so.
At trial, Stephens asserted the defense of consent of the victim, claiming they had engaged in consensual sexual intercourse. He claimed the position used by them was vaginal intercourse by rear entry which he referred to as "doggy style." He claimed that while they were so engaged, he told her he had heard she enjoyed rear entry style intercourse and this made her so angry she pursued the attempted rape charges against him.
I
Stephens claims the trial court erred in excluding his proposed testimony regarding the victim's past sexual conduct and reputation. In an offer to prove during trial, Stephens would have testified that Tim and Drema Hall told Stephens they had participated in sexual partner switching in which the victim was involved and that she had the reputation of liking sexual intercourse "doggy fashion." Stephens claims that while he was having intercourse with her in that fashion, he told her this story and she became so angry she made him *139stop and leave. He claimed her anger caused her to bring this criminal action against him. f
Stephens now contends an exception to the Rape Shield Statute should be carved out to include res gestae statements. The statute referred to as the Rape Shield Statute, Ind.Code § 35-87-4-4, provides for three exceptions to the exclusion of reputation evidence of the past sexual conduct of a witness other than the accused. Those exceptions are: the victim's or witness' past sexual conduct with the defendant; evidence that shows a specific instance of sexual activity which would show some person other than the defendant committed the act in question; and evidence that the victim's pregnancy at the time of trial was not caused by the defendant. The statute further provides in § 85-87-4-4(c) that if a party proposes to offer evidence of an exception, a written motion must be filed at least ten (10) days before trial containing an offer of proof showing relevancy of the evidence in the case and accompanied by an affidavit in which the offer of proof is stated. Section (c) further provides that the court is to conduct a hearing and rule on the admissibility and form of the evidence at that time. Appellant did not follow that procedure here but attempted to offer the evidence at the time of trial. His contention that a proposed exception permitting res gestae statements is suspect because he claims it is his own statement that he made during the encounter and is denied by the victim. Obviously approval of such an exception would open the door for evading the statute entirely.
The purpose of the Rape Shield Statute is to shield the victims of sex crimes from general inquiry into their prior sexual conduct. Lewis v. State (1982), Ind., 440 N.E.2d 1125, 1129, cert. denied (1983), 461 U.S. 915, 103 S.Ct. 1895, 77 L.Ed.2d 284. If it appears to the court there may be a reason to admit evidence of the victim's past sexual conduct, the court's ultimate determination is reversible only upon abuse of discretion. Munn v. State (1987), Ind., 505 N.E.2d 782, 785. Stephens was permitted to testify that he had a friendly relationship with the victim, that they were engaging in consensual sexual intercourse on that night, and that she became angry with him and forced him to stop. Considering the facts and cireum-stances here, we are unable to find an abuse of discretion in the trial court's ruling.
Stephens further contends violation of due process of law in the imposition of the Rape Shield Statute preventing him from testifying. He cites Chambers v. Mississippi (1973), 410 U.S. 284, 93 S.Ct. 1038, 35 L.Ed.2d 297. Chambers concerned a murder trial wherein Chambers was not allowed to cross-examine one McDonald, who had confessed to the murder and whom Chambers had called as a witness, because Mississippi's common law "voucher" rule prohibited one from impeaching his own witness. Under the Mississippi rule, Chambers was not allowed to introduce the testimony of three witnesses to whom McDonald had confessed to the murder as the trial court had held that inadmissible hearsay. The Chombers Court held that the right to confront and to cross-examine is not absolute and may, in appropriate cases, bow to accommodate other legitimate interest in the criminal trial process. The Court further observed, however, "[t)he [voucher] rule rests on the presumption-without regard to the circumstances of the particular case-that a party who calls a witness 'vouches for his credibility.'" Such a rule "bears little present relationship to the realities of the criminal process." Id. at 295-96, 93 S.Ct. at 1046, 35 L.Ed.2d at 309. Appellant claims in the instant case that the refusal to permit his proposed testimony represented a similar mechanistic application of rules and prevented him from presenting relevant and probative evidence resulting in deprivation of due process of law.
We fail to see a parallel in the facts and circumstances of Chambers and the instant case. The purpose of the Rape Shield Statute was to prevent evidence such as that proposed by Stephens. Stephens' proposed testimony was not only evidence of the victim's past sexual conduct but was based *140solely on his own statement and credibility supported by hearsay. It was also demonstrated by the evidence that Stephens gave several conflicting versions of the incident. Stephens fails to show a deprivation of due process of law.
II
Finally, Stephens claims the imposition of the maximum sentence of twenty (20) years for a Class B felony was manifestly unreasonable in light of the nature of the offense and the character of the offender pursuant to Rule 2 of Ind.R.App.Rev.Sen.
Stephens bases this contention on the fact that the evidence showed there was no actual completion of the act of rape, that relatively little resistance was required from the victim to ward off the attack, and that according to the victim's testimony the closest Stephens ever came to actually completing the act was to start to unfasten his trousers. His reasoning is that to give the maximum sentence in a case with these facts is to violate a rational sentencing scheme that should punish more severely those who commit more heinous acts. Fointno v. State (1986), Ind., 487 N.E.2d 140, 148. Our standard of review of this issue has been clearly stated. We find a sentence to be manifestly unreason" able if no reasonable person could find the sentence appropriate to the offender. Crisler v. State (1987), Ind., 509 N.E.2d 822, 823. The trial court is given wide discretion in fixing the sentence upon con-viection and will be reversed only if a manifest abuse of discretion is demonstrated. Harris v. State (1981), Ind., 425 N.E.2d 112, 117. We do not conduct a de novo review of the sentencing hearing and assess or reweigh the trial court's findings and conclusions regarding aggravating and mitigating cireumstances so long as the sentences imposed were authorized by statute and the record discloses support for the trial court's finding of aggravating and mitigating circumstances. Bish v. State (1981), Ind., 421 N.E.2d 608, 620.
To comply with Ind.Code § 35-38-1-3, the trial court's statement of the reasons for the sentence imposed must identify all the significant mitigating and aggravating circumstances, state the specific reason why each cireumstance is considered to be mitigating or aggravating, and articulate that the court evaluated and balanced the mitigating circumstances against the aggravating circumstances to determine if the mitigating cireumstances offset the aggravating circumstances. Townsend v. State (1986), Ind., 498 N.E.2d 1198, 1201; Hammons v. State (1986), Ind., 493 N.E.2d 1250, 1254.
In the instant case, the trial court found as aggravators that, as a juvenile in 1973 and in 1975, Stephens was found to be a delinquent for having committed the offenses of burglary; since having become an adult, Stephens had been convicted of disorderly conduct, conversion, criminal trespass, and battery, all misdemeanors; Stephens had previously been found guilty of the misdemeanor of battery which involved an aggressive and violent act; that in this cause of action, Stephens was con-viected of attempted rape, an act of aggression; and that during the police investigation Stephens lied to police authorities in making statements on several occasions, said false statements being admitted to by Stephens at trial. The court found the only mitigator was the fact that Stephens provided support for his three minor children. He found the aggravating cireumstances, particularly involving Stephens' past criminal record and his potential for aggressive behavior, greatly outweighed the mitigating circumstances in this action. He concluded Stephens should be sentenced to the enhanced term of twenty (20) years. We find no abuse of discretion in the trial court's determination of sentence here nor do we view the sentence as being manifestly unreasonable.
The trial court is affirmed.
SHEPARD, C.J., and GIVAN, J., concur.
DeBRULER, J., dissents with separate opinion in which DICKSON, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9739529 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:17:00.970404+00 ===

*141DeBRULER, Justice,
dissenting.
The defense to this attempted rape charge was consent. Appellant testified that he and the victim were engaged in consensual sexual intercourse when the putative victim became angry at him and disengaged. According to the defense story, such anger was caused by something appellant said at the time, and the anger was so great that it caused the putative victim to bring a false charge of rape. Because the telling would constitute evidence of the vice-tim's past sexual conduct, the exclusionary rule of the rape shield statute was applied so as to bar appellant from telling the jury what it was that he had said to her. I.C. 85-837-4-4(a)(1).
This situation is parallel to that in which a trial court is called upon to bar the production of evidence that would put the defendant in a place other than the place of the offense at the critical time. 1.C. 85-86-4-1. A majority of this Court has held that where the defendant has failed to comply with the provisions of the alibi statute, the exclusionary rule of that statute may constitutionally be applied so as to prevent the defendant himself from testifying that he was at another place at the time of the crime. Lake v. State (1971), 257 Ind. 264, 274 N.E.2d 249. Two judges of this Court have held the position that the exclusionary rule may be applied so as to prevent the defendant from presenting witnesses and documentation for an alibi, but that it may not be applied so as to prevent the defendant himself from personally testifying and giving his exculpatory stories. Bowen v. State (1975), 263 Ind. 558, 567, 334 N.E.2d 691, 697 (concurring opinion of DeBruler, J., in which Prentice, J., concurred). The basis of this differing view is that the right of the accused to be heard in the tribunal is among the most sacrosanct and most essential to a fair determination of guilt. We were of the opinion that the right to be heard could not be forfeited in furtherance of a statute, the purpose of which was to protect the state from facing surprise defenses.
The situation here is quite similar. The purpose of the rape shield statute is a good and legitimate one. However, the defendant has the right to be heard in court and to give his version of the events upon which the state relies for conviction. Such right is, I believe, paramount in this situation, and the interest served by the rape shield statute must give way so as to permit the defendant to speak his piece under oath in front of the trier of fact with regard to the events transpiring at the time of the offense which serve the interests of the defense in any rational way. This proposed testimony of the defendant himself satisfies this test of rationality, even though it may be suspect and open the door to evasion of the statute as declared in the majority opinion.
I would hold that the trial court was in error when ruling that appellant could not testify and describe what he told the alleged victim at the time the offense was alleged to have been committed.
DICKSON, J., concurs.

=== CASE 2220196 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:35.990851+00 ===

544 N.E.2d 1364 (1989)
Harold E. LIVINGSTON, Appellant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee.
No. 53S00-8803-CR-295.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
October 18, 1989.
*1365 Susan K. Carpenter, Public Defender and David P. Freund, Deputy Public Defender, Indianapolis, for appellant.
Linley E. Pearson, Atty. Gen. and Gary Damon Secrest, Deputy Atty. Gen., Indianapolis, for appellee.
PIVARNIK, Justice.
Following a jury trial in the Monroe Superior Court, Defendant-Appellant Harold Livingston was convicted of Murder and Robbery and was sentenced to a term of forty-five (45) years.
Five issues are presented for our review in this direct appeal:
1. erroneous excusal of a juror after the jury had been sworn and subsequent refusal of the trial court to grant Livingston's motion for a mistrial;
2. sufficiency of the evidence;
3. refusal of the trial court to permit Livingston to introduce photographic exhibits into evidence;
4. error of the trial court in permitting a State's witness to introduce improper photographic exhibits; and
5. permitting the State to introduce a hair into evidence without establishing a proper chain of custody.
Livingston also alleged ineffective assistance of counsel but claimed trial counsel did not properly prepare the issue for briefing and withdrew it from consideration at this time. Therefore, the issue of ineffective assistance of counsel will not be discussed in this opinion.
The facts show that Livingston and Allen DeMoss were both charged with the murder of Allen's cousin, Ronnie DeMoss. Allen DeMoss gave several statements to the police, implicating himself and Livingston, pleaded guilty and was sentenced to a term *1366 of forty years. He testified for the State. It appeared Allen DeMoss was offered an opportunity to get ten years reduced from his sentence in return for his testimony. The facts showed that on March 4, 1986, victim Ronnie DeMoss was arrested and charged with molesting and exploiting Travis DeMoss, Allen's younger brother. Allen knew of the charges and was aware of the possibility that Ronnie DeMoss had taken exploitative photographs of his brother, demonstrating the sexual encounter. Allen was also aware of allegations that Ronnie had molested another cousin. Allen claimed that he, himself, had been molested by Ronnie in the past. Allen then decided to seek revenge by stealing various electronic accessories out of Ronnie's trailer. To that end, he had arranged to sell some of the items to others. In the week preceding the perpetration of this crime, Allen was living in his car which was parked behind Ronnie's trailer. Livingston invited Allen to stay at Livingston's house because his parents were out of town and DeMoss accepted. They spent much of their time drinking beer and vodka and discussed the contemplated burglary of Ronnie's home. Livingston was known to have expressed disdain for "faggots" and "queers" and agreed to help in the burglary. When the two of them left the house of a friend to go to Ronnie's trailer, Livingston told the occupant of the house he was going to do something about the "faggots" in the neighborhood.
Ronnie let the two of them into the trailer and while Allen was arranging to select items to take, Livingston grabbed Ronnie from behind and started to beat him. Allen hauled items out of the house and saw Livingston striking Ronnie on the floor but did not see a knife in his hand. Ronnie died from a number of stab wounds. After they left the residence, Livingston threw the knife into a field. It was later recovered and bloodstains on it were consistent with the blood of the victim. Hair found on the knife and on Ronnie's clothing were consistent with Livingston's type.
I
The question presented is whether jeopardy attaches when the twelve member jury is sworn but the alternates have not been selected and sworn. Indiana has not yet faced this precise situation but its resolution by other jurisdictions is helpful to our consideration of the issue.
The record here reflects that after both prosecution and defense had the opportunity to individually question John Ostler, both sides accepted him as the twelfth juror. The trial judge immediately swore in the twelve jurors. The trial judge then announced to counsel and to the sworn jurors that two alternate jurors were going to be selected and the twelve just sworn would be excused while that was being done. At that point, John Ostler, who had just been sworn as a juror, informed the court that after having thought about it overnight, he realized he vaguely knew a John Livingston but had not realized it earlier when the name of John Livingston had been read as one of the potential witnesses who might testify. The trial court then conducted a hearing at which it was determined that the John Livingston known by Ostler was Harold Livingston's brother who was listed as a possible witness. Ostler testified he had never talked with Livingston about this case nor even knew that John Livingston was connected to this case. He knew John Livingston as a bartender, had become friendly with him and thought he would tend to believe his testimony because he considered him a truthful person. On questioning by the court and counsel, Ostler stated he would be willing to fairly weigh all the evidence and make determinations of credibility including John Livingston's but admitted it might be difficult for him. The State then challenged Ostler and the trial judge granted the challenge removing Ostler. He then advised everyone they would select a replacement for Ostler as well as two alternate jurors with the parties having the right to use their remaining peremptory challenges. Livingston objected to Ostler's removal and moved for a mistrial which was denied by the trial court.
We start with the well established principle that a defendant is in jeopardy when the jury selected to try his cause is sworn. This principle was well articulated by Justice *1367 Jasper in Maddox v. State (1951), 230 Ind. 92, 102 N.E.2d 225:
This court has decided on numerous occasions that when a person is properly charged with a crime, has been arraigned and pleaded to such charge, has been put upon his trial before a tribunal properly organized and competent to try him for the offense charged, and a jury has been impaneled from persons competent to sit on the trial and duly sworn, then jeopardy attaches.
Id. at 98, 102 N.E.2d at 228 (citing Armentrout v. State (1938), 214 Ind. 273, 275, 15 N.E.2d 363; Gillespie v. State (1907), 168 Ind. 298, 80 N.E. 829; Adams v. State (1884), 99 Ind. 244).
Further, however, it is well established that defendant is not placed in jeopardy until the entire jury is sworn and is fully constituted to try the defendant on the charges brought. Judge Robertson, writing for a unanimous court in Godfrey v. State (1978), 177 Ind. App. 644, 380 N.E.2d 621, held that jeopardy had not attached when two of the twelve jurors had not taken the oath. In Godfrey, at the close of the giving of the oath, two jurors remained standing and stated they had not taken the oath and would suffer real hardship if they were to sit on the jury. Both of those jurors were excused by agreement of the parties. The following morning the trial court declared a mistrial and discharged the jurors who had been sworn over the defendant's objection. The trial court found that jeopardy had not attached because some members of the putative panel were not sworn and he thereupon excused all of the panel and had the parties select an entire new jury. Although the Court of Appeals felt the action of the trial judge in excusing the entire panel was questionable, it found there was no error in the actions of the trial court because jeopardy had not attached. The Court of Appeals found one is not in jeopardy when the trial starts and one or more of the jurors have not been sworn. Id. at 646, 380 N.E.2d at 622. We agree that a jury is not fully constituted and in a position to try the cause until the entire jury has been sworn.
The question here is what effect the use of alternate jurors pursuant to Ind.R.Tr.P. 47(b) has in the final constitution of the jury. The State contends the entire jury was not selected and sworn until the alternates were selected and sworn along with the original twelve. Although there is no Indiana or United States Supreme Court case directly on point, the principle stated in Godfrey has been interpreted with respect to alternate jurors as meaning the entire jury is not sworn and jeopardy has not attached until the alternates are impaneled and sworn. California decided this issue in a factual situation very similar to the instant case in People v. Burns (1948), 84 Cal. App.2d 18, 189 P.2d 868, cert. denied (1948), 335 U.S. 844, 69 S.Ct. 66, 93 L.Ed. 394. In Burns, a jury of twelve had been selected and sworn to try the case and were then admonished and allowed to separate until trial. The court then announced its intention to impanel alternate jurors. In selecting alternate jurors the court was acting pursuant to § 1089 of the California Penal Code which provided for the use of alternate jurors similar to provisions of our trial rule 47(b). After one alternate was selected but not sworn, the court learned that one of the twelve regular jurors had a hit and run charge pending against him. Over objection of the defendant, the court removed the juror, swore the alternate and seated him on the regular panel in place of the excused juror. The trial court rejected a motion for dismissal and discharge on double jeopardy grounds, and the defendant advanced that argument on appeal. The California Supreme Court acknowledged that jeopardy attaches when the jury is impaneled and sworn but found that previous cases which considered the issue had not dealt with the more recent enactments which provided for the use of alternate jurors. The court found the rule still applies whether there are alternates or not but saw as the central question whether jeopardy would attach when the original twelve were sworn or whether it attached only after the full complement of jurors of both classes were impaneled and sworn. It then concluded:
For these reasons we are unable to follow appellants' argument that jeopardy attached in this case when the original *1368 twelve jurors were sworn, but must hold that it attached only after the alternate juror was sworn, hence that the defendants faced but one jury.
Id. at 26, 189 P.2d at 872. Burns was reaffirmed based on similar facts in People v. Hess (1951), 107 Cal. App.2d 407, 425-26, 237 P.2d 568, 579.
In 1949, one year after Burns, Pennsylvania decided Commonwealth v. Almeida (1949), 362 Pa. 596, 68 A.2d 595, cert. denied (1950) 339 U.S. 924, 70 S.Ct. 614, 94 L.Ed. 1346. Pennsylvania had a provision similar to California's statute and to our rule 47(b) permitting the selection of two alternate jurors if, in the opinion of the judge, the trial is likely to be protracted. Pennsylvania's and California's provisions were again similar to our rule 47(b) in that the alternates were to take the same oath as the other jurors selected, were to attend the trial at all phases in company with the other jurors and were to be excused only after a verdict had been reached. The Pennsylvania court held:
The court [below] held that under the [alternate juror provision] fourteen jurors, including the two alternates, must be sworn before the trial can proceed, and the accused is not in jeopardy until "all fourteen are sworn and, until that time, any one of the jurors previously accepted and sworn may be challenged with the reasonable discretion of the trial judge." We agree with this.
Id. at 636, 68 A.2d at 614-15 (footnote omitted). The principle was again affirmed by California in In re Mendes (1979), 23 Cal.3d 847, 153 Cal. Rptr. 831, 592 P.2d 318:
We hold that the selection of a jury in a criminal case is not completed and jeopardy does not attach until all of the jurors, including any alternate jurors, are sworn.
Id. at 850, 153 Cal. Rptr. at 832, 592 P.2d at 319. We find this reasoning to be sound and consistent with the settled law in Indiana expressed in Maddox, supra, and Godfrey, supra, and cases cited therein. The very purpose of adopting provisions for selection of alternate jurors was to resolve the frustration caused by problems demonstrated in the instant case and those we have cited. With the use of alternate jurors, the need to replace one of the original panel easily can be done by assigning the first alternate to that position and continuing the trial. It follows that the final selection of the jury that will try the defendant's case is not complete until the regular panel and the alternates, who sit with the regular panel and may very well act as a member of it, have been sworn.
Further, we see no impingement of Livingston's constitutional interest. The United States Supreme Court in Wade v. Hunter (1949), 336 U.S. 684, 69 S.Ct. 834, 93 L.Ed. 974, reasoned:
The double-jeopardy provision of the Fifth Amendment, however, does not mean that every time a defendant is put to trial before a competent tribunal he is entitled to go free if the trial fails to end in a final judgment. Such a rule would create an insuperable obstacle to the administration of justice in many cases in which there is no semblance of the type of oppressive practices at which the double-jeopardy prohibition is aimed. There may be unforeseeable circumstances that arise during a trial making its completion impossible, such as the failure of a jury to agree on a verdict. In such event the purpose of law to protect society from those guilty of crimes frequently would be frustrated by denying courts power to put the defendant to trial again. And there have been instances where a trial judge has discovered facts during a trial which indicated one or more members of the jury might be biased against the Government or the defendant. It is settled that the duty of the judge in this event is to discharge the jury and direct a retrial. What has been said is enough to show that a defendant's valued right to have his trial completed by a particular tribunal must in some instances be subordinated to the public's interest in fair trials designed to end in just judgments.
Id. at 688-89, 69 S.Ct. at 837, 93 L.Ed. at 978. This language was approved by the United States Supreme Court in United States v. Jorn (1971), 400 U.S. 470, 480, 91 S.Ct. 547, 554-55, 27 L.Ed.2d 543, 554 and Illinois v. *1369 Somerville (1973), 410 U.S. 458, 470, 93 S.Ct. 1066, 1073, 35 L.Ed.2d 425, 434.
In view of our holding, we need not consider the question of whether the legal necessity exists for withdrawing submission of the case to the original panel or changing it by removing one or more of its members. Neither do we reach the question raised by Livingston of the propriety of the court removing the juror in question here without first withdrawing submission of the case to the entire panel. Because we hold that the jury was not yet fully constituted as the entire jury had not been sworn, the procedure followed by the trial judge was proper and no error was presented.
II
Livingston claims there was insufficient evidence to support his convictions for robbery and murder, basing his contention on the fact that circumstantial evidence in general was weak and that the eyewitness testimony of Allen DeMoss was inherently incredible. In view of the evidence here, this is an invitation for us to reweigh the evidence and credibility of the witnesses and substitute our judgment for that of the jury. It is well established that we do not do this as an appellate tribunal. Appellant points out that there were inconsistencies in Allen DeMoss' testimony and that there were apparent motives for him to murder the victim. The jury heard all of these facts and acted within their area of responsibility in weighing the evidence. In addition to Allen's testimony, there was much circumstantial evidence in favor of the judgment, and our examination of this evidence on appeal is to determine whether inferences could reasonably be drawn by the jury which sustained the verdicts. Mills v. State (1987), Ind., 512 N.E.2d 846, 848. The evidence showed that Livingston was in possession of the murder weapon before and after the commission of the crime; that he was known to have an animosity toward those he called "faggots" and "queers" and professed that he was going to do something about the "faggots" in the neighborhood immediately before this crime was committed. Other statements and actions of Livingston following the crime were of similar weight. It is true Allen did not see Livingston stab Ronnie DeMoss with a knife. He did see him striking DeMoss many times while DeMoss lay on the floor, but he said he did not pay enough attention to it to have observed the knife. Ronnie was stabbed several times, however, and immediately after leaving Ronnie's trailer, Livingston was in possession of the knife which had blood and hair on it and disposed of it in a field.
There was sufficient probative evidence before the jury to support their verdicts.
III
Livingston claims the trial court erred by refusing to allow into evidence photographs of the murder victim, Ronnie DeMoss, engaged in sexual acts with Allen DeMoss' younger brother.
Prior to the beginning of trial, the State filed a motion in limine asking the trial court to order Livingston not to bring to the attention of the jury any prior misconduct of Ronnie DeMoss. The trial court denied the motion.
Livingston's theory of the case was that Allen DeMoss, who repeatedly denied having any intent to physically harm Ronnie DeMoss or that he actually stabbed him, viciously killed his uncle, not only in revenge for Ronnie DeMoss' molesting Allen's younger brother, but also for having molested Allen himself as a child. There was considerable evidence introduced by the State which established that Ronnie had been arrested on March 4, 1986, a little less than three weeks before he was murdered, and charged with sexually molesting and exploiting Allen's twelve year-old brother. Both of Ronnie's parents testified that he had been arrested for child molestation and Mrs. DeMoss knew there were some pictures involved.
Allen testified that he knew his uncle had been arrested for molesting Travis and that he was not surprised because Ronnie had attempted to molest him, Allen, when he was younger. Allen believed Ronnie had also molested some of his other cousins. Allen admitted the reason he decided to steal Ronnie's television, stereo and VCR *1370 was for revenge for his brother Travis and to teach Ronnie not to molest kids. On cross-examination, Allen said he knew Ronnie had taken pictures of Travis and that the police had the pictures but he had never seen them. He admitted he had stated one of the reasons he went to Ronnie's trailer was to prevent Ronnie from showing any pictures of Travis and that he would have taken any photographs of the nature described had he seen them in Ronnie's trailer. He also testified he did not like homosexuals.
On cross-examination of Allen, Livingston attempted to introduce into evidence Exhibits O, P, Q, R, and S which were the photographs in question, apparently taken by Ronnie during his sexual encounter with Travis. The State objected to the admission of these photographs, claiming they had no probative value and that any value they might have was far outweighed by the prejudicial effect they might have on the jury by outraging them. The trial court found the photographs were irrelevant in that they did not prove anything because the evidence established Allen had never seen the photographs; thus, he could not have been motivated by them and, further, he could not be a sponsor of them because he could not identify them. The defense again attempted to place the same exhibits into evidence through Indiana State Police Detective Allcron. Detective Allcron testified he first saw the photographs on or about February 27, 1986 during an investigation of Ronnie DeMoss for child molestation. He also testified that in his opinion, the motive for killing Ronnie DeMoss was robbery and revenge. Allcron also testified he never showed the pictures to Allen DeMoss or told him they existed. The court again refused admission of these exhibits through Detective Allcron for the reason that Allen DeMoss had never seen them, although he believed photographs existed, and his motive could not have been based on photographs. The court found them to be irrelevant for that reason and would not introduce something to the jury that "was not a part of it [motive]."
We do not find the trial court abused his discretion in refusing these exhibits. In the first place, the court correctly found that because Allen DeMoss had never seen the photographs, they could not be the basis for his revulsion and rage. Second, Allen and others had already testified about Allen's knowledge of the molestation of his younger brother, that photographs of the encounter existed and that Allen had thoughts of revenge against Ronnie. In that regard, the photographs were nothing more than cumulative, and any error that might arguably be noted was harmless.
IV
Livingston objects to the testimony of State's witness, Oliver, who was permitted to give an opinion concerning the comparison of a photograph of a boot to a photograph of a footprint. His objection is that the scale for such comparison was not accurate as a foundational matter to support his opinion.
The evidence showed technician George Abbott of the Indiana State Police went to Ronnie Demoss' trailer on March 22, 1986 and obtained a set of footprints which appeared to have been made by western or cowboy style boots with a wide instep and deep heel. Abbott took a photograph of the footprint to show it as he saw it. He then overlaid a tape measure and rephotographed the footprint so that a measurement could be made of the footprint and demonstrate to scale its length. The photograph without the tape measure was Exhibit 35 and the one with the tape measure was Exhibit 36. State Police laboratory physical comparison analyst Michael Oliver testified he was asked to compare the negatives of photographs of a footprint to a photograph of a boot. He stated he made State's Exhibits 35 and 36, two black and white photographs, from slides of the footprints prepared by Abbott. He attempted to make both photographs the same size for a one-to-one depiction for comparison purposes. He then compared the photographs with Exhibit 24 which showed Livingston's boots. Livingston's objection to the exhibits was not the comparison by Oliver of the footprint and the boots because he concedes anyone can give an opinion on the similarity of footprints, citing *1371 Halbig v. State (1988), Ind., 525 N.E.2d 288, 291 and Johnson v. State (1978), 177 Ind. App. 501, 380 N.E.2d 566. Johnson was cited with approval by this Court in Hartlerode v. State (1984), Ind., 470 N.E.2d 716, 717. Livingston's objection is that the attempt to give credibility to the photographs by the use of the tape measure was misleading because the round lens of a camera distorts the picture it takes from the center out and, therefore, the measurement depicted in the photograph is not accurate. This was demonstrated by having Oliver take a ruler and measure the photograph which revealed that in some areas of the photograph the inch lines were more than an inch apart and in other areas less than an inch. Apparently, Livingston's claim is that the exhibits misled the jury into believing the photographs were to scale when they actually were not. Abbott and Oliver both testified that there would be a distortion in a photograph but it would not be significant for the purposes of these exhibits. Significantly, Oliver was unable to make a definitive statement about his comparisons. He testified he was unable to say the footprints matched Livingston's boot print but that the prints could have been made by Livingston's boot. No issue is presented meriting reversal.
V
Livingston claims the court improperly permitted a hair into evidence because a proper chain of custody had not been established.
Indiana State Police evidence technician George Abbott testified he gained possession of a buck knife which was labeled State's Exhibit 11. He placed it in a white envelope which he numbered Exhibit No. 19, sealed it and placed his initials on it. He submitted it to the State Police laboratory with a request that two hairs appearing on the knife be compared with known samples from Allen DeMoss, Ronnie DeMoss, and Harold Livingston. Testimony showed the sealed envelope came to the State Police Laboratory in the sealed condition and was examined by State Police forensic chemist, Judith Macechko. She removed the knife from the envelope and removed two hairs which she then placed in a separate plastic bag and stapled the plastic bag to the white envelope which was labeled Exhibit 19. The plastic bag was labeled Exhibit 19-A. Physical comparisons analyst Michael Oliver received Exhibit 19-A from the evidence clerk, found it to be in a sealed condition, made an analysis of it, resealed it and returned it to the evidence clerk. Macechko and Oliver both testified the contents of the exhibit appeared to be the same as it was when they had seen it during their examinations. Livingston's claim of lack of showing of chain of custody is that the laboratory custodian did not testify regarding the passage of the exhibit through her hands. He claims this hiatus breaks the chain assuring there was no tampering of the exhibit and, therefore, the exhibit was inadmissible. Livingston did not object to the admission of Exhibit 19-A which contained the hair in question. All of the witnesses who testified in regard to the course of travel of Exhibits 19 and 19-A established that, before and after the exhibit went to the clerk who had custody of items of evidence, the exhibit was sealed and appeared to be in the same condition it was when the witness last saw it. The State need not provide evidence excluding all possibility of mishap or tampering, but need provide only reasonable assurance that the evidence passed through various hands in an undisturbed condition. Simmons v. State (1987), Ind., 504 N.E.2d 575, 578; Borom v. State (1984), Ind., 470 N.E.2d 712, 714-15. In Smith v. State (1983), Ind. App., 452 N.E.2d 160, the Court of Appeals held that testimony from the clerk at the State Police post who had custody of fungible items was not a necessary witness to establish chain of custody for an item where the item was placed in and passed in a sealed envelope, giving reasonable assurance the exhibit passed through the various hands in an undisturbed condition. We agree and find that such reasonable assurance was demonstrated *1372 here. No error is presented on this issue.
The trial court is affirmed.
SHEPARD, C.J., and DeBRULER, GIVAN and DICKSON, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9739530 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:17:04.004367+00 ===

JUSTICE LINDBERG delivered the opinion of the court: Respondent, Carol Carey, the natural mother of the minor child, Brendan Carey, and the former spouse of Brendan’s natural father, the deceased John Carey, appeals from the judgment of the circuit court of Du Page County finding in a modification of custody proceeding pursuant to section 610 of the Illinois Marriage and Dissolution of Marriage Act (the Dissolution Act) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 40, par. 610) that it is in the best interests of Brendan to place permanent legal custody of Brendan with John Carey’s second wife and widow, Brendan’s stepmother, the intervenor, Mary Carey. On August 1, 1964, John Carey (John) and Carol Carey (Carol) were married. Their marriage produced four children, Sean, Kathleen, Maureen and Brendan. In January 1980, Carol moved out of the marital residence in Wheaton, Illinois, and into an apartment, also located in Wheaton. The children lived with John in the marital residence. On September 14, 1981, the circuit court of Du Page County entered a judgment of dissolution of marriage which incorporated a settlement agreement entered between John and Carol. At the time of dissolution, Sean was 16 years old, Kathleen was 14, Maureen was 10 and Brendan was 6. The settlement agreement incorporated in the judgment of dissolution of marriage gave the care, custody and control of the children to John, with Carol having rights to reasonable visitation. In the summer of 1980, John began dating Mary Carey (Mary). Mary spent considerable time with the children of John and Carol while dating John. In December 1981, Mary moved into John and the children’s home, and John and Mary were married on January 15, 1982. In 1984, John, who like Mary, worked for the Internal Revenue Service, was transferred to Washington, D.C. John petitioned the court to remove the children from Illinois to the Washington, D.C., area. On October 30, 1984, the circuit court of Du Page County entered an order by agreement of John and Carol which provided in relevant part that John would retain “permanent custody” of the minor Brendan, age nine, and be allowed to move Brendan with him to the Washington, D.C., area. The agreed order also transferred the permanent custody of the minor Maureen, age 14, to Carol. The order set a liberal visitation schedule for John and Carol to see Maureen and Brendan. The two other children, Sean and Kathleen, had attained emancipation and were no longer the subject of custody arrangements between John and Carol. John, his wife Mary, and Brendan moved to a suburb of Washington, D.C., located in Fairfax County, Virginia. A mother-son relationship developed between Brendan and his stepmother, Mary. Carol exercised her rights to visitation with her son Brendan, including 18 overnight visits in 1984. The situation remained this way until 1987. In the early hours of Saturday, October 24, 1987, John Carey died. John did not leave a last will and testament. That afternoon Mary and Carol talked by phone. Carol, a teacher in the Chicago public school system, expressed her desire to come to Virginia that evening to get Brendan. Mary did not intend to allow Brendan to go with Carol. Carol did not go to Virginia that Saturday. Within a few days of John’s death, Mary commenced proceedings in a circuit court for the county of Fairfax, Virginia, to obtain an order appointing Mary and Brendan’s paternal grandmother, Ann Carey, guardians of Brendan. Mary’s “Petition for Appointment of a Guardian” stated that Brendan, age 12, who had an estate of $500, had resided with his father, John, and his stepmother nearly six years, and in Fairfax County, Virginia, since 1984 and that John had died. The petition further stated that Carol Carey, a resident of Illinois, by an agreed order entered in the circuit court of Du Page County, Illinois, relinquished full legal custody of Brendan to John. The petition further stated that Brendan, the heir of his father’s estate, wished to continue to reside with Mary in Virginia. The notarized petition was signed by Mary and Ann Carey. On November 13, 1987, the circuit court of Fairfax County, Virginia, finding Brendan without a guardian and in need of a guardian, entered an order appointing Mary and Ann Carey temporary guardians of Brendan and his estate. Carol was not given notice of these proceedings. On November 8, 1987, in the circuit court of Du Page County, Carol petitioned for an emergency modification of custody pursuant to section 610 of the Dissolution Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 40, par. 610). Mary was given notice of these proceedings and filed responsive pleadings. After the filing by Mary and Carol of various pleadings on January 6, 1988, Mary’s petition forum non conveniens was denied, the circuit court of Du Page County finding it had jurisdiction to make a custody determination under the Dissolution Act and the Uniform Child Custody Jurisdiction Act (the Child Custody Act) incorporated into the Dissolution Act. (See Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 40, pars. 601(a), 2104.) The trial court gave leave to Mary to file her petition to intervene and other responsive pleadings. The January 6, 1988, order also provided for Mary, as coguardian, to maintain physical possession of Brendan pending a hearing on temporary custody which was set for February 5, 1988. Carol petitioned for and was granted reasonable visitation with Brendan in Virginia. Mary filed a petition to intervene and also sought leave to file a counterpetition for permanent custody of Brendan. Carol filed pleadings seeking to dismiss Mary and strike her petition to intervene based upon Mary’s lack of standing under section 601 of the Dissolution Act. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 40, par. 601.) On February 5, 1988, the court, having communicated with the court in Virginia, reiterated the fact it had jurisdiction under the Dissolution Act and the Child Custody Act and also refused to strike Mary's petition based on a lack of standing. The trial court, based upon Mary’s intention of seeking custody of Brendan, treated Mary’s petition to intervene as a petition for custody to which the standing requirements of section 601(b)(2) of the Dissolution Act applied (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 40, par. 601(b)(2)). The trial court also stated that Mary would bear the burden of showing the best interests of Brendan were to remain with her in Virginia. The trial court gave leave to Mary to file her counterpetition for custody and ordered Carol to respond. The order did not address temporary custody, but Brendan remained with Mary subject to Carol’s rights of visitation. Discovery schedules were set and eventually a trial date was set for July 27, 1988, on the issue of Brendan’s best interests under section 602 of the Dissolution Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 40, par. 602). The burden to proceed was placed without objection upon Carol, apparently because she filed her petition for custody first. Shortly before trial, Carol filed a motion seeking an evidentiary hearing and reconsideration of whether Mary had standing to seek permanent custody under section 601 of the Dissolution Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 40, par. 601). On July 27, 1987, the day of trial, Judge Hayton, who was not the judge who originally found on February 5, 1988, that Mary had standing to seek custody, refused to reconsider the trial court’s prior finding and denied Carol’s motion. At trial, Mary, Carol, their respective experts and a court-appointed psychologist testified. The trial court held an in camera interview of Brendan in which the trial court asked Brendan its own questions and in which various questions, submitted by both sides’ counsel and approved by the court, were asked. Neither party’s counsel was allowed to be present although both were given transcripts of the interview. At the close of the evidence, the trial court found that it was in the best interests of Brendan to place permanent custody with Mary subject to Carol’s liberal rights of visitation. Initially, we must address the confusing and inadequate nature of Carol’s appellate brief. She has failed to comply with numerous requirements of Supreme Court Rule 341(e) (107 Ill. 2d R. 341(e)) governing the contents and substance of an appellant’s brief. Her statement of facts is replete with improper argument and characterizations of the record and is barely sufficient for an understanding of the issues raised on appeal. Additionally, the argument section of her appellant’s brief contains no citation to the record whatsoever in support of the numerous facts and questionable characterizations contained in her legal arguments. Further, her brief makes numerous statements of law with no supporting authority.  Rather than dismiss the appeal for failure to substantially comply with Supreme Court Rule 341(e), we will address the single issue for which Carol has cited legal authority and for which the facts necessary to understand the issue are simple and, for the most part, sufficiently stated in the statement of facts. (See Mead v. Board of Review (1986), 143 Ill. App. 3d 1088, 494 N.E.2d 171.) The other issues sought to be argued by Carol on appeal are waived for failure to comply with Supreme Court Rule 341(e)(7), concerning citation to the record and authority in support of the arguments contained in the appellate brief. Fuller v. Justice (1983), 117 Ill. App. 3d 933, 453 N.E.2d 1133 (a court of review is entitled to have the issues clearly defined and to be cited pertinent authority). The only issue sufficiently raised and argued on appeal is whether the nonparent, Mary, had standing under section 601(b)(2) of the Dissolution Act to seek custody of Brendan under the best interests standard of the Dissolution Act. (See Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 40, pars. 601(b)(2), 602.) Furthermore, we note that Carol does not argue on appeal that the trial court’s finding that the best interests of Brendan dictate custody be placed with Mary was an abuse of discretion or against the manifest weight of the evidence. In re Custody of Piccirilli (1980), 88 Ill. App. 3d 621, 626, 410 N.E.2d 1086, 1090. Carol contends the trial court erred in finding that Mary had standing under section 601(b)(2) of the Dissolution Act to seek custody of Brendan under the best interests standard of the Dissolution Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 40, par. 601) in light of Carol’s superior right as a natural mother to custody of Brendan. Intervenor, Mary, argues that the trial court properly found that she had standing either under sections 601(b)(2) or 601(c) of the Dissolution Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 40, pars. 601(b)(2), (c)) or under section 4 of the Child Custody Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 40, par. 2104).  We agree with Carol that, in order to seek custody of a child under the modification of custody procedures of the Dissolution Act, a nonparent seeking custody must meet the standing requirements of section 601(b)(2). (In re Marriage of Nicholas (1988), 170 Ill. App. 3d 171, 524 N.E.2d 728.) Further, we do not find any standing requirement relating to a nonparent’s right to seek custody under the Child Custody Act as incorporated under the jurisdictional section of the Dissolution Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 40, par. 601(a)) that would ■lead us to conclude that the standing requirements of section 601(b)(2) were intended by the legislature to be inapplicable to a non-parent seeking custody just because such nonparent happens to reside outside Illinois. See In re Custody of Barokas (1982), 109 Ill. App. 3d 536, 541, 440 N.E.2d 1036, 1040.  The superior rights of a natural parent to the care, custody and control of his or her child are well recognized in Illinois and embodied in our statutory law. (In re Custody of Peterson (1986), 112 Ill. 2d 48, 51, 491 N.E.2d 1150, 1152.) Under the Juvenile Court Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 37, par. 801 — 1 et seq.) and the Adoption Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 40, par. 1501 et seq.), unless a natural parent consents or is judged “unfit,” a child may not be placed in the custody of a nonparent. (In re Custody of Peterson (1986), 112 Ill. 2d 48, 491 N.E.2d 1150.) However, under the Dissolution Act, a non-parent may obtain custody of a child if the best interests of the child so dictate without a showing that the natural parent is unfit. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 40, par. 101 et seq.) In re Custody of Peterson (1986), 112 Ill. 2d 48, 491 N.E.2d 1150.  Before a nonparent may proceed under the best interests standard of the Dissolution Act (see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 40, par. 602), the nonparent seeking custody must first show that he or she meets the standing requirements of section 601(b)(2) of the Dissolution Act. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 40, par. 601(b)(2); In re Custody of Peterson (1986), 112 Ill. 2d 48, 491 N.E.2d 1150; In re Marriage of Nicholas (1988), 170 Ill. App. 3d 171, 524 N.E.2d 728 (nonparent seeking to intervene in proceedings pursuant to section 601(c) of the Dissolution Act must meet section 601(b)(2) standing requirement where intervenor nonparent seeks custody); see In re Person & Estate of Newsome (1988), 173 Ill. App. 3d 376, 527 N.E.2d 524 (applied section 601(b)(2) standing requirement in probate proceedings to maternal grandparents who sought custody of child who had lived with and was in physical possession of man who lived with mother at time of mother’s death and claimed to be father).) The superior right of a natural parent to legal custody of his or her child is recognized and protected in the Dissolution Act by requiring a nonparent seeking custody to first meet the standing requirements of section 601(b)(2) of the Dissolution Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 40, par. 601(b)(2)), before being considered for custody under the best interests standard without the necessity of first establishing the unfitness of the parent. (In re Custody of Peterson (1986), 112 Ill. 2d 48, 53, 491 N.E.2d 1150, 1152; In re Marriage of Nicholas (1988), 170 Ill. App. 3d 171, 175, 524 N.E.2d 728, 731; In re Custody of Barokas (1982), 109 Ill. App. 3d 536, 541, 440 N.E.2d 1036, 1040.) The superior right of a natural parent to custody of his or her child is not absolute but only one of several factors looked to in determining best interests of the child. In re Custody of Peterson (1986), 112 Ill. 2d 48, 51-52, 491 N.E.2d 1150, 1151.  Section 601(b)(2) of the Dissolution Act provides in relevant part: “A child custody proceeding is commenced in the court * * * (2) by a person other than a parent, by filing a petition for custody of the child in the county in which he is permanently resident or found, but only if he is not in the physical custody of one of his parents.” (Emphasis added.) Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 40, par. 601(b)(2). A determination of when a child is “not in the physical custody of one of his parents” so as to create standing in a nonparent seeking custody under the Dissolution Act is not subject to any clear litmus test or dependent upon any single fact such as who is in actual physical possession of the child at the time the petition for custody modification is filed. (See In re Marriage of Santa Cruz (1988), 172 Ill. App. 3d 775, 527 N.E.2d 131.) In Santa Cruz, this court extensively reviewed the only Illinois Supreme Court decision, Peterson, to have addressed the standing issue as well as In re Custody of Barokas (1982), 109 Ill. App. 3d 536, 440 N.E.2d 1036, and In re Custody of Menconi (1983), 117 Ill. App. 3d 394, 453 N.E.2d 835, which were the two cases favorably cited and relied upon by the court in Peterson. Additionally, in Santa Cruz, we discussed the facts of the three other recent decisions that have applied the rationale of Peterson. (See Montgomery v. Roudez (1987), 156 Ill. App. 3d 262, 509 N.E.2d 499; In re Custody of McCarthy (1987), 157 Ill. App. 3d 377, 510 N.E.2d 555; In re Custody of O’Rourke (1987), 160 Ill. App. 3d 584, 514 N.E.2d 6.) From these cases, we concluded that a determination of whether a child was “not in the physical custody” of one of his parents under the language of section 601(b)(2) so as to confer standing on a nonparent to seek custody depended upon a consideration of various factors, including who was in physical possession of the child, how that person got possession as well as the duration and nature of the physical possession. In re Marriage of Santa Cruz (1988), 172 Ill. App. 3d 775, 783, 527 N.E.2d 131, 136.  Although relevant factors for a determination of standing include the manner, nature and duration of physical possession, such factors must be applied within the statutory scheme of the Dissolution Act and the Child Custody Act incorporated therein, which evince twin policies favoring the superior rights of parents to the custody of their children and the fostering of greater stability in the home environment by deterring abductions and other unilateral removals of children. (See In re Custody of Menconi (1983), 117 Ill. App. 3d 394, 398, 453 N.E.2d 835, 838; Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 40, pars. 601, 2102(a)(4), (a)(5).) As the Illinois Supreme Court stated in Peterson, “the standing requirement under section 601(b)(2) should not turn on who is in physical possession, so to speak, of the child at the moment of filing the petition for custody. To hold differently would be to encourage abductions of minors in order to satisfy the literal terms of the standing requirement and would, in reality, defeat the statutory intendment.” In re Custody of Peterson (1986), 112 Ill. 2d 48, 53-54, 491 N.E.2d 1150, 1152-53. Similar to our holding in Santa Cruz is the holding of the Appellate Court, Third District, in In re Marriage of Nicholas (1988), 170 Ill. App. 3d 171, 178, 524 N.E.2d 728, 733, which, after reviewing Peterson, Barokas and Menconi, stated “physical custody, as defined by section 601(b)(2), requires a determination of who was providing for the care, custody and welfare of the child prior to the initiation of custody proceedings.” (In re Marriage of Nicholas (1988), 170 Ill. App. 3d 171, 178, 524 N.E.2d 728, 733.) Since no one factor is controlling in the determination of whether a child is not in the physical custody of one of his parents under section 601(b)(2), such a determination in a given case will depend heavily on the particular facts of the individual case. It has been held that the overnight visit by a child to a third party and that party’s refusal to return the child to its custodial parent did not deprive that parent of “physical custody” as that term is used in section 601(b)(2) so as to create standing of the nonparent, third party, to seek custody of the child under the Dissolution Act. (In re Custody of McCuan (1988), 176 Ill. App. 3d 421, 531 N.E.2d 102.) The forcible removal of a child from his grandparents by a parent who had not cared for the child in the 6V2 years since he left the child at age two months with the grandparents did not deprive the grandparents of standing under section 601(b)(2) to seek custody under the best interest standard of the Dissolution Act. (In re Custody of Menconi (1983), 117 Ill. App. 3d 394, 453 N.E.2d 835.) In some cases, the courts relied on the facts surrounding the voluntary relinquishment of the physical and/or legal custody of the child as well as the parents’ intentions and expectations when relinquishing the child to the care of another. See In re Custody of Peterson (1986), 112 Ill. 2d 48, 491 N.E.2d 1150; Montgomery v. Roudez (1987), 156 Ill. App. 3d 262, 509 N.E.2d 499 (mother upon voluntarily relinquishing custody of newborn to great aunt signed papers equivalent to adoption consent forms); In re Marriage of Santa Cruz (1988), 172 Ill. App. 3d 775, 527 N.E.2d 131; In re Marriage of Gustafson (1989), 181 Ill. App. 3d 472, 536 N.E.2d 1359.  In the instant case Carol, by the settlement agreement incorporated into the judgment of dissolution, gave permanent legal custody of Brendan, then age four, to John in 1981. Between 1982, after John’s marriage to Mary, and 1984, prior to John, Mary and Brendan’s move to Virginia, Brendan lived with John and Mary. Although Carol exercised visitation rights, Mary, as John’s wife, undertook with John to provide for the care and welfare of Brendan. In 1984, Carol by an agreed order allowed John to retain permanent custody of Brendan and to move Brendan to Virginia, where Brendan’s care, custody and welfare were provided by John and Mary. In 1987, when John died, a mother-son relationship existed between Mary and Brendan. Carol, although exercising her visitation rights, had not provided for the care, custody and welfare of Brendan in such a manner that, when John died, the trial court was required to find that physical custody as used in section 601(b)(2) was in Carol, who had voluntarily relinquished permanent legal custody in 1981. See In re Custody of Menconi (1983), 117 Ill. App. 3d 394, 453 N.E.2d 835 (where father voluntarily placed two-month-old daughter with his parents and in the next 6V2 years the grandparents provided for the care and custody of the child and a mother-daughter relationship developed between the grandmother and child, the father’s taking of the child from the grandparents four days prior to the grandparents’ petition for custody did not defeat the grandparents’ standing under section 601(b)(2)); cf. In re Custody of Peterson (1986), 112 Ill. 2d 48, 491 N.E.2d 1150 (father, who lived on same block as ex-spouse granted custody of child, and who exercised regular visitation, had physical custody of child upon ex-spouse’s death for purposes of defeating maternal grandparents’ standing under section 601(b)(2) even though ex-spouse lived with child’s maternal grandparents and they helped with the child, where the ex-spouse never gave custody of child to grandparents); In re Marriage of Gustafson (1989), 181 Ill. App. 3d 472, 536 N.E.2d 1359. The dissent filed in this case takes the position that because the facts in this case so closely parallel those in In re Custody of Peterson (1986), 112 Ill. 2d 48, 491 N.E.2d 1150, Peterson requires us to find that Mary had no standing to seek custody of Brendan because it would not have occurred to Carol that Mary had physical custody of Brendan and was developing a position of standing. We disagree. In Peterson the custody arrangement was determined by the court rather than by agreement of the parties; here, Carol had previously agreed to Brendan’s permanent custody with John at a time when John was dating Mary. After John and Mary were married, Carol agreed to allow Brendan to move with John and Mary to Washington, D.C., where they continued to reside until John’s death some five years later. During this time, Mary, as John’s wife, was an integral part of the family unit in which Brendan lived. It is apparent from the evidence that for five years, Brendan enjoyed a mother/son relationship. Although the grandparents in Peterson provided a home and helped their ailing daughter care for the child, there was no indication that the grandparents had established any parental relationship with the child. Moreover, the facts in Peterson indicate that the custodial mother was residing with her parents because of her health. Although the mother and child did remain there until the mother’s death, it appears that the arrangement was not initially intended to be a permanent one. In the case before us, however, the parties in agreeing to Brendan’s residence out of State -with his father and stepmother established a permanent arrangement which would no doubt have continued but for John’s death. Given the distinguishing facts in this case, Peterson does not require us to find that Mary had no standing to seek custody of Brendan.  In the instant case, we do not find that the trial court’s implicit finding that Brendan was not in the physical custody of one of his parents to be against the manifest weight of the evidence or that the trial court erred in ruling that Mary had standing to petition for custody of Brendan under the best-interests standard provided for in modification of custody proceedings under the Dissolution Act. In re Custody of Peterson (1986), 112 Ill. 2d 48, 491 N.E.2d 1150.  As Carol’s brief repeatedly emphasizes, we are aware that the record indicated Mary took affirmative steps, such as staying with friends immediately after John’s death, to prevent Carol from attempting to take possession of Brendan after John’s death. Additionally, Mary may have possibly failed to fully inform the Virginia court during the guardianship proceedings of Carol’s desire to obtain possession and control of Brendan, not to mention the fact that Carol retained liberal rights of visitation under the Illinois circuit court’s order entered in 1984. However, Carol did not have the right to unilaterally retake physical custody of Brendan since the legal custody of Brendan upon John’s death did not automatically revert to Carol. In re Marriage of Nicholas (1988), 170 Ill. App. 3d 171, 178, 524 N.E.2d 728, 733; Milenkovic v. Milenkovic (1981), 93 Ill. App. 3d 204, 416 N.E.2d 1140 (death of the custodial parent after a final judgment of dissolution of marriage has been entered does not automatically revert custody to the surviving noncustodial parent, but the court has jurisdiction to determine further custody transfers in that the legal custody of the child after the custodial parent’s death is not immediately in anyone). The proper procedure, as followed by Carol, was to petition the court for a modification of custody pursuant to section 610 of the Dissolution Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 40, par. 610). In this way, the twin policies of the Dissolution Act and the Child Custody Act, of avoiding child abductions and other unilateral removals of children and of fostering a stable home environment, were achieved to a great extent in that Brendan remained with Mary, with whom he had lived for the past six years, until the courts became involved and exercised their power to address the best interests of Brendan. (See In re Custody of Menconi (1983), 117 Ill. App. 3d 394, 398, 453 N.E.2d 835, 838.) We do not condone or excuse the actions of Mary which denied Carol her rights to visitation with Brendan after John’s death. Nor, do we condone Carol’s threat to remove Brendan from the household literally within days after the death of his father. However, the same rationale which controls the determination of standing under section 601(b)(2) dictates that Mary’s actions would not result in her loss of standing under section 601(b)(2) where Mary as a non-parent otherwise properly had standing to seek custody under section 601(b)(2). In re Custody of Peterson (1986), 112 Ill. 2d 48, 491 N.E.2d 1150 (physical custody and related issue of standing do not turn on who is in actual physical possession at time proceedings are commenced). The judgment of the circuit court is affirmed. Affirmed. WOODWARD, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9739531 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:17:04.009004+00 ===

JUSTICE DUNN, dissenting: I respectfully dissent because the holding of the majority cannot be reconciled with our supreme court’s decision in In re Custody of Peterson (1986), 112 Ill. 2d 48, 491 N.E.2d 1150. The majority recognizes that Mary only had standing to petition for custody of Brendan under the Act if he was “not in the physical custody of one of his parents” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 40, par. 601(b)(2)). In Peterson, the child resided with her mother and maternal grandparents following the dissolution of her parents’ marriage. The father, who lived on the same block, regularly exercised his visitation rights. After the mother’s death, the grandparents petitioned for custody under the Act. Our supreme court noted that the grandparents had assisted in caring for the child but went on to state as follows: “Considering, however, that the mother continued to live with the child, it would not reasonably occur to the father that the maternal grandparents had physical custody of his child and were developing a position of standing, so that upon the death of his wife he could be deprived of his right to custody of his child. The father regularly exercised his visitation rights with Lynette at the Jadrychs, where Lynette and her mother lived. Within the meaning of section 601(b)(2) Lynette must be considered to have been, upon her mother’s death, in the physical custody of her father.” (Emphasis added.) Peterson, 112 Ill. 2d at 54, 491 N.E.2d at 1153. As Justice Green observed in his special concurrence in In re Marriage of Gustafson (1989), 181 Ill. App. 3d 472, Peterson provides that if the noncustodial parent continually shows interest in a child and seeks custody upon the death of the custodial parent, a constructive physical custody will be implied in favor of the noncustodial parent. (Gustafson, 181 Ill. App. 3d at 481, 536 N.E.2d at 1364 (Green, J., specially concurring).) This serves to protect the right of natural parents as against third parties to the care, custody, and control of their children (181 Ill. App. 3d at 481, 536 N.E.2d at 1364 (Green, J., specially concurring)), a right that was mentioned in Peterson (112 Ill. 2d at 51, 491 N.E.2d at 1151). Here, as in Peterson, the noncustodial parent continually showed an interest in the child by regularly exercising visitation rights. The noncustodial parent also sought custody in both instances and immediately challenged custody petitions filed by third parties who had resided with the child and the custodial parent. The only major factual difference between this case and Peterson is that the noncustodial parent contested custody of the child during the dissolution proceedings in Peterson while Carol Carey agreed in the case at bar that her husband, John, would receive custody of Brendan. Such an agreement, however, is not tantamount to an abandonment of a child or a loss of interest in him. A holding to the contrary would only serve to discourage amicable settlement of custody matters in dissolution proceedings by forcing the parties to litigate custody matters in order to fully protect their parental rights in the event of the other parent’s death. In the case at bar as in Peterson, the noncustodial parent regularly exercised visitation rights and maintained an interest in the child. It would not have occurred to Carol that the presence of Mary in John’s household could cause Mary to attain standing to seek custody of Brendan in the event of John’s death, just as it would not have occurred to the father in Peterson that the presence of the mother in the grandparents’ household would give the grandparents standing to seek custody upon the mother’s death (112 Ill. 2d at 54, 491 N.E.2d at 1153). Under Peterson and section 601(b)(2) of the Act, Mary lacked standing to seek custody of Brendan pursuant to the Act because Carol had physical custody of Brendan upon John’s death. In addition to protecting the rights of noncustodial parents, the Peterson holding also serves the interests of children. This is somewhat ironic because the standard for custody determinations under the Act is the best interests of the child, and Peterson takes a restrictive view of standing under the Act. By doing so, however, our supreme court has discouraged custody litigation upon the death of custodial parents, thus preventing many children who have undergone the trauma of a parent’s death from then undergoing the trauma of being the subject of a custody battle. In cases where the noncustodial parent is an unfit custodian, custody may still be challenged under the Adoption Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 40, par. 1501 et seq.) as our supreme court noted in Peterson (112 Ill. 2d at 55, 491 N.E.2d at 1153). Since I believe that Peterson compels.the conclusion that Mary did not have standing under section 601(b)(2) of the Act to seek custody of Brendan, I respectfully dissent.

=== CASE 2220199 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:36.096257+00 ===

544 N.E.2d 153 (1989)
Teresa Ann SEELEY, Appellant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee.
No. 60S00-8805-CR-442.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
October 4, 1989.
*154 C. Thomas Spencer, Hickam and Hickam, Spencer, for appellant.
Linley E. Pearson, Atty. Gen., Michael Gene Worden, Deputy Atty. Gen., Indianapolis, for appellee.
GIVAN, Justice.
A jury trial resulted in the conviction of appellant of Count I, Felony Murder; Count II, Kidnapping; Count III, Robbery; and Count IV, Felony Murder. The trial court correctly ruled that Count III, Robbery, was an included offense of Count I, Felony Murder in the Perpetration of a Robbery, and that Count II, Kidnapping, was an included offense of Count IV, Felony Murder in the Perpetration of a Kidnapping. The trial court merged those counts accordingly. The trial court further found that it could not impose two sentences for murder where there had been but one person murdered. The court therefore sentenced appellant to forty (40) years imprisonment under Count I and vacated the convictions under Counts II, III, and IV.
The facts are: Douglas M. Crawford, the victim in this case, met Teresa Seeley, appellant in this case, Debbie King, and Penny Morrison as they were hitchhiking in Indianapolis. After picking them up, he bought beer and whiskey for everyone, then gave the women a ride to the Owen County home of Bernard Wyant, supposedly to go to a party. When they arrived at Wyant's home, King and appellant went inside where King asked for a gun to be used to rob Crawford.
While the others were in the Wyant home, Crawford made sexual advances to Morrison, causing an argument between them. Morrison got out of the car, went around to Crawford's side and, with the use of a knife, forced him from the car. At that point, she demanded his wallet and took other items from his pocket. She threw the items into the car and tied Crawford's hands with her shoelaces. Crawford was forced into the car and the three women drove away with King at the wheel.
After progressing down the road for some distance, they stopped, presumably to remove Crawford from the car. However, he had broken the shoelaces and a fight ensued. During the struggle, Crawford was forced from the car and the three women started driving away. However, they apparently discovered they were driving in the wrong direction to get to the highway to return to Indianapolis. King stopped the car, turned it around, and drove back toward Crawford who was standing beside the road. As she approached Crawford, she accelerated the car and stated, "I'm going to kill him," whereupon she drove into Crawford and in fact did kill him.
The women drove back to Indianapolis in Crawford's car. They eventually abandoned the car by driving it into White River in Indianapolis. Later, appellant and Morrison were at the apartment of Mark Patterson when appellant told him about killing Crawford and indicated that both women wanted to flee the state. Prior to that time, they had told Wayne Pryor about the killing. Appellant later contacted a co-worker, Edna Kennedy, and told her about the killing. Kennedy subsequently made arrangements for appellant and Morrison to turn themselves into the police.
Appellant claims the trial court erred in failing to follow proper procedures when it became apparent that prospective jurors had received improper communications concerning *155 the facts of the case. Appellant moved for a new venire which was overruled by the court.
On the second day of jury selection, one of the panelists, Juanita Roberts, requested to speak with the court. The court advised her he could not converse with her but asked her to reduce her question to writing and present it to the court. Next the court called counsel for both parties to the bench and allowed them to read the note which stated: "The lady beside me said outside that she should have been charged with premeditated murder instead of just murder." The lady referred to in the note was Helen Ooley, another one of the panelists.
At this point, the court recessed the proceedings and met in chambers with counsel concerning the problem. It was decided to interrogate Mrs. Roberts outside the presence of the other jurors. She was brought into the courtroom, placed in the jury box, and questioned by all parties. She indicated that she had overheard a conversation between Mrs. Ooley and an unidentified panelist, who had not yet been examined, and that Mrs. Ooley had made the above-quoted statement.
Mrs. Roberts then was returned to the jury room and Mrs. Ooley was brought out and questioned similarly. Initially she maintained there had been no such conversation. However, she then recanted and recalled the conversation referred to in the note. However, she insisted it had nothing to do with the case before the court. She then was returned to the jury room. Both Mrs. Roberts and Mrs. Ooley were admonished not to discuss anything which occurred during their individual questioning.
Appellant then moved to strike the venire and requested the court call a new panel for the reason that the jury now was tainted in that an unidentified panelist, to whom Mrs. Ooley had made her statement, remained and was presumed to be among the as-yet unquestioned panelists. Appellant further claimed that the procedure of questioning Mrs. Ooley and Mrs. Roberts had created prejudicial speculation as to what had transpired during the recess.
The trial court denied appellant's motion for a new venire. However, the court excused both Mrs. Roberts and Mrs. Ooley. He then restored one peremptory challenge each to the State and the defendant and proceeded with impaneling the jury.
The next morning, the court advised counsel that Mrs. Roberts had called him at his home the night before and indicated that she felt compelled to report another incident which had occurred the day before. She reported that Janet Hall, a juror seated and sworn, had indicated to two other jurors during a recess that when she arrived home on the first day of jury selection, her husband had been very upset at the prospect that she would be selected because of the financial impact upon their family and that he felt the defendant was guilty simply because she was charged.
The trial court then brought Mrs. Hall out of the jury room and placed her in the jury box, and she was examined in the same manner as the other jurors had been examined the day before. She verified the conversation with her husband concerning the case and said that she had told Mrs. Sutherlen and Mrs. Stringfellow of the conversation. She stated that she had not been influenced by the conversation and could be a fair and impartial juror. The court then separately called Mrs. Sutherlen and Mrs. Stringfellow from the jury room for questioning. They both acknowledged the conversation with varying degrees of recollection.
Following this interrogation, appellant made a motion for mistrial which the court denied. The trial court refused to interrogate the remaining jurors on the ground that there was no evidence they had been exposed to the statement made by Hall to Stringfellow and Sutherlen.
Appellant claims the trial court did not follow the guidelines set forth in Lindsey v. State (1973), 260 Ind. 351, 295 N.E.2d 819. We would point out that the first incident referred to above occurred prior to the final selection of the jury, that the two prospective jurors who had been questioned by the court and the parties in fact were excused from the panel, and that the *156 jury selection continued with the court adding one additional preemptory challenge to each party. The procedure set forth in Lindsey is addressed to a situation occuring after the jury has been selected and the trial is in progress.
In the instant case, the parties had every opportunity to question each of the prospective jurors prior to finally accepting the jury. The trial court collectively questioned the panel members to learn of any exposure to the possibly prejudicial conversation, and no exposure was discovered. The trial court also admonished the jury collectively not to discuss the case. Under the circumstances, we cannot perceive that there is evidence of prejudice which would require the cause to be removed from the jury. See Daniels v. State (1976), 264 Ind. 490, 346 N.E.2d 566.
A factually different situation arises in the second incident where, after the jury had been seated, the court received further information of potentially prejudicial conduct. However, here the trial court again questioned the jurors involved and permitted counsel to do the same. When it was determined by the court that the so-called prejudicial statement's effect had been minimal and that each juror stated that they were unaffected by the remark, the court overruled appellant's motion for mistrial. Appellant again takes the position that the court erred in failing to follow the procedures set forth in Lindsey.
However, in Lindsey, after setting out the proper procedure to be followed in a situation such as in the case at bar, Justice Prentice stated:
"At all stages, the trial court must have discretion to make the determination, within the context of the particular circumstances; and a denial of a motion to interrogate the jury will be reversible error, only if we can say that there has been substantial peril. If the jury has been interrogated and admonished, as set forth above, the continuance of the trial, over the imperiled party's motion for a mistrial, will be reversible error only if it can be said, after giving the decision of the trial judge the benefit of all reasonable doubt, that the peril was such as to be uncurable by instruction." Lindsey, supra, 260 Ind. at 359, 295 N.E.2d at 824.
In the case at bar, the trial judge was faced with the dilemma either of accepting the word of the three questioned jurors that other jurors had not been exposed to their conversation or of running the risk of prejudicing the panel by questioning all of them concerning the improper remark by the one juror's husband. Even if we assume for the sake of argument that the court erred by not so proceeding, we cannot say that appellant was placed in such peril that it was uncurable by the general instruction to the jury that they were to decide the case solely upon the facts presented at the trial. Under the circumstances, we hold the trial court did not err in denying appellant's motion for mistrial. See Gee v. State (1979), 271 Ind. 28, 389 N.E.2d 303; Daniels, supra.
Appellant maintains the evidence is not sufficient to sustain the verdicts of felony murder. Appellant takes the position that both the robbery and the kidnapping had been completed, and appellant had left the scene of the crime with her companions when King, who was driving the car, independently determined to strike Crawford with the car, resulting in his death. Many times this Court has explained the difference between the technical completion of the felony to which the murder attaches and the continuing res gestae of that crime sufficient to bring it within the felony murder statute.
In Eddy v. State (1986), Ind., 496 N.E.2d 24, then-Justice Shepard carefully and accurately outlined the application of the felony murder statute. In that case, the appellant had requested an instruction to the jury which very closely follows appellant's theory in this case. In Eddy, the appellant took the position that the robbery was completed before the homicide was committed; thus the homicide did not occur during the commission of the robbery. Justice Shepard observed:
*157 "This Court has long declined to define the phrase, `while committing', in terms of the chronological completion of the statutory elements of the underlying felony. To require that the murder occur before each of the statutory elements of the robbery have been completed would elevate form over substance. The felony murder statute must be construed in light of its purpose:... ." Id. at 28.
One of the cases cited in Eddy is Neal v. State (1938), 214 Ind. 328, 14 N.E.2d 590. In that case, the Court stated:
"The taking of his money from the pockets of the victim, the disposal of his body, and the transportation of the car from the scene of the crime to Madison, were all parts of the same unlawful enterprise." Id. at 342, 14 N.E.2d at 597.
In Averhart v. State (1984), Ind., 470 N.E.2d 666, 692, cert. denied, 471 U.S. 1030, 105 S.Ct. 2051, 85 L.Ed.2d 323, this Court stated:
"It has long been the law in Indiana that the shooting of a person by a robber or burglar while leaving the premises in an attempt to complete the crime is part of the res gestae of the robbery such that the shooting is, for felony murder purposes, committed in the perpetration of the robbery or burglary."
In the case at bar, appellant and her companions had just completed the robbery of appellant by taking his wallet and belongings from his person. They were leaving the scene in the victim's automobile, which they also had stolen from him. We perceive little difference in King's determination to run over the victim with his own automobile as they were escaping than if, for example, as they drove away, one of the women had fired a shot from the moving car striking and killing the victim. In either event, the victim's death was brought about by an act of one of the confederates as they continued in their completion of the crimes by effecting their escape in the victim's stolen automobile. There is ample evidence in this record to sustain the conviction of felony murder.
Appellant also makes the claim that neither she nor Morrison was consulted by King concerning her decision to drive the car into the victim. However, it is well established that when confederates undertake the commission of a felony and one of them causes a death in furtherance thereof, all are deemed equally guilty of the murder. Evans v. State (1986), Ind., 497 N.E.2d 919.
The trial court is affirmed.
SHEPARD, C.J., and DeBRULER, PIVARNIK and DICKSON, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9739532 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:17:06.307161+00 ===

JUSTICE RYAN delivered the opinion of the court: Following a jury trial in the circuit court of Cook County, defendant, George W. Del Vecchio, was convicted of murder, burglary, rape and deviate sexual assault. At the conclusion of the sentencing hearing, the jury found that there existed one or more factors in aggravation set forth in section 9 — 1(b) of the Criminal Code of 1961 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 38, par. 9 — 1(b)) and that there were no mitigating factors sufficient to preclude a sentence of death. The sentence of death was imposed. The defendant was also sentenced to 15 years’ imprisonment for rape, 6 years’ for deviate sexual assault, and 7 years’ for burglary. On direct appeal to this court (Ill. Const. 1970, art. VI, §4(b); 107 Ill. 2d R. 603), the convictions and sentences were affirmed. (People v. Del Vecchio (1985), 105 Ill. 2d 414 (hereinafter referred to as Del Vecchio I).) The United States Supreme Court denied the defendant’s petition for writ of certiorari. (Del Vecchio v. Illinois (1985), 474 U.S. 883, 88 L. Ed. 2d 173, 106 S. Ct. 204.) Defendant then filed a petition under the Post-Conviction Hearing Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 122 — 1 et seq.), and counsel was appointed. Without an evidentiary hearing, the circuit court granted the State’s motion to dismiss the petition. This appeal concerns the correctness of that dismissal. Defendant was convicted for the December 22, 1977, murder of six-year-old Tony Canzoneri, the rape and deviate sexual assault of Canzoneri’s mother and the burglary of their home. The facts relating to the underlying crimes were discussed at length in the first appeal (Del Vecchio I, 105 Ill. 2d 414), and we will discuss only the facts relevant to the issues on this review. Del Vecchio’s first claim in his post-conviction petition is that there should be a new trial because the 1979 trial judge, Judge Louis B. Garippo (the trial judge for the 1977 murder of Tony Canzoneri), had a conflict of interest stemming from his involvement in a 1965 case in which Del Vecchio was convicted of the murder of Fred Christiansen. One of the aggravating factors introduced at the penalty hearing in our case was the 1965 murder of Fred Christiansen, of which the defendant was convicted at the age of 16. The record reflects that in 1979, defendant’s defense attorneys learned, during the trial, that Garippo had been present at the defendant’s 1965 plea of guilty in the Christiansen murder case. They knew that Judge Garippo had been an assistant Státe’s Attorney, but they were unaware that he had been chief of the criminal division at that time. Defendant’s attorneys prepared a motion for mistrial but, knowing only of the judge’s limited involvement, they did not file it, believing that at that late stage in the proceeding the judge would not disqualify himself simply because he had witnessed the 1965 proceedings. Briefly, the facts surrounding the 1965 conviction are as follows. On February 2, 1965, Del Vecchio was interrogated in connection with the murder of Fred Christiansen. At that time he confessed to the crime. An assistant State’s Attorney took a written statement and later prepared a report for his supervisors on the investigation, interrogation and confession. One of the supervisors was Louis Garippo, then the chief of the State’s Attorney’s criminal division. The Christiansen murder received a good deal of publicity because it represented a new and alarming phenomenon: a robbery spree and a killing by a young person under the influence of drugs. At the time of the murder Del Vecchio was 16 years old and would turn 17 on March 1, 1965, at which age he could be tried as an adult. In mid-February Del Vecchio’s attorney went to Garippo and requested an expedited indictment so that Del Vecchio could be sentenced as a youth. Garippo agreed and a grand jury indicted Del Vecchio. On February 24, 1965, Del Vecchio pleaded guilty and was sentenced that day. The defendant acknowledges that in 1965, upon interrogation, he confessed to the crime and that after the decision to expedite the indictment the State’s Attorney’s office made no significant decisions in the case. However, he now claims that he was denied a fair trial in 1979 on the murder charge involved in the case before us because of Garippo’s involvement with the 1965 prosecution. He speculates that perhaps Judge Garippo regretted his 1965 decision to expedite the indictment. That decision allowed Del Vecchio to be sentenced as a youth, which presumably helped him obtain an earlier release from prison, and as a result of this early release he was able to perform the subsequent crimes. Before addressing the issue of judicial disqualification it is important to note that in 1979, Del Vecchio was tried before a jury and that he had a jury sentencing hearing. The jury made the findings that Del Vecchio was death-eligible and the jury determined that the aggravating factors making defendant eligible for the death sentence were present and that there were no mitigating factors sufficient to preclude the imposition of the death penalty. The judge had virtually no role in these decisions. In a post-conviction proceeding, the petitioner has the burden of proof and must establish a substantial deprivation of rights under the United States Constitution or the Constitution of Illinois before he is entitled to any relief. (People v. Silagy (1987), 116 Ill. 2d 357, 365; People v. Harper (1969), 43 Ill. 2d 368, 372.) “Dismissal of nonmeritorious petitions on motion is certainly within contemplation of the Act [citation], and necessary to the orderly and expeditious disposition of these petitions.” People v. Collins (1968), 39 Ill. 2d 286, 288. The United States Supreme Court has recognized that the issue of judicial disqualification does not necessarily involve a question of constitutional validity. The Supreme Court has stated that “matters of kinship, personal bias, state policy, remoteness of interest would seem generally to be matters merely of legislative discretion. [Citation.] But it certainly violates the 14th Amendment and deprives a defendant in a criminal case of due process of law to subject his liberty or property to the judgment of a court, the judge of which has a direct, personal, substantial pecuniary interest in reaching a conclusion against him in his case.” (Tumey v. Ohio (1926), 273 U.S. 510, 523, 71 L. Ed. 749, 754, 47 S. Ct. 437, 441; see Aetna Life Insurance Co. v. Lavoie (1986), 475 U.S. 813, 89 L. Ed. 2d 823, 106 S. Ct. 1580; Ward v. Village of Monroeville (1972), 409 U.S. 57, 34 L. Ed. 2d 267, 93 S. Ct. 80.) Another guiding principle on the issue of judicial bias is whether the case involves a possible temptation such that the average person, acting as judge, could not hold the balance nice, clear and true between the State and the accused. (Turney v. Ohio (1926), 273 U.S. 510, 532, 71 L. Ed. 749, 758, 47 S. Ct. 437, 444.) Recently, the Supreme Court recognized that only under the most extreme cases would disqualification on the basis of bias or prejudice be constitutionally required. Aetna Life Insurance Co. v. Lavoie (1986), 475 U.S. 813, 821, 89 L. Ed. 2d 823, 832, 106 S. Ct. 1580, 1585. Certainly, Judge Garippo had no pecuniary interest in the matter. However, the defendant points to a number of rulings during the course of the 1979 proceedings that were supposedly prejudicial to him and which indicate Judge Garippo’s bias. These rulings cannot be raised now as error because a proceeding under the Post-Conviction Hearing Act is not an appeal, but is a collateral attack on the judgment. (People v. James (1986), 111 Ill. 2d 283, 290.) The judgment of the reviewing court on appeal is res judicata as to all issues decided, and any claim that could have been presented on direct appeal is, if not presented, thereafter barred under the doctrine of waiver. People v. Silagy (1987), 116 Ill. 2d 357, 365. One of the rulings now claimed to have been prejudicial was the judge’s refusal to rule on a pretrial motion that the 1965 evidence was irrelevant to rebut a possible defense of insanity in the 1979 case. Judge Garippo did not rule on the motion, claiming he did not have enough information before trial. In the post-conviction petition the defendant argues Garippo ordered the psychiatrists to prepare written reports for him before trial and, therefore, he must have had plenty of information on which to base a ruling. Another claimed indication of prejudice is that Judge Garippo stated that Del Vecchio was more worthy of the death penalty than John Gacy, whose case was also on the judge’s trial call. (See People v. Gacy (1984), 103 Ill. 2d 1.) In an affidavit attached to the State’s motion to dismiss the post-conviction petition, Judge Garippo stated that he was not a strong proponent of the death penalty, but that of the three death penalty cases on his docket in 1979-80, based on the psychiatric reports available to him, Gacy was the least likely candidate for the death penalty. Either of these matters could have been raised on direct appeal. The statement objected to by Del Vecchio was made in 1979 and was made in the presence of his two defense attorneys. At that time, if they felt their client was prejudiced in any way by Judge Garippo’s statement, they could have moved for a substitution of judges. Because neither of these issues was.raised as error, it is likely that the trial and appellate attorneys did not think the rulings were sufficiently prejudicial to the defendant. Likewise, we are not persuaded that any bias or prejudice on the part of Judge Garippo toward Del Vecchio is shown. It is also argued that perhaps Judge Garippo violated a rule of this court when he presided over Del Vecchio’s case. The Supreme Court, in Aetna Life Insurance Co. v. Lavoie (1986), 475 U.S. 813, 828, 89 L. Ed. 2d 823, 837, 106 S. Ct. 1580, 1589, noted that the States are free to impose more rigorous standards for judicial disqualification than those mandated by the due process clause. This court had established, at the time of the defendant’s hearing, standards for disqualification due to a prior involvement with the defendant. (73 Ill. 2d R. 67(c).) Supreme Court Rule 67(c) at that time stated: “A judge shall not participate in any case in which he has previously acted as counsel. He cannot rid himself of this responsibility by consent of counsel or the parties to the case.” (73 Ill. 2d R. 67(c).) This rule did not require that anytime a judge had knowledge of, contact with, or an interest in the case he must recuse himself or his failure to do so would be reversible error. We agree with the holdings of our appellate court to this effect. (See People v. Lipa (1982), 109 Ill. App. 3d 610 (the trial judge had been in a supervisory capacity with the State’s Attorney’s office at the time of the defendant’s indictment and had approved a grand jury subpoena in the case); People v. Burnett (1979), 73 Ill. App. 3d 750 (the trial judge had been in a supervisory capacity with the State’s Attorney’s office at the circuit court where defendant’s case had previously been pending and where a bond forfeiture hearing had been held).) In United States ex rel. Link v. Lane (7th Cir. 1987), 811 F.2d 1166, 1171, the court held that our rule on judicial disqualification did not require a judge to withdraw even though he had previously been involved in the case. In Link, the judge had appeared before the grand jury investigating the defendants and had assisted in the preparation of a memorandum. The judge had no recollection of these acts. Trial counsel was aware of the involvement and felt there was no need for recusal. Merely having a previous involvement with a defendant does not, per se, require disqualification. The important phrase is “acted as counsel.” Attached to the State’s motion to dismiss was the affidavit of Louis Garippo, wherein he explains that the extent of his role in the 1965 murder case was limited to assigning the case to an attorney who had previously been his trial partner at the State’s Attorney’s office and agreeing, at the request of defense counsel, to expedite the indictment. By no stretch of the term could it be said that this involvement constitutes acting as counsel. Del Vecchio has presented nothing indicating further involvement in the case other than that Garippo probably received a State’s Attorney’s report on the interrogation, investigation, and confession; that he was in the courtroom during the guilty plea and sentencing; and that at the time in question, the State’s Attorney’s office was not very large and Garippo most likely knew the details of the case. Del Vecchio admits that after agreeing to expedite the indictment, the State’s Attorney’s office had little involvement with the 1965 murder case and that the case received a great deal of publicity. On the basis of the motion to dismiss and the supporting documents, the trial judge granted the State’s motion to dismiss the post-conviction petition. We agree that our rule was not violated and that there was no constitutional deprivation. Judge Garippo did not have a direct, personal interest in seeing Del Vecchio punished, nor was he unable to balance the interests between the defense and the State. He did not act as counsel in 1965 such that recusal was required in the 1979 case. In light of his limited role, we find no prejudice to the defendant, no due process violation, and that a new trial is not warranted. Del Vecchio next requests an evidentiary hearing, contending that his due process rights were violated because a police officer perjured himself at the sentencing hearing in regard to the defendant’s drug use. Officer Motzny testified, on cross-examination at the 1979 sentencing hearing, that he had spoken to Mrs. Del Vecchio, the defendant’s mother, within hours after the 1965 arrest and that, at that time, she denied any knowledge of her son’s drug use. It is contended that the testimony is relevant because one of Del Vecchio’s defenses to the 1977 crimes was that he was under the influence of drugs. The State contested this defense and, instead, characterized him as a malingerer. A post-conviction petitioner is not entitled to an evidentiary hearing as a matter of right. (People v. James (1986), 111 Ill. 2d 283, 291.) A hearing is only allowed if the petitioner makes a substantial showing of a violation of a constitutional right and the allegations are supported by the record in the case or by accompanying affidavits. (People v. Curtis (1971), 48 Ill. 2d 25, 27.) Del Vecchio attempts to establish circumstantially that it is implausible his mother would have made such a statement. Two days before the 1965 killing, she provided information for a missing-persons report and she stated that her son used drugs; subsequent to the arrest, she told the press about his drug use; another police officer testified in 1965 that during the interrogation following his arrest, Del Vecchio stated he was on pills; and there were numerous exhibits and testimony documenting his drug use. At the sentencing hearing in 1979, Officer Motzny stated that Del Vecchio’s mother said, after the 1965 arrest, that she had no knowledge about her son’s drug use. In the post-conviction petition, Mrs. Del Vecchio’s affidavit states that before the 1965 killing, in the missing-persons report, she told the police about her son’s drug use and that there “is absolutely no reason why, following the Christiansen killing, I would have denied that George had used drugs. I believe I made no such denial. To the best of my present recollection, I made no such denial.” Based upon this, Del Vecchio requests a finding that the officer knowingly committed perjury or an evidentiary hearing on the issue. The circuit court ruled that an evidentiary hearing was not warranted and granted the motion to dismiss. It reasoned that this was only a small aspect of the consideration in the aggravation and mitigation stage of the sentencing hearing, that there was ample evidence of the defendant’s drug use, and that Mrs. Del Vecchio’s affidavit does not clearly establish perjury. Initially, the State argues that the issue was waived by the failure to raise it on direct appeal. However, where fundamental fairness so requires, this court will relax the waiver doctrine in post-conviction proceedings (People v. Burns (1979), 75 Ill. 2d 282, 290; People v. Hamby (1968), 39 Ill. 2d 290, 291), and, though it is unusual to grant an evidentiary hearing or a new trial based on such a claim as this, the Post-Conviction Hearing Act has been used to remedy a claim of perjury (People v. Macias (1968), 39 Ill. 2d 208, 211-12). One instance where an evidentiary hearing was allowed was in People v. Cihlar (1986), 111 Ill. 2d 212, where the defendant located a witness who would testify that the victim stated that the assailant had worn a mask at the time of the crime. The victim’s testimony at trial was that the defendant had worn a hairnet and the testimony was the only evidence connecting the defendant with the crime. This court granted an evidentiary hearing, finding that if the conviction were based on this false testimony, due process would be violated. Alleged perjury does not always rise to a substantial constitutional violation. In People v. Doherty (1966), 36 Ill. 2d 286, 289, the petitioner claimed that a police officer perjured himself because there were inherent improbabilities in his testimony and the testimony was contradicted by the petitioner. The court held that the claim fell far short of establishing a substantial denial of a constitutional right. Rather, such matters concern the weight and credibility of the evidence and go to the issue of guilt or innocence. See People v. Tyner (1968), 40 Ill. 2d 1, 3; People v. Orndorff (1968), 39 Ill. 2d 96, 100. The alleged perjurious testimony in this case was given in 1979, but related to defendant’s 1965, not 1977, drug use. The testimony referred to one instance where the defendant’s mother discussed Del Vecchio’s drug use in 1965, and her affidavit now merely states that she believes she would have told the police about her son’s drug use. There were numerous references throughout the record that the defendant had used drugs. In fact, Del Vecchio’s 1965 confession was admitted through the testimony of the same Officer Motzny, and in it are a number of statements about defendant’s drug use. The importance of the 1965 drug use is diminished by the fact that trial counsel did not attempt to bring out from Del Vecchio at the sentencing whether he had used drugs during the 1965 murder, though there was extensive testimony regarding his 1977 drug use, and this issue was not raised on appeal. In any event, there was ample evidence concerning the defendant’s drug use such that Officer Motzny’s statement does not rise to a constitutional violation requiring a new sentencing hearing or an evidentiary hearing on the post-conviction petition. The inconsistency would, at most, go to the weight and credibility of the witness’ testimony. Del Vecchio next contends that the trial court erred in not granting defendant’s request for production of certain documents before it ruled on the State’s motion to dismiss the post-conviction petition. First, he requests the missing-persons report issued shortly before the 1965 murder, and the report of Officers Vass and Motzny summarizing their interview with Mrs. Del Vecchio. He claims that these reports may contain information that contradicts Officer Motzny’s testimony that Mrs. Del Vecchio did not say her son had been using drugs. Even if the documents show that Mrs. Del Vecchio told the police about the drug use, their production is not warranted, due to our ruling that the officer’s inconsistent testimony does not require a new sentencing hearing. Second, defendant requests disclosure of a memorandum an assistant State’s Attorney prepared concerning the investigation, interrogation, and confession of Del Vecchio, and “other documents” relating to Garippo’s involvement. Our analysis above shows that Garippo did not act as counsel in the 1965 murder case and the affidavits and exhibits provided by the petitioner and the State show that Garippo’s involvement was minor. Judge Garippo’s 1979 rulings were upheld on direct appeal and no bias or prejudice is established in reviewing the record of the proceedings. Therefore, there has been no substantial showing of a violation of a constitutional right and an evidentiary hearing is unwarranted. People v. Silagy (1987), 116 Ill. 2d 357, 365. Lastly, the defendant requests the police department “street files.” These files are auxiliary records of an investigation kept by police officers. A number of newspapers’ reports immediately following defendant’s arrest indicate that perhaps Mrs. Canzoneri had been partying with Del Vecchio and had consented to sex with him, and that the defendant was under the influence of narcotics. The defendant believes that the source for these articles was a supervising officer who had spoken to reporters. Defendant claims that the street files may contain information that supports his defense that he was under the influence of controlled substances at the time of his arrest and that Mrs. Canzoneri was. not raped. Bolstering this view is the original arrest sheet, which indicated the charges would include drug offenses but not sex offenses, and that the police did not preserve Mrs. Canzoneri’s nightgown or bed sheets, which most likely would have been done if rape had been suspected. As noted, a proceeding under the Post-Conviction Hearing Act is not an appeal, but is a collateral attack on the judgment. (People v. James (1986), 111 Ill. 2d 283, 290.) “The purpose of a post-conviction proceeding is to inquire into the constitutional phases of the original conviction which have not already been adjudicated” (People v. Williams (1970), 47 Ill. 2d 1, 3), and the petitioner must make a substantial showing of a violation of a constitutional right (People v. Silagy (1987), 116 Ill. 2d 357, 365). The court fails to see what constitutional rights defendant is attempting to raise. Instead, it appears that he is trying to relitigate factual issues that were or should have been litigated at the trial. Del Vecchio was aware in 1977 of these articles and attempted to impeach police officers and Mrs. Canzoneri from these reports, but was unable to do so because the police officer who allegedly was the source of the articles stated that he neither interviewed the victim nor took any notes. Therefore, a post-conviction proceeding is not the proper forum in which to raise this issue. (See Palmer v. City of Chicago (1985), 755 F. 2d 560 (street files may be obtained through a properly drafted, specific subpoena).) The judge was correct in not entering a general discovery order prior to ruling on the motion to dismiss. (See People v. Rose (1971), 48 Ill. 2d 300, 302.) Also, defendant is not correct in saying that the judge did not permit him to subpoena specific documents before ruling on the motion to dismiss. When asked whether the court’s order would include counsel’s efforts to “get by subpoena rather than by formal discovery,” the court prefaced its answer with “the court says it is up to you.” This cannot be construed to be a prohibition by the court of counsel’s use of a subpoena to procure desired documents. The defendant next contends that the prosecutor made improper remarks concerning parole during opening and closing arguments of the sentencing hearing. This same issue was raised in Del Vecchio I and defendant again relies on the two statements addressed in that opinion. (105 Ill. 2d at 435-36.) However, in the post-conviction petition, the defendant also cites to one statement made during closing argument which, in Del Vecchio I, he argued was an improper remark about the victim’s family (105 Ill. 2d at 434-35), and to one instance which has not yet been addressed. The one new remark occurred during closing argument, when the prosecution argued: “Eight years, eight years after he kills Mr. Christian-sen and does those other acts, they decide to let him go, he’s allowed to walk out, to be put on parole because he’s rehabilitated. He’s not going to do it anymore. He’s got the guards down there and Bible students in his corner back then. Let him go, he’s okay now. What’s he do when he’s on parole? He’s now on parole. He immediately, not immediately starts selling dope. MR. QUEENEY: Objection to that. MR. OBBISH: Starts selling various substances. THE COURT: He may argue. MR. OBBISH: While he’s on parole. That’s how much he respects the laws that the rest of us have to follow.” As we stated, the defendant has the burden, under the Post-Conviction Hearing Act, to establish a substantial deprivation of constitutional rights, and determinations of the trial court will not be disturbed unless manifestly erroneous. (People v. Griffin (1985), 109 Ill. 2d 293, 303.) Proceedings under the Act are not meant to allow the defendant to relitigate his case. Issues raised on direct appeal are ordinarily res judicata, and issues which could have been raised but were not are deemed waived. (People v. Burns (1979), 75 Ill. 2d 282, 290.) Though we have recognized the need to relax this rule in a post-conviction petition where fundamental fairness requires (People v. Hamby (1968), 39 Ill. 2d 290, 291), we do not believe that under these facts, fundamental fairness mandates further review of this issue. Del Vecchio I relied on sound authority, and the defendant has raised only one new allegedly improper remark and taken another statement that he earlier argued was improper but in a different context. Both could have been raised in the first appeal. In holding that the statements did not constitute reversible error, Del Vecchio I ruled that the assistant State’s Attorney accurately described the jury’s choices, and distinguished People v. Walker (1982), 91 Ill. 2d 502, where the jury clearly was persuaded by the remarks about parole. The court also ruled that Del Vecchio had not been denied a fair trial on constitutional grounds and cited California v. Ramos (1983), 463 U.S. 992, 77 L. Ed. 2d 1171, 103 S. Ct. 3446, which found no constitutional violation in accurately characterizing sentencing choices. Del Vecchio, however, argues that we should address the issue because our holding contradicted a number of earlier Illinois cases and that in People v. Brisbon (1985), 106 Ill. 2d 342, the court ruled that Ramos was not controlling and prosecutors may not urge death due to the possibility of parole. Therefore, he claims to have been treated disparately from other defendants in violation of his right to due process and equal protection and that arbitrary application of rules of law in death penalty cases violates the prohibition against cruel and unusual punishment. We must view the propriety of the prosecutor’s comments concerning parole from two different perspectives: statutory proscription and constitutional proscription. In Del Vecchio I, we analyzed the objections to the comments in light of this court’s holding in People v. Walker (1982), 91 Ill. 2d 502, and found the remarks distinguishable from those in Walker and not error. In California v. Ramos (1983), 463 U.S. 992, 1013 n.30, 77 L. Ed. 2d 1171. 1189 n.30. 103 S. Ct. 3446. 3460 n.30. the Supreme Court considered that our holding in Walker was based on our statute, which requires that the court or jury consider the aggravating and mitigating factors which are relevant to the imposition of the death penalty. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 38, par. 9 — 1(c).) In Walker, we stated that whether a defendant may, at some future time, be paroled is not a proper aggravating factor to consider in determining whether the death penalty should be imposed. (Walker, 91 Ill. 2d at 515.) Thus, the holding in Walker must be viewed as the Supreme Court viewed it, as being based on a statutory and not a constitutional limitation. In Del Vecchio I, in addition to finding the statements not improper in light of Walker, we also analyzed the remarks in light of constitutional limitations and, relying on California v. Ramos, again found that they were not improper. (105 Ill. 2d at 435-37.) Thus, both the constitutional and statutory challenges to the complained-of remarks were decided in Del Vecchio I. Defendant contends, however, that our holding in People v. Brisbon (1985), 106 Ill. 2d 342, must be viewed as overruling our holding on this point in Del Vecchio I, and as a return to the test of People v. Walker and People v. Szabo (1983), 94 Ill. 2d 327. We do not agree. We noted above that in Del Vecchio I, we subjected the complained-of remarks to the test of our holding in Walker, as well as to the constitutional test. Brisbon was also decided by applying the Walker test. The fact that different results, based on different facts in different cases, were achieved does not mean that the later case (Brisbon) overruled the former (Del Vecchio I). The rule in Del Vecchio I was not changed by Brisbon so that the rule of Del Vecchio I would only apply to Del Vecchio, as he now contends, thereby raising constitutional questions of equal protection or due process, or an eighth amendment violation. The rule applied in both Del Vecchio I and Brisbon is the same. Different results were achieved under different facts. The propriety of the remarks concerning parole that are now before us was considered, or could have been considered, in Del Vecchio I. We will not relitigate their propriety in this post-conviction action under the guise of a due process, equal protection or eighth amendment violation. The question involved is only that of the construction of our sentencing statute and is not of constitutional dimensions. See People v. Brisbon (1985), 106 Ill. 2d 342, 368. Defendant next contends that his eighth amendment rights were violated because the jury was allowed to hear statements regarding the victims’ family during both the guilt-innocence phase and the sentencing phase of his trial. This issue was raised in the direct appeal and the court held that the statements were not prejudicial. (Del Vecchio I, 105 Ill. 2d at 434-35.) Ordinarily res judicata and waiver would bar consideration of an issue which was raised or could have been raised (People v. Gaines (1984), 105 Ill. 2d 79, 87-88), but under certain circumstances, fundamental fairness dictates that we consider the issue (People v. Hamby (1968), 39 Ill. 2d 290, 291). Although we ultimately do not accept the defendant’s argument, we feel that this issue should be addressed because defendant argues that a recent United States Supreme Court opinion has changed the law applied in Del Vecchio I (Booth v. Maryland (1987), 482 U.S. 496, 96 L. Ed 2d 440, 107 S. Ct. 2529). Generally, where testimony respecting the deceased’s family “is not elicited incidentally, but is presented in such a manner as to cause the jury to believe it is material, its admission is highly prejudicial and constitutes reversible error unless an objection thereto is sustained and the jury instructed to disregard such evidence.” (People v. Bernette (1964), 30 Ill. 2d 359, 371.) However, a new trial is not required every time there is mention of a victim’s family because in certain instances that statement may be harmless. (People v. Simms (1988), 121 Ill. 2d 259, 269; People v. Free (1983), 94 Ill. 2d 378, 414-15.) This court recognizes a distinction between making the jury aware of the family left behind and cases where the prosecution has dwelt upon the deceased’s family to the point that the jury could have related that evidence to the defendant’s guilt. People v. Bernette (1964), 30 Ill. 2d 359, 371. The references which Del Vecchio claims are improper began during the opening argument of the trial when the prosecutor established the sequence of events on the night of the multiple crimes. He stated that: “On December 21st, in the afternoon hours, when Tony was alive and Karen came home after Christmas shopping, Karen and her son sat down and ate, and called a friend of their’s named Santo Falcone to go Christmas shopping with them, because two weeks before this happened, two weeks before this crime occurred, Joseph Canzoneri left her, left her to go live with another woman. And on the day of the crime, the other son Joseph Jr. was not living at this house. His bedroom, as shown in the diagram, the second bedroom, unoccupied. Joseph Jr. is an exceptional child and is in a home for special children. On that day the only people that were living in that house were Karen, who slept upstairs, and Tony, who slept in the far bottom bedroom.” The next references came during the beginning of the direct examination of Mrs. Canzoneri. The following ensued: “Q. And when you moved in, who moved into the building with you? A. My ex-husband, Joe, my son Tony, and myself, Joey. Q. What are the ages of your sons? A. Eight and seven, six. I’m sorry. Q. Which one of the sons was eight years old? A. Joey. Q. Which son was six? A. Tony.” Later, in the direct examination of Mrs. Canzoneri, she was asked: “Q. On December 22nd, 1977, was your husband, Joseph, living with you? A. No. Q. And when did he move out of your house? A. About two weeks previous to that. Q. How long had you been married to Joseph Canzoneri? A. Ten years. Q. Which of your children were living with you on December 21st and 22nd, 1977? A. Tony. Q. And where was Joseph? A. He was in a special school.” Del Vecchio claims that telling the jury that the father had left the family and that the surviving child has a learning disability was improper and that it was done solely to stir the jurors’ emotions. We do not find that a new trial is warranted based on these statements. None of these statements were objected to at trial. The prosecutor did not dwell on these facts so that the jury would give special emphasis to them or consider that evidence as material to the defendant’s guilt. Though they may have been unnecessary, they were, nonetheless, only incidental references. The remaining statements were made at the sentencing hearing. During the mitigation and aggravation stage, the prosecuting attorney argued: “Then it’s not bad enough he kills the little boy, he then goes and he rapes the little boy’s mother, devastates a second family. Wasn’t satisfied with what he did to the Christiansen family, now there’s another family, the Canzoneri family, they’re going to suffer too. Again, the mitigation you must agree that it outweighs this aggravation. MR. QUEENEY: Objection to this. THE COURT: Objection sustained, improper statement.” References were again made to the victims’ families during the closing arguments of the sentencing hearing. The prosecuting attorney stated: “Mr. Queeney said he doesn’t know how to talk about life and no words could talk about life. Well, Helen Christiansen can tell you about life, she can tell you about the life that she lost, about her husband who was taken out of her family by this man. And Karen Canzoneri can tell you about life. She can tell you about her little boy that’s no longer with her. She can tell you about how this man took the only thing she had left in her life. * * * Your children, my children, you can throw away everything else that people have, and children are the most important, and Mr. Queeney says he can’t talk about life. How about the rights of Karen Canzoneri and the rights of Angeline Adams [Tony’s grandmother], a woman who lived for that little boy, a woman who lived across the street from her grandson? Karen Canzoneri now goes through her life with that void that will never be filled. She has a right to have a just verdict.” These statements were largely unobjected to and many were not raised on direct appeal, which is an indication that counsel, both at trial and after combing the record for appeal, did not consider them violative of previous holdings of this court. We do not agree with defendant’s argument that Booth v. Maryland (1987), 482 U.S. 496, 96 L. Ed. 2d 440, 107 S. Ct. 2529, changes the law of this State and makes it improper to use any victim impact testimony at sentencing. In Booth, pursuant to a Maryland statute, during the sentencing stage a victim impact statement was read to the jury. The statement contained a description of the emotional trauma suffered by the family, the personal characteristics of the victims, and family members’ opinions and characterizations of the crimes and of the defendant. In Booth, the particular statement took almost four pages of the Supreme Court opinion to reprint. The Court ruled that admitting the statement was unconstitutional because it placed too great an emphasis on the victim and the family, instead of on the defendant and his behavior. Booth does not establish that any testimony regarding the victim or family is unconstitutional. Rather, it is similar to the view expressed by this court that if the testimony dwells on these factors, there is reversible error. (See People v. Simms (1988), 121 Ill. 2d 259.) We do not find that Booth changes Illinois law or is controlling in this situation. The testimony elicited from Mrs. Canzoneri did not dwell upon her family as victims similar to the victim impact statement in Booth, nor were the statements presented in a manner likely to appeal to the jury’s sensitivities. Unlike People v. Bernette (1964), 30 Ill. 2d 359, or People v. Hope (1986), 116 Ill. 2d 265, there were not numerous references throughout direct testimony and argument to the jury regarding the victim’s family. After reviewing Booth, we conclude that the holding in that case does not require that we grant defendant a new trial or sentencing hearing. The defendant next contends that due process was violated because he did not have fair notice that his 1965 murder conviction would later be used to make him death-eligible. First, he argues that People v. Davis (1983), 95 Ill. 2d 1, eliminated the statutory requirement of section 9 — 1(b)(3) of the Criminal Code (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 38, par. 9 — 1(b)(3)) that separate murders be intentional or premeditated to render defendant eligible for the death penalty. He argues that no jury determined that his 1965 or 1977 murders were premeditated and that it violates due process to apply the Davis ruling retroactively to his 1979 sentencing. The defendant misinterprets the ruling in Davis. The court, in Davis, only clarified the statutory language which existed in 1977. Davis did not “eliminate” anything from the statute. Rather, it reviewed the language and legislative history and concluded that the aggravating factor in section 9 — 1(b)(3) includes prior murder convictions resulting from intentional or knowing acts as well as those which are premeditated. (People v. Davis (1983), 95 Ill. 2d 1, 36; see People v. Owens (1984), 102 Ill. 2d 88, 108.) The Davis court did not, as Del Vecchio claims, render the phrase “separate premeditated acts” meaningless. Additionally, this argument could have been raised on direct appeal and failure to do so results in waiver. Next, the defendant argues that the death penalty statute does not allow a murder that occurred before its effective date to be used as a statutory aggravating factor, and that he did not have fair notice that the 1965 crime could make him death-eligible via a 1977 statute. The defendant made this argument at trial and the judge ruled against him. In Del Vecchio I, he raised a challenge on different grounds to the use of his 1965 conviction as an aggravating factor. Likewise, he could have challenged its use on this basis. Failure to do so constitutes waiver. Regardless of this waiver, the defendant, in 1965, had ample notice that the murder conviction could be used in some way against him later. Section 2 — 9(2) of the Juvenile Court Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1965, ch. 37, par. 702 — 9(2)) provided that a conviction under the act may later be used in determining the sentence to be imposed in a subsequent crime. See People v. Owens (1984), 102 Ill. 2d 88,112-13. Del Vecchio’s last basis for challenging the use of the 1965 murder conviction is that fair notice is violated by using as an aggravating factor a murder which occurred before the defendant reached age 18. The court finds it unnecessary to determine if a murder conviction occurring before the defendant reaches age 18 can be used in the eligibility stage of the sentencing hearing. This issue could have been raised on direct appeal. Furthermore, it involves a question of statutory construction and not a constitutional matter. It cannot be elevated to constitutional magnitude by claiming lack of fair notice. The death penalty statute had not been enacted at the time of the 1965 murder and there had been no construction of the statute consistent with defendant’s contention at the time of the 1979 trial. The defendant next seeks to challenge his 1965 conviction. First, he claims that the confession was involuntary, Miranda-violative, and the product of fourth amendment violations. In Del Vecchio I, we held that a voluntary plea of guilty waives all errors or irregularities in obtaining that plea that were not jurisdictional (Del Vecchio, 105 Ill. 2d at 432-33), and we decline to reconsider that holding. Second, he argues that his 1965 counsel improperly informed him that if he pleaded guilty as a juvenile he would receive a hearing prior to being transferred to an adult prison facility. Defendant contends that that view was “dead wrong” and contradicted a clear statute that a male convicted as an adult before age 17 and committed to the Youth Commission could automatically be transferred to an adult penitentiary without a hearing. Del Vecchio now claims that his guilty plea is constitutionally infirm and his 1979 death sentence should be vacated. The defendant argues that waiver should not apply in this situation because the 1979 trial counsel was not aware that Del Vecchio had been promised a hearing before transfer and was thus unable to raise the issue. Counsel explains that he was unaware of the broken promise because he had limited access to the 1965 court file, claiming that the prosecutor improperly took the file. Attached to the post-conviction petition are the affidavits of the two attorneys who represented Del Vecchio in 1979. They admit having access to the file in 1979, but claim it disappeared before they could make a meaningful review. They did subsequently obtain the file before the 1979 trial, but state they did not have time to thoroughly study it, partly because the lead attorney was on trial on another case. They requested a continuance but were denied. Though the 1979 attorneys had limited access to the file, they were still able to file three motions to suppress the 1965 confession. Also, they admit that they never spoke to Del Vecchio’s 1965 counsel. The affidavit of 1965 counsel states that he earlier litigated this very issue. In 1969, he brought a Federal action to prevent transferring Del Vecchio without a hearing. The action was dismissed for failure to exhaust State remedies. He then filed a State habeas corpus action, and the trial court ruled against him. He then drafted a petition to the supreme court to overturn the trial court ruling, but Del Vecchio dismissed him as counsel. Thus, it is clear that there were numerous occasions when this argument was previously raised, and there have been other times when it could have been raised, for example, in 1971 at the resentencing hearing. Moreover, there were other sources for this information besides the 1965 court file. We fail to see how the fact of the temporarily missing file deprived the defendant of a substantial constitutional right. Regardless of the temporarily missing file, this argument could have been raised earlier. Del Vecchio next contends that his sixth amendment right to counsel was denied when the trial court ruled that his attorney could not be present at a psychiatric examination. This issue was resolved against the defendant in People v. Larsen (1979), 74 Ill. 2d 348, and it is waived by Del Vecchio’s failure to raise it on direct appeal (People v. Silagy (1987), 116 Ill. 2d-357, 365). Defendant argues that his sixth amendment right to a jury drawn from a fair cross-section of the community was denied because prosecutors allegedly used peremptory challenges to exclude an “estimated” six black prospective jurors. Defendant gives no explanation as to why this issue was not raised on the original appeal, but is raised now for the first time nearly 10 years after the trial. Matters become more difficult to prove with the passage of time. Prosecutors and defense counsel move on to other positions and are often not available after years have passed. Holding that the defendant has waived this issue by failure to raise it on direct appeal is entirely justified at this late date. Last, defendant contends that the Illinois death penalty statute is unconstitutional because the State is not required to prove by some burden of proof that death is the appropriate penalty, or that aggravating circumstances outweigh mitigating circumstances. Res judicata bars raising this contention in the post-conviction proceeding because this issue was raised in Del Vecchio, 105 Ill. 2d at 446, and this court ruled against the defendant. That holding has been affirmed on a number of occasions (People v. Johnson (1987), 119 Ill. 2d 119, 151; People v. Perez (1985), 108 Ill. 2d 70, 96), and we will not further consider the issue here. We are aware of the opinion of the United States District Court for the Central District of Illinois, filed April 29, 1989, in the case of the United States ex rel. Silagy v. Peters (C.D. Ill. 1989), 713 F. Supp. 1246. In that case the court held the Illinois death penalty statute (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1979, ch. 38, par. 9 — 1) unconstitutional. In passing on Federal constitutional questions, State courts and lower Federal courts have the same responsibility and occupy the same position. Until the Supreme Court of the United States has spoken, State courts are not precluded from exercising their own judgments on Federal constitutional questions. Because lower Federal courts exercise no appellate jurisdiction over State courts, decisions of lower Federal courts are not conclusive on State courts, except insofar as the decision of the lower Federal court may become the law of the case. United States ex rel. Lawrence v. Woods (7th Cir. 1970), 432 F.2d 1072; see also City of Chicago v. Groffman (1977), 68 Ill. 2d 112; People v. Stansberry (1971), 47 Ill. 2d 541. For the reasons stated, we find that the circuit court of Cook County did not err in dismissing defendant’s petition for post-conviction relief. Therefore, its judgment is affirmed. We hereby direct the clerk of this court to enter an order fixing Tuesday, November 14, 1989, as the date on which the sentence of death entered by the circuit court of Cook County shall be executed. The defendant shall be executed by lethal injection in the manner provided by section 119 — 5 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 38, par. 119 — 5). A certified copy of this order shall be transmitted by the clerk of this court to the Director of Corrections, to the warden of Stateville Correctional Center, and to the warden of the institution wherein the defendant is confined. Judgment affirmed. WARD and CALVO, JJ., took no part in the consideration or decision of this case.

=== CASE 9739533 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:17:06.313699+00 ===

JUSTICE CLARK, dissenting: I must respectfully dissent because I believe that the trial court judge’s failure to recuse himself from this case violated defendant’s right to be tried and sentenced by an impartial adjudicator as provided by the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment to the United States Constitution. The majority’s decision that the trial court judge’s failure to recuse himself did not violate due process is based upon the court’s conclusion that the judge (1) “had no pecuniary interest in the matter” (129 Ill. 2d at 275), and (2) did not make any rulings which indicated that he was biased or prejudiced toward defendant (129 Ill. 2d at 276). However, as I will explain, the majority’s narrow analysis of defendant’s claim does not comport with the standards established by the United States Supreme Court for assessing whether a judge’s participation in a case violated the Federal constitutional right to due process of law. The Supreme Court has made clear that due process is violated where a judge “has a direct, personal, substantial pecuniary interest” in the case before him. (See Tumey v. Ohio (1927), 273 U.S. 510, 523, 71 L. Ed. 749, 754, 47 S. Ct. 437, 441.) However, as the majority recognizes, the Supreme Court has never indicated that such a situation is the only one which would require recusal. (See 129 Ill. 2d at 276-77.) Rather, the Supreme Court has repeatedly stated that due process requires recusal in situations where hearing the case “would offer a possible temptation to the average *** judge to *** lead him not to hold the balance nice, clear and true.” (Tumey, 273 U.S. at 532, 71 L. Ed. at 758, 47 S. Ct. at 444, quoted in Aetna Life Insurance Co. v. Lavoie (1986), 475 U.S. 813, 825, 89 L. Ed. 2d 823, 835, 106 S. Ct. 1580, 1587, and Ward v. Village of Monroeville (1972), 409 U.S. 57, 60, 34 L. Ed. 2d 267, 271, 93 S. Ct. 80, 83.) Furthermore, under the due process clause a judge must recuse himself from hearing a case not only where he is actually prejudiced, but also where his hearing the case would create even the appearance of partiality. As the Court recently explained: “The Due Process Clause ‘may sometimes bar trial by judges who have no actual bias and who would do their very best to weigh the scales of justice equally between contending parties. But to perform its high function in the best way, “justice must satisfy the appearance of justice.” ’ [In re] Murchison [(1955), 349 U.S. 133, 136, 99 L. Ed. 942, 946, 75 S. Ct. 623, 625].” Aetna Life Insurance Co., 475 U.S. at 825, 89 L. Ed. 2d at 835, 106 S. Ct. at 1587. As is apparent from the language of these Supreme Court decisions, the majority’s due process analysis should not have ended after the majority concluded that the trial court neither had a pecuniary interest in the case nor made erroneous rulings prejudicial to defendant. Instead, the court must then go on to decide whether the trial court judge’s participation in the case created the appearance of partiality. The majority’s reluctance to fully analyze defendant’s claim is apparently based upon the majority’s statement that “[Recently, the Supreme Court recognized that only under the most extreme cases would disqualification on the basis of bias or prejudice be constitutionally required.” (Emphasis added.) (129 Ill. 2d at 275.) The problem with this statement, however, is that the Supreme Court has never made such a broad recognition. Rather, what the Supreme Court stated in Aetna Life Insurance Co. is that: “We need not decide whether allegations of bias or prejudice by a judge of the type we have here would ever be sufficient under the Due Process Clause to force recusal. Certainly only in the most extreme of cases would disqualification on this basis be constitutionally required.” (Emphasis added.) (Aetna Life Insurance Co., 475 U.S. at 821, 89 L. Ed. 2d at 832, 106 S. Ct. at 1585.) The allegations being referred to by the Court in Aetna were that the judge in that case should have recused himself because he had a “general hostility towards insurance companies that were dilatory in paying claims.” (Aetna Life Insurance Co., 475 U.S. at 820, 89 L. Ed. 2d at 831, 106 S. Ct. at 1584.) The Court concluded that “allegations of bias and prejudice on this general basis, however, are insufficient to establish any constitutional violation.” (Emphasis added.) (Aetna Life Insurance Co., 475 U.S. at 821, 89 L. Ed. 2d at 832, 106 S. Ct. at 1585.) Thus, what the Supreme Court recognized was that only in rare instances would a judge be required to recuse himself because he may have a general bias which could be prejudicial to a defendant; not, as the majority believes, that the Constitution only requires recusal on the basis of bias or prejudice in “the most extreme cases.” Defendant’s allegations of bias in this case are not of the general type disparaged by the Court in Aetna. Rather, as is set forth in the majority’s opinion, defendant alleges that the trial court judge participated in the prosecution of a 1965 case in which defendant was convicted of murder. In that 1965 case, defendant, while under interrogation by a police officer and an assistant State’s Attorney, confessed that he committed the crime. The trial court judge in the present case was, at that time, chief of the Cook County State’s Attorney’s criminal division. He was also a supervisor of the assistant State’s Attorney who had taken defendant’s confession. As the assistant State’s Attorney’s supervisor, the trial court judge probably received a copy of the assistant State’s Attorney’s written report of the interrogation, investigation and confession of defendant. The trial court judge, in his former role, also agreed to expedite the indictment of defendant so that defendant, who was 16 years old at the time of the 1965 murder, could be sentenced as a youth rather than as an adult. Defendant’s 1965 confession and murder conviction both played important roles in the 1979 trial and sentencing hearing. To prevent the confession from being used to impeach defendant’s testimony and rebut his possible insanity defense, defendant moved to suppress the confession because it had been involuntary, Mirandaviolative, and the product of fourth amendment violations. For the same reasons, defendant moved that evidence of his 1965 confession and conviction not be admitted into his sentencing hearing. The trial court judge, however, did not grant either motion. While it may be true, as the majority states, that the trial court judge’s rulings on these motions were correct, or that defendant waived any argument that they were erroneous (129 Ill. 2d at 276, 293), such conclusions are not particularly relevant to the issue of whether the trial court judge’s participation in the case presented the appearance of partiality (see Aetna Life Insurance Co., 475 U.S. at 825, 89 L. Ed. 2d at 835, 106 S. Ct. at 1587; In re Murchison, 349 U.S. at 136, 99 L. Ed. at 946, 75 S. Ct. at 625). Instead, the relevant inquiry must be whether the trial court judge’s participation in defendant’s 1965 case could possibly “ ‘ “lead him not to hold the balance nice, clear and true.” ’ ” (Aetna Life Insurance Co., 475 U.S. at 825, 89 L. Ed. 2d at 835, 106 S. Ct. at 1587, quoting Ward, 409 U.S. at 60, 34 L. Ed. 2d at 271, 93 S. Ct. at 83; see also Taylor v. Hayes (1974), 418 U.S. 488, 501, 41 L. Ed. 2d 897, 909, 94 S. Ct. 2697, 2704.) In light of these principles, I conclude that the trial court judge should have recused himself from the case. My conclusion is based upon two factors. The first is that the trial court judge was a supervisor of the assistant State’s Attorney who had obtained the 1965 confession. As a supervisor, it is likely that in 1965 he received a copy of the report prepared by the assistant State’s Attorney describing the interrogation, investigation and confession of defendant. Even if, as supervisor, he had never seen the report, in these circumstances there is at least the appearance that the trial court judge would not be able to make an impartial decision regarding defendant’s motions to suppress the confession since the trial court judge (then chief of the State’s Attorney’s criminal division) supervised the assistant State’s Attorney who had actually procured the confession. The second factor which leads me to conclude that the trial court judge should have recused himself is that he is the one who in 1965 ultimately decided to expedite the indictment which allowed defendant to be sentenced as a juvenile rather than as an adult. This decision, as the majority notes, possibly allowed defendant to be released from prison earlier than if he had been sentenced as an adult, “and as a result of this early release he was able to perform the subsequent crimes.” (129 Ill. 2d at 274.) Although it may be, as the majority characterizes it, “speculatponj” (129 Ill. 2d at 273), it is not too far fetched to believe that the trial court judge may have regretted his 1965 decision to expedite the indictment. Nor is it far fetched to think that this regret would “offer a possible temptation” to the trial court judge to “not hold the balance nice, clear and true” at either the trial or the sentencing hearing. Though we need not determine whether or not this in fact happened, the mere potential is enough to require recusal. The majority attempts to bolster its conclusion that defendant’s due process rights were not violated by noting that defendant: “was tried before a jury and that he had a jury sentencing hearing. The jury made the findings that [defendant] was death-eligible and the jury determined that the aggravating factors making defendant eligible for the death sentence were present and that there were no mitigating factors sufficient to preclude the imposition of the death penalty. The judge had virtually no role in these decisions.” (129 Ill. 2d at 274.) As I read this statement, its implication is that even if the trial court judge had been prejudiced, his prejudice had no impact upon defendant’s conviction since it was the jury that made all of the factual determinations in the case. Such an assertion, however, is simply not true. Of course the jury made the factual determinations. However, the jury had to make these determinations based upon the evidence which the judge allowed into the case. Thus, the trial court judge, through his rulings as to the admissibility of defendant’s 1965 confession and conviction, certainly played a major role in the jury’s decisions. Likewise, any bias that possibly influenced the trial court judge in making these evidentiary rulings would also have influenced the jury’s decisions. The majority’s rather cursory review of defendant’s due process claim is particularly disturbing in this case since defendant’s life quite literally hangs in the balance. Where a judge has a possible bias or prejudice which could throw off this balance, the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment to the United States Constitution requires that he recuse himself. Because I believe that the trial court judge’s participation in the case presented the appearance of partiality, I would reverse and remand for a new trial and therefore respectfully dissent.

=== CASE 2220215 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:36.571037+00 ===

6 N.Y.3d 471 (2006)
846 N.E.2d 1201
813 N.Y.S.2d 691
WIEN & MALKIN LLP et al., Respondents,
v.
HELMSLEY-SPEAR, INC., Appellant.
Court of Appeals of the State of New York.
Argued January 5, 2006.
Decided February 21, 2006.
*472 Dickstein Shapiro Morin & Oshinsky LLP, New York City (Howard Graff, Deborah A. Skakel and Judith R. Cohen of *473 counsel), for appellant.
*474 Dewey Pegno & Kramarsky LLP, New York City (Thomas E.L. Dewey of counsel), and Thelen Reid & Priest LLP for respondents.
Judges CIPARICK, ROSENBLATT, GRAFFEO and R.S. SMITH concur; Chief Judge KAYE and Judge READ taking no part.
*475 OPINION OF THE COURT
G.B. SMITH, J.
In this appeal we review the Appellate Division's vacatur of an arbitration award after a remand from the Supreme Court of the United States with an instruction to reconsider in light of Citizens Bank v Alafabco, Inc. (539 US 52 [2003]). Since arbitral judgments are owed substantial deference and there was no showing that the arbitration panel manifestly disregarded the law, the award should be reinstated. The order of the Appellate Division should, therefore, be reversed.
In 1997, Wien & Malkin LLP (Wien & Malkin) attempted to oust Helmsley-Spear, Inc. (Helmsley-Spear) as managing agent of 11 New York City properties.[1] Wien & Malkin served as the representative and designee of ownership interests in these buildings, provided legal services such as drafting leases and performed administrative tasks. Helmsley-Spear was owned by *476 Irving Schneider and Alvin Schwartz, both former executives in the former Helmsley-Spear Corporation.[2] The partnerships began as a result of the late Harry Helmsley's efforts to find valuable properties and offer opportunities to others, like the late Lawrence A. Wien, to syndicate interests in the properties to passive investors.
In 1997, Peter Malkin, the current chairman of Wien & Malkin and son-in-law of the late Lawrence A. Wien, sent a request to the partners in 200 Fifth Avenue Associates (Toy Center Joint Venture), Fisk Building Associates, and Lincoln Building Associates asking that they authorize him to terminate Helmsley-Spear without cause and retain a new managing agent. In August 1997, three of the partnerships voted to remove Helmsley-Spear without cause by votes of 60% or more.[3] Helmsley-Spear obtained a stay and on September 8, 1997, Supreme Court granted Helmsley-Spear's motion to compel arbitration.
Later in September 1997, Leona Helmsley entered into a series of agreements with Irving Schneider and Alvin Schwartz, who owned one-tenth percent (.1%) of Helmsley-Spear.[4] Both Schneider and Schwartz held an option to purchase all of Helmsley-Spear's share from Helmsley Enterprises.[5] Schneider and Schwartz formed a new corporation called "HS Acquisition Corporation" or "Newco" which purchased substantially all of the assets of the original Helmsley-Spear and renamed itself "Helmsley-Spear, Inc." Newco possessed the right to manage the 11 properties. Leona Helmsley granted the new corporation *477 her irrevocable proxy to vote in favor of Helmsley-Spear's retention as managing agent of the properties, as long as Messrs. Schneider and Schwartz remained as managers of Helmsley-Spear.
During arbitration, Wien & Malkin and Peter Malkin (collectively, Wien & Malkin) sought termination of Helmsley-Spear as managing agent on both "for cause" and "without cause" grounds.[6] The matters were consolidated by the New York City office of the American Arbitration Association under its Commercial Arbitration Rules, and the panel was comprised of three distinguished arbitrators.[7] The proceedings began in June 1998. Evidentiary hearings occurred between April 1999 and June 2000, during which the parties offered approximately 1,000 exhibits each. Over 50 witnesses testified during more than 60 days of hearings.
On March 30, 2001, the arbitration panel issued a 134-page decision that denied Wien & Malkin's request to remove Helmsley-Spear as managing agent for cause and without cause. Helmsley-Spear was declared the legal and valid successor in interest to the former Helmsley-Spear Corporation and to have validly exercised the option agreement of 1970; Wien & Malkin was enjoined from contesting the validity or in any way interfering with the voting agreement between Leona Helmsley and Helmsley-Spear; and Wien & Malkin was enjoined from calling or holding a partnership meeting for the purpose of removing Helmsley-Spear as managing agent unless it followed an outlined 11-step procedure.
Helmsley-Spear then moved to confirm the award while Wien & Malkin moved to vacate it, claiming that there were many areas in which the decision was "legally in error." Supreme Court disagreed and confirmed the award on July 23, 2001. The Appellate Division concluded that since the dispute involved buildings within New York City and did not have a substantial effect on interstate commerce, the Federal Arbitration Act did not apply. *478 It unanimously affirmed the confirmation under CPLR 7511 stating:
"[T]he award must stand unless shown to be utterly arbitrary or violative of public policy. We are not empowered to vacate an award merely for errors of law or fact committed by the arbitrators. . . . [W]e conclude that the arbitration panel's findings . . . were not so arbitrary as to warrant vacatur" (300 AD2d 32, 33 [2002] [citations omitted]).
The United States Supreme Court granted certiorari and, on October 6, 2003, vacated the Appellate Division's judgment and remanded the matter for further consideration in light of the Court's holding in Citizens Bank v Alafabco, Inc. (539 US 52 [2003])[8] (Wien & Malkin LLP v Helmsley-Spear, Inc., 540 US 801 [2003]).
Upon remand, Wien & Malkin argued that the FAA was applicable to this matter, the award should be vacated because the panel incorrectly recognized the new Helmsley-Spear as a valid successor, and the voting agreement between Leona Helmsley and Messrs. Schwartz and Schneider was unenforceable. The Appellate Division reversed Supreme Court's order and vacated the challenged portion of the arbitration award (12 AD3d 65 [2004]). The Court reasoned that under the FAA, the issue was whether the award exhibited a "manifest disregard of the law" such that vacatur was warranted (id. at 66, citing Matter of Spear, Leeds & Kellogg v Bullseye Sec., 291 AD2d 255, 256 [1st Dept 2002]; Halligan v Piper Jaffray, Inc., 148 F3d 197, 204 [2d Cir 1998], cert denied 526 US 1034 [1999]). The Appellate Division relied on its own jurisprudence in Sawtelle v Waddell & Reed (304 AD2d 103, 108 [2003]), and held that the arbitration *479 panel committed clear legal error and manifestly disregarded both contract law and the applicable agreements. It reasoned that the "conduct of Leona Helmsley and defendant's principals in entering an agreement assigning Helmsley-Spear's personal services contracts to defendant was a clear violation of the well-settled legal principle that personal services contracts . . . may not be assigned without the consent of the principal" (12 AD3d at 71 [citations omitted]). It determined that the new Helmsley-Spear was not a mere "change of form" and that the panel "ignored the facts that Helmsley-Spear, Inc. had different officers, directors, shareholders, management personnel, financial structure and fewer properties under management than Helmsley-Spear" (id. at 72).
The Court also found that the arbitrators manifestly disregarded the applicable agreements by finding that Wien & Malkin was bound to retain Helmsley-Spear as managing agent due to defects in the proxy voting procedure. The Court reasoned that:
"Contrary to the findings of the arbitration panel, the partnership agreements did not provide for a particular method of solicitation of proxies for a vote to terminate the managing agents and did not establish a fiduciary duty to them. Nor was there any showing that Peter Malkin fraudulently induced the partners to give him their proxies" (id.).
Finally, the Court concluded that the arbitrators did not err by upholding Leona Helmsley's voting agreement with the new Helmsley-Spear but noted that this issue was academic in light of its conclusions that the arbitrators erred in finding the proxy solicitation process defective.
The Appellate Division granted Helmsley-Spear leave to appeal to this Court, and certified the following question: "Was the order of this Court, which reversed the judgment of Supreme Court, properly made?" For the reasons that follow, we conclude that it was not.
It is well settled that judicial review of arbitration awards is extremely limited (see Paperworkers v Misco, Inc., 484 US 29 [1987]). An arbitration award must be upheld when the arbitrator "offer[s] even a barely colorable justification for the outcome reached" (Matter of Andros Cia. Maritima, S.A. [Marc Rich & Co., A.G.], 579 F2d 691, 704 [2d Cir 1978]). Indeed, we have stated time and again that an arbitrator's award should not be vacated for errors of law and fact committed by the arbitrator *480 and the courts should not assume the role of overseers to mold the award to conform to their sense of justice (see Matter of Sprinzen [Nomberg], 46 NY2d 623, 629 [1979]; Matter of New York State Correctional Officers & Police Benevolent Assn. v State of New York, 94 NY2d 321, 326 [1999] ["A court cannot examine the merits of an arbitration award and substitute its judgment for that of the arbitrator simply because it believes its interpretation would be the better one"]).
The FAA permits vacatur of an arbitration award on four grounds which all involve fraud, corruption or misconduct on the part of arbitrators, grounds which are inapplicable to the present matter.[9] In addition to these four grounds, an award may be vacated under federal law if it exhibits a "manifest disregard of law" (Duferco Intl. Steel Trading v T Klaveness Shipping A/S, 333 F3d 383, 388 [2d Cir 2003]; Goldman v Architectural Iron Co., 306 F3d 1214, 1216 [2d Cir 2002], citing DiRussa v Dean Witter Reynolds Inc., 121 F3d 818, 821 [2d Cir 1997]).[10] But manifest disregard of law is a "severely limited" doctrine (Matter of Arbitration No. AAA13-161-0511-85 Under Grain Arbitration Rules, 867 F2d 130, 133 [2d Cir 1989]). It is a doctrine of last resort limited to the rare occurrences of apparent "egregious impropriety" on the part of the arbitrators, "where none of the provisions of the FAA apply" (Duferco, 333 F3d at *481 389). The doctrine of manifest disregard, therefore, "gives extreme deference to arbitrators" (DiRussa, 121 F3d at 821).[11] The Second Circuit has also indicated that the doctrine requires "more than a simple error in law or a failure by the arbitrators to understand or apply it; and, it is more than an erroneous interpretation of the law" (Duferco, 333 F3d at 389). We agree with that premise. To modify or vacate an award on the ground of manifest disregard of the law, a court must find "both that (1) the arbitrators knew of a governing legal principle yet refused to apply it or ignored it altogether, and (2) the law ignored by the arbitrators was well defined, explicit, and clearly applicable to the case" (Wallace v Buttar, 378 F3d 182, 189 [2d Cir 2004], quoting Banco de Seguros del Estado v Mutual Mar. Off., Inc., 344 F3d 255, 263 [2d Cir 2003]).
The Appellate Division considered three issues when it reviewed the 2001 panel award. Specifically, the Court considered whether the panel manifestly disregarded the law when it (1) concluded that Helmsley-Spear was a valid successor in interest to the former Helmsley-Spear by virtue of the 1997 agreements; (2) annulled the purported proxy vote taken by Peter Malkin to terminate Helmsley-Spear without cause at three of the buildings; and (3) upheld the voting agreement between Leona Helmsley and Messrs. Schneider and Schwartz. We address each issue in turn.
First, the Appellate Division found that the arbitrators manifestly disregarded the law in concluding that the new Helmsley-Spear should be the managing agent for the 11 properties. The arbitrators found that the new Helmsley-Spear was the valid successor in interest to the former Helmsley-Spear because it deemed Messrs. Schneider and Schwartz to have exercised the 1970 option agreement in 1997. The Appellate Division, however, found that Messrs. Schneider and Schwartz did not exercise the 1970 option agreement, and that under the *482 1997 transactions, the new Helmsley-Spear was not a successor, but an assignee.[12] Thus, the Appellate Division reasoned, the assignment of the 11 management contracts to the new Helmsley-Spear was invalid because those 11 contracts were contracts for personal services, which may not be assigned absent the principal's consent.
The Appellate Division is correct that personal services contracts generally may not be assigned absent the principal's consent (see 9 Corbin, Contracts § 865 [interim ed]; 3 Farnsworth, Contracts §§ 11.4, 11.10 [3d ed]).[13] Unlike the Appellate Division, however, we do not believe that this rule is clearly applicable to the facts of this case.
In relevant part, the panel determined:
"The parties to the 1997 transaction cast it as a purchase of the assets of the existing Helmsley-Spear corporation rather than a purchase of its stock. We are persuaded this change was merely one of form, done for tax reasons having to do with certain `parked' properties that are unrelated to the issues of this case. [Wien & Malkin has] not persuaded us that the change of form had any other consequence to the parties, to the partnerships or to Wien & Malkin."
The Appellate Division stated that the panel "erroneously conclud[ed] that Helmsley-Spear[ ] was a mere `change of form'" and "ignored the facts that Helmsley-Spear[ ] had different officers, directors, shareholders, management personnel, financial structure and fewer properties under management *483 than [the former] Helmsley-Spear" (12 AD3d at 72). Manifest disregard of the facts is not a permissible ground for vacatur of an award (Wallace v Buttar, 378 F3d at 193; Westerbeke Corp. v Daihatsu Motor Co., Ltd., 304 F3d 200, 213 [2002], citing ConnTech Dev. Co. v University of Conn. Educ. Props., Inc., 102 F3d 677, 687 [2d Cir 1996] ["holding that an erroneous factual determination is not a ground for vacating an arbitration award"]).
Whether the 1970 option agreement was exercised was a factual determination by the panel and its findings should remain undisturbed. In Paperworkers v Misco, Inc., the Supreme Court stated:
"[W]here it is contemplated that the arbitrator will determine remedies for contract violations that he finds, courts have no authority to disagree with his honest judgment in that respect. If the courts were free to intervene on these grounds, the speedy resolution of grievances by private mechanisms would be greatly undermined. . . . But as long as the arbitrator is even arguably construing or applying the contract and acting within the scope of his authority, that a court is convinced he committed serious error does not suffice to overturn his decision" (484 US 29, 38 [1987] [emphasis added]; see also Matter of Dowleyne v New York City Tr. Auth., 3 NY3d 633, 634 [2004] [reversing the Appellate Division's vacatur of an arbitration award "because it improperly substituted its factual finding for that of a majority of the arbitration panel"]).
The arbitration panel did not manifestly disregard the law when it concluded that Helmsley-Spear remained the valid managing agent after the 1997 transaction. There were several underlying contracts between Helmsley-Spear, Wien & Malkin, and their previous incarnations that would understandably lead the panel to conclude that the parties contemplated an ongoing contractual relationship with successors of Helmsley-Spear.[14] In addition, Wien & Malkin specifically contemplated that Messrs. *484 Schneider and Schwartz would one day control Helmsley-Spear because the firm drafted the 1970 option. The 1997 acquisition agreement stated, "[t]he parties acknowledge and agree that they have entered into this Agreement in implementation of the exercise of the option granted in 1970 by Harry B. Helmsley to Schneider and Schwartz to acquire the balance of the outstanding shares of [Helmsley-Spear] upon his death." While the Appellate Division indicated that the panel "ignored" the fact that the new Helmsley-Spear's characteristics differed from the former Helmsley-Spear, the panel found that the change in the company's form was merely a "technical matter" and that Wien & Malkin failed to prove that "the change of form had any other consequence to the parties." In this regard, the Appellate Division improperly disturbed the panel's finding that the change in form was not consequential (see Wallace, 378 F3d at 193; Westerbeke, 304 F3d at 213 ["Under the manifest disregard standard . . . the governing law must clearly apply to the facts of the case, as those facts have been determined by the arbitrator"]).
Accordingly, even if the property management agreements constituted unassignable personal services contracts, the arbitration panel did not manifestly disregard the law because its conclusion, that Helmsley-Spear remained the managing agent as the valid successor in interest to the former Helmsley-Spear, was more than "barely colorable" (Wallace, 378 F3d at 190 [emphasis deleted]).
Even if the law of assignment of personal services contracts was clearly applicable, there was no showing that the arbitrators knew they were disregarding the law by naming Helmsley-Spear a valid successor in interest. The Appellate Division did not address the other half of the manifest disregard standard: that "the arbitrators knew of a governing legal principle yet refused to apply it or ignored it altogether" (Wallace, 378 F3d at 189). "Explicit rejection of governing law provides the strongest evidentiary basis for a finding that the arbitrator acted with the requisite intent" (Westerbeke, 304 F3d at 217). There is no explicit evidence in the record that any of the arbitrators believed that contractual assignment law applied. Nor is there any deliberateness or willfulness exhibited within the award that shows the arbitrators' intent to flout the law. The arbitrators' reasoningthat the option agreement was exerciseddoes not "strain[ ] credulity" (id. at 218). Therefore, the panel's conclusion regarding the 1997 transaction between *485 Leona Helmsley and Messrs. Schneider and Schwartz was not a manifest disregard of law. Thus, the Appellate Division erred in vacating that portion of the award.
Next, the Appellate Division held that the arbitration panel manifestly disregarded the law by voiding the purported proxy vote conducted by Peter Malkin to terminate Helmsley-Spear's services without cause at three of the partnerships. As the Appellate Division explained:
"Contrary to the findings of the arbitration panel, the partnership agreements did not provide for a particular method of solicitation of proxies for a vote to terminate the managing agents and did not establish a fiduciary duty to them. Nor was there any showing that Peter Malkin fraudulently induced the partners to give him their proxies" (12 AD3d at 72).
In Westerbeke, the Second Circuit stated that vacatur on the basis of manifest disregard of a contract is appropriate only where "the arbitral award contradicts an express and unambiguous term of the contract or if the award so far departs from the terms of the agreement that it is not even arguably derived from the contract" (304 F3d at 222). Here, the arbitral award does not contradict any express and unambiguous terms of the contracts. The partnership agreements provided that the partners could terminate Helmsley-Spear without cause "by the written vote of parties representing at least [50% or 60%] of the ownership of the assets of the joint venture." In annulling the proxy vote, the arbitration panel found that Malkin's solicitation of the proxies "was not preceded or accompanied by any disclosure at all" and that he failed to obtain "an informed vote of the general partners." It was within the panel's discretion to conclude that certain procedures needed to be put in place to ensure an informed vote. The panel, therefore, did not manifestly disregard the law in annulling the proxy votes.
The final issue is whether the voting agreement between Leona Helmsley and Messrs. Schneider and Schwartz was valid. The Appellate Division reasoned that the voting agreement did not transfer Leona Helmsley's partnership interest, "but merely made an agreement to vote for the retention of Newco as managing agent, a vote she was entitled to cast with or without the agreement" (12 AD3d at 73). Ultimately, the Appellate Division termed this issue "academic" (id.).
*486 Wien & Malkin argues that the transfer of a partner's management rights to a nonpartner is unlawful because it interferes with administration of the partnership (citing Rapoport v 55 Perry Co., 50 AD2d 54, 57 [1st Dept 1975]). Wien & Malkin posits that the clearly applicable laws are Partnership Law § 40 (7) and § 53 (1).[15] While it is clear that the affairs of partners should be managed by partners, Leona Helmsley's agreement involved "a vote she was entitled to cast" in whatever manner she chose. Therefore, we agree with the lower court's reasoning that the arbitrators did not manifestly disregard the law by concluding Mrs. Helmsley's actions did not violate state partnership law. The panel reasoned that there was no claim that Helmsley-Spear sought to become a partner, only that a partner agreed to vote on a specific limited issue, and that invalidating the voting agreement would undermine the option agreement, which "further[ed] the interests of the partnership and the continuity of its business." This analysis shows no evidence of the panel's intent to disregard the law. Therefore, its award on this matter will also stand.
Accordingly, the order of the Appellate Division should be reversed, with costs, and the judgment of Supreme Court, New York County, reinstated. The certified question should not be answered upon the ground that it is unnecessary.
Order reversed, etc.
NOTES
[1]  This case involves the operating entity tier of eight properties and three partnerships with single tiers which control three other properties within Manhattan. The buildings are the Empire State Building, the Lincoln Building at 60 East 42nd Street, the Fisk Building at 250 West 57th Street, the Toy Building at 200 Fifth Avenue and 1107 Broadway, 112 West 34th Street, 1333 Broadway, 1350 Broadway, 1359 Broadway, 1400 Broadway, and 501 Seventh Avenue. 500-512 Seventh Avenue was sold during the course of arbitration.
[2]  Leona Helmsley was originally a party in this matter until December 1997 when she settled with Wien & Malkin. Mrs. Helmsley was a principal of Helmsley-Spear and the sole beneficiary of her husband's interests in the partnerships at issue. Alvin Schwartz died in 2001.
[3]  Partners representing a 69.16667% interest in the Toy Center Joint Venture, 60% interest in Fisk Building Associates, and 69.653417% interest in Lincoln Building Associates granted Mr. Malkin the authority to vote their interests and terminate Helmsley-Spear as managing agent.
[4]  At the time, Leona Helmsley's company, Helmsley Enterprises, owned 99.9% of Helmsley-Spear.
[5]  The option, originated in 1970, provided:
"This agreement shall be binding upon the heirs and legal representatives of the individual parties and upon the successors and assigns of HELMSLEY ENTERPRISES, INC. and HELMSLEY-SPEAR, INC. The rights of SCHWARTZ and SCHNEIDER hereunder are personal to each of them and to the survivor of them, and are not transferable by both or either by operation of law or otherwise."
[6]  Wien & Malkin originally commenced two separate arbitrations: one, on behalf of all 11 partnerships to terminate Helmsley-Spear as the exclusive managing and leasing agent for cause and two, on behalf of three partnerships (Lincoln Building Associates, Fisk Building Associates, and 200 Fifth Avenue Associates) to terminate Helmsley-Spear without cause. These actions were ultimately consolidated.
[7]  The arbitrators were Nicholas deB. Katzenbach, a former United States Attorney General and Under Secretary of State, William L.D. Barrett and John M. Wilkinson.
[8]  In Citizens Bank v Alafabco, Inc., the Supreme Court held that the Federal Arbitration Act (FAA) encompasses a wider range of transactions than those actually "in commerce" (539 US at 56). The FAA states, in part:
"A written provision in any maritime transaction or contract evidencing a transaction involving commerce to settle by arbitration a controversy thereafter arising out of such contract or transaction, or the refusal to perform the whole or any part thereof, or an agreement in writing to submit to arbitration an existing controversy arising out of such a contract, transaction, or refusal, shall be valid, irrevocable, and enforceable, save upon such grounds as exist at law or in equity for the revocation of any contract." (9 USC § 2.)
The Supreme Court's remand, therefore, meant that if the subject matter of an arbitration merely affected interstate commerce, the FAA would apply.
[9]  The FAA states, in part:
"In any of the following cases the United States court in and for the district wherein the award was made may make an order vacating the award upon the application of any party to the arbitration 
"(1) where the award was procured by corruption, fraud, or undue means;
"(2) where there was evident partiality or corruption in the arbitrators, or either of them;
"(3) where the arbitrators were guilty of misconduct in refusing to postpone the hearing, upon sufficient cause shown, or in refusing to hear evidence pertinent and material to the controversy; or of any other misbehavior by which the rights of any party have been prejudiced; or
"(4) where the arbitrators exceeded their powers, or so imperfectly executed them that a mutual, final, and definite award upon the subject matter submitted was not made" (9 USC § 10 [a]).
[10]  The term "manifest disregard of law" originated in dicta within Wilko v Swan (346 US 427, 436-437 [1953]), where Justice Reed wrote, "the interpretations of the law by the arbitrators in contrast to manifest disregard are not subject, in the federal courts, to judicial review for error in interpretation."
[11]  Vacatur on the ground of manifest disregard of law is rare (see Duferco, 333 F3d at 389 [stating that since 1960 the Second Circuit has vacated some part or all of an arbitral award for manifest disregard in only four out of 48 cases: Halligan v Piper Jaffray, Inc., 148 F3d 197 (2d Cir 1998); New York Tel. Co. v Communications Workers of Am. Local 1100, AFL-CIO Dist. One, 256 F3d 89 (2d Cir 2001); Fahnestock & Co., Inc. v Waltman, 935 F2d 512 (2d Cir 1991); and Perma-Line Corp. of Am. v Sign Pictorial & Display Union, Local 230, Intl. Bhd. of Painters & Allied Trades, AFL-CIO, 639 F2d 890 (2d Cir 1981)]). These cases, excepting Halligan, all "involve[] . . . arbitral decision[s] that exceed[] the legal powers of the arbitrators" (id.), an issue not presented in the current case.
[12]  A successor in interest is "[o]ne who follows another in ownership or control of property" and "retains the same rights as the original owner, with no change in substance" (Black's Law Dictionary 1446 [7th ed 1999]). An assignee is "[o]ne to whom property rights or powers are transferred by another" and "[c]ourts recognize the protean nature of the term and are therefore often forced to look to the intent of the assignor and assignee in making the assignment" (Black's Law Dictionary 114 [7th ed 1999]).
[13]  Helmsley-Spear argues that these were not personal services contracts, and that even if they were, New York law provides an exception to that general rule where there are no words restraining assignment and "[t]he matter of the contract involved no personal relation or confidence between the parties, or exercise of personal skill or science, for the contractor was a corporation and its work was necessarily to be done through agents or servants" (New England Iron Co. v Gilbert [Metropolitan] El. R.R. Co., 91 NY 153, 167 [1883]). Because we hold that the arbitration panel was justified in reaching its conclusion based on the grounds it stated, we do not need to reach this issue.
[14]  For example, the partnership agreement for the Empire State Building Company stated, "Helmsley-Spear, Inc. or its successor is named as the managing agent" and the 1960 modification agreement for 1359 Broadway Associates provided for voting to terminate Helmsley-Spear "in the event of the death of Harry B. Helmsley or his retirement from active participation in the conduct of the business of Helmsley-Spear, Inc. or its successors."
[15]  Partnership Law § 40 (7) states, "No person can become a member of a partnership without the consent of all the partners." Partnership Law § 53 (1) states:
"A conveyance by a partner of his interest in the partnership does not of itself dissolve the partnership, nor, as against the other partners in the absence of agreement, entitle the assignee, during the continuance of the partnership, to interfere in the management or administration of the partnership business or affairs, or to require any information or account of partnership transactions, or to inspect the partnership books; but it merely entitles the assignee to receive in accordance with his contract the profits to which the assigning partner would otherwise be entitled."

=== CASE 9739538 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:17:12.575798+00 ===

OPINION OF THE COURT
Chief Judge Kaye.
The People ask us to extend the “confirmatory identification” exception derived from People v Wharton (74 NY2d 921 [1989]) to situations where a police officer’s initial encounter with a suspect and subsequent identification of that suspect are temporally related, such that the two might be considered part of a single police procedure. To do so, however, would run afoul of CPL 710.30. Moreover, such an exception would eliminate the protections offered by a Wade hearing even when the initial police viewing—albeit part of a single police procedure—was fleeting, unreliable and susceptible of misidentification.
The Facts
On November 11, 2000, at 6:05 p.m., Michael Todd was in his Manhattan apartment when he noticed someone on the fire escape of the building across the courtyard. Although the sun had set, there were lights in the courtyard and Todd used his binoculars to take a closer look. Todd saw someone he later identified as Black or Hispanic, wearing a red sweater or sweatshirt, dark pants and a hat, but he was unable to make out the details of the individual’s face. After seeing the person attempt to open several windows, Todd called 911.
Officers Cremin, Sandoval, O’Boyle and Brennan responded to the radio call of a burglary in progress, involving a male Black or Hispanic. Entering the courtyard, they heard Todd direct them to the fire escape. Eventually, at least two of the officers saw a person crouching on the fire escape several floors up and shone their flashlights on him. Officer Cremin told the individual to come down but he instead ran up the fire escape toward the roof. Officer O’Boyle was able to observe only the individual’s clothing. Officer Cremin, however, later testified that he was able to see the individual’s face—a male Hispanic with facial hair—as well as his dark jacket and pants when the man, running to the roof, stopped for two to four seconds on the fourth or fifth story fire escape (some 40 to 50 feet up) and looked down. Officer Cremin radioed a description to his fellow officers but did not mention facial hair.
Several officers made it to the roof but the man was already gone. From the roof, they saw an individual wearing a black *430jacket and dark pants in a small alley adjacent to the building. One of the officers ordered the man to stop but he ran from the alley. Officer Brennan sent a radio call that a male Hispanic dressed in black was running north on Broadway toward Dyckman Street. Auxiliary Police Sergeant Escoto, who happened to be working in the area that day, heard the radio transmission and spotted defendant, wearing dark pants, a red shirt and black jacket, on Dyckman Street running east toward Broadway. When Escoto approached defendant, defendant was out of breath and sweating. Other officers quickly arrived and defendant was taken into custody.
One of the officers radioed for another officer to come make an identification. Although Officer Cremin was unsure whether he had heard this transmission, he arrived at the scene where defendant was being held, after having searched for the suspect in a subway station and spoken with a possible witness inside a store. Approximately 30 minutes had elapsed since the initial 911 call. Officer Cremin observed defendant sweating, noticed his rapid heartbeat and identified him as the man he had seen on the fire escape. Following defendant’s arrest, the prosecution made voluntary disclosures but failed to mention a pretrial identification and served no CPL 710.30 (1) (b) notice. Defendant moved to preclude any identification testimony based on the lack of notice.
During defendant’s pretrial Huntley hearing—centered on possible suppression of statements not at issue here—Officer Cremin testified about his street identification and also made an in-court identification of defendant. After the hearing, defendant argued that both the out-of-court and in-court identifications should be precluded due to the lack of CPL 710.30 notice. The court, however, found that no notice was required and permitted Officer Cremin to testify at trial about his out-of-court identification and to identify defendant as the individual he had observed on the fire escape. Officer Cremin was the only witness to identify defendant as the individual on the fire escape.
Defendant was convicted of two counts of attempted second-degree burglary. The Appellate Division affirmed the conviction, holding that Officer Cremin’s identification “constituted a confirmatory identification that was exempt from the notice and hearing requirements of CPL article 710.” We now reverse and order a new trial.
*431The Applicable Law
CPL 710.30 could not be clearer. The Legislature has prescribed that, within 15 days of arraignment, the prosecution must serve upon the defendant notice of its intention to introduce at trial “testimony regarding an observation of the defendant either at the time or place of the commission of the offense or upon some other occasion relevant to the case, to be given by a witness who has previously identified him as such” (CPL 710.30 [1] [b]). Upon the service of notice, “the defendant must be accorded reasonable opportunity to move before trial, pursuant to subdivision one of section 710.40, to suppress” the identification (CPL 710.30 [2]). If notice is not given, the prosecution will be precluded from introducing such evidence at trial, unless (1) it is permitted to serve a late notice for good cause shown, or (2) the defendant has moved to suppress the identification. testimony and the motion is denied (see CPL 710.30 [2], [3]). Neither of these exceptions is relevant here.
CPL 710.30 underscores and facilitates the defendant’s right, prior to trial, to test the reliability of any out-of-court identifications that the People intend to introduce. The statutory scheme ensures that the identifications are not the product of undue suggestiveness, and lessens the possibility of misidentification (see People v Rodriguez, 79 NY2d 445, 449 [1992]; People v Newball, 76 NY2d 587, 590-591 [1990]). The statutory mandate is plain and the procedure simple: the People serve notice, the defendant moves to suppress and the court holds a Wade hearing to consider the suppression motion. A court may summarily deny a suppression motion without a hearing only if “[t]he motion papers do not allege a ground constituting [a] legal basis for the motion” (CPL 710.60 [3] [a]). Thus, once the People serve notice that they intend to introduce identification testimony, the defendant may choose to respond with a motion to suppress that testimony and, so long as the motion alleges undue suggestiveness, the defendant is generally entitled to a Wade hearing.
We have recognized, however, two instances when, as a matter of law, the identification at issue could not be the product of undue suggestiveness. Under such circumstances, the defendant is not entitled to a Wade hearing and thus the People are not obligated to provide notice pursuant to CPL 710.30 (1) (b). This so-called “confirmatory identification” exception carries significant consequences and is therefore limited to the scenarios set forth in People v Wharton and People v Rodriguez, where there *432is no risk of misidentification. As we noted in Rodriguez, a court may summarily deny a Wade hearing (and hence no CPL 710.30 notice would be required) where the court concludes that, as a matter of law, the identifying, civilian witness knew the “defendant so well that no amount of police suggestiveness could possibly taint the identification” (79 NY2d at 453).
Here, we are concerned only with the Wharton scenario. In Wharton, an experienced undercover officer observed the defendant face-to-face during a planned buy-and-bust operation. The officer then radioed his backup team with a description of the defendant, who was immediately arrested. As planned, within five minutes of the arrest, the purchasing officer drove past the defendant specifically for the purpose of identifying him, and then again identified him a few hours later at the police station.
Under such circumstances, we held that the defendant was not entitled to a Wade hearing (and thus would not be entitled to CPL 710.30 notice) to test the officer’s identification, reasoning that
“[t]he viewing by this trained undercover narcotics officer occurred at a place and time sufficiently connected and contemporaneous to the arrest itself as to constitute the ordinary and proper completion of an integral police procedure. Additionally, as we have observed in this kind of situation, it lent assurance that an innocent person was not being detained by reason of a mistaken arrest. The undercover officer’s participation in the criminal apprehension operation at issue was planned, and he was experienced and expected to observe carefully the defendant for purposes of later identification and for completion of his official duties” (79 NY2d at 922-923 [citations omitted]).
We further stated that there is no “categorical rule exempting from requested Wade hearings confirmatory identifications by police officers by merely labeling them as such. Where the nature and circumstances of the encounter and identification may warrant, a hearing should and undoubtedly will be held” {id. at 923 [citation omitted]).
Thus, the quality of the officer’s initial viewing must be a critical factor in any Wharton-type analysis. The risk of undue suggestiveness is obviated only when the identifying officer’s observation of the defendant is so clear that the identification could not be mistaken. When there is a risk that the quality of *433the initial observation has eroded over time, we have consistently held that police identifications do not enjoy any exemption from the statutory notice and hearing requirements (see People v Mato, 83 NY2d 406, 410-411 [1994]; Newball, 76 NY2d at 591-592; People v Gordon, 76 NY2d 595 [1990]). Indeed, in Gordon we made clear that
“ [c] omprehensive analysis, not superficial categorization, ultimately governs. . . . Misidentifications should be carefully guarded against lest innocent persons be swept into unlawful arrests and convictions. Trained and perhaps well-intentioned police officers may too easily fall prey to the pressures and official routinization of depersonalized identifications, which could also lead to unacceptable injustices. Showup evidence must be eschewed and, at the very least, subjected to Wade hearings in these circumstances to guard against these dangers, even for in-court identifications” (Gordon, 76 NY2d at 601).
Here, we cannot conclude that the circumstances of Officer Cremin’s initial viewing were such that, as a matter of law, the subsequent identification could not have been the product of undue suggestiveness. Indeed, the initial encounter—at night, while defendant stopped for a few seconds on a fire escape some 40 to 50 feet above the ground—stands in stark contrast to the face-to-face viewing in Wharton. Moreover, this was not a situation where the officer was placed on the scene specifically to make an identification, and was therefore focused on identifying the suspect to a backup team. Although we do not suggest that this identification in fact resulted from any impropriety, that is not the test. Indeed, that is the very determination requiring a Wade hearing.
The People were required to serve CPL 710.30 (1) (b) notice. To conclude otherwise directly contravenes the simple procedure that has been mandated by the Legislature and would permit the People to avoid their statutory obligation merely because a police officer’s initial viewing of a suspect and a subsequent identification might be temporally related. Nor will we draw the courts into the countless factual disputes that such an exception portends.
Defendant’s remaining contention regarding New York’s persistent violent felony offender statute is without merit.
*434Accordingly, the order of the Appellate Division should be reversed, defendant’s motion to preclude identification testimony granted and a new trial ordered.

=== CASE 9739539 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:17:12.58017+00 ===

R.S. Smith, J. (dissenting).
I dissent, because I think that requiring a Wade hearing in cases like this one, where the chance that the hearing will lead to the suppression of evidence is vanishingly small, is a waste of time and puts an unjustified burden on the criminal justice system.
The purpose of a Wade hearing is to decide whether a pretrial identification of the defendant violated the defendant’s constitutional rights and, if so, what the remedy should be (see United States v Wade, 388 US 218, 242 [1967]). In cases where a police officer who observed a crime identified the defendant some minutes or hours later, no court as far as I know has ever even reached the second question. Neither party has cited, the majority does not cite, and I have not been able to find any case in which any court held that an identification of this type violated a defendant’s constitutional rights.
This is not surprising, because, when a police officer has observed a crime, and a suspect is arrested shortly afterwards, getting the officer to look at the suspect as soon as possible is not only constitutionally permissible; it is a very good idea. The best way to find out whether the police have arrested the right person or not is to ask the officer who saw the event, and to ask quickly while the offender’s appearance is fresh in the officer’s mind. This procedure greatly increases the likelihood that people arrested by mistake will be set free at once, and that guilty people will be identified correctly. In this case, as the majority points out, the officer’s view of the burglar at the time of the crime was imperfect, and so a mistake in identification was possible—but delaying the postarrest identification would have increased the possibility. It would not have made sense to prevent Officer Cremin from seeing defendant until a lawyer could be found and a lineup arranged, and defendant does not argue that either counsel or a lineup was required here. (See State v Medley, 11 Wash App 491, 499, 524 P2d 466, 471 [1974] [“It is patently frivolous to contend that a law enforcement officer whose pursuit of criminal suspects is interrupted may not, a short time later, identify the suspects as the ones whose criminal conduct he has previously observed”].)
But defendant does argue, and the majority holds, that he was entitled to a Wade hearing to determine whether Officer *435Cremin’s identification of him was so tainted by suggestiveness that it deprived him of due process. It is theoretically possible that a due process violation could occur in such an encounter, but the possibility is remote. In People v Wharton (74 NY2d 921, 922-923 [1989]), we explained that a trained police officer’s identification of a defendant “at a place and time sufficiently connected and contemporaneous to the arrest itself as to constitute the ordinary and proper completion of an integral police procedure” was not the sort of event “ordinarily burdened or compromised by forbidden suggestiveness, warranting a lineup procedure or Wade hearing.” We pointed out in Wharton that such an observation did not entail “the kind of per se suggestive or improper bolstering present in show-up identifications by civilian witnesses” (id. at 923). The difference between police officers and civilians is significant here. An officer is much less likely than a civilian to be swayed by the assumption that a suspect who is in police custody must be guilty (cf. Wade, 388 US at 234).
In short, I think the procedure followed here was so obviously a desirable one, and the risk of suggestiveness so small, that here, as in Wharton, a Wade hearing was unnecessary. Several Appellate Division cases agree (see People v Suleman, 262 AD2d 337 [2d Dept 1999]; People v Campbell, 225 AD2d 1021 [4th Dept 1996]; People v James, 220 AD2d 370 [1st Dept 1995]; People v Starr, 221 AD2d 488 [2d Dept 1995]).
The majority limits Wharton to the situation where the officer’s “identification could not be mistaken” (majority op at 432). But Wharton does not say or imply that it is so limited, and logic does not support the limitation. The issue to be decided at a Wade hearing is not whether the officer made a mistake; that is for the jury to decide at trial. The issue is whether the postarrest identification was unduly suggestive—i.e., whether the circumstances of the identification increased the risk that the officer might err. A prompt postarrest viewing of a suspect by a police officer who saw the crime is virtually guaranteed to diminish the risk of error, not increase it.
The majority relies heavily on the text of CPL 710.30 (1) (b), which, it is true, makes no express exceptions to the requirement that the prosecution give notice when it intends to offer at trial “testimony regarding an observation of the defendant . . . by a witness who has previously identified him.” But we have already held—in Wharton and in People v Rodriguez (79 NY2d 445 [1992])—that exceptions do exist. Wharton and Rodriguez *436both hold, that there are cases where no Wade hearing is necessary, and that in those cases no notice under CPL 710.30 is necessary either. The question here is how the Wharton exception should be defined. I think the majority defines it too narrowly, thus making the system more complicated and cumbersome than it needs to be, and adding unnecessarily to the number of cases in which an offender walks free because police or prosecutors have slipped up in complying with a procedural rule.
Judges G.B. Smith, Ciparick, Rosenblatt, Graffeo and Read concur with Chief Judge Kaye; Judge R.S. Smith dissents in a separate opinion.
Order reversed, etc.

=== CASE 9739540 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:17:12.837768+00 ===

*342OPINION
VAIDIK, Judge.
Case Summary
Mark Collier appeals his conviction for the attempted murder of his estranged wife. Specifically, he argues that his conduct did not constitute a substantial step toward commission of the crime of murder, as required by Indiana's attempt statute, but was instead mere preparation. We agree, and therefore we reverse Collier's conviction for attempted murder.1
Facts and Procedural History
Collier married his wife, Naney, on May 24, 1986. Nancy separated from Collier and moved out of their home on March 22, 20083. On March 24, 2008, Nancy obtained an Ex Parte Order for Protection in which Collier was ordered to stay away from Nancy's place of employment, Cameron Hospital in Angola, Indiana. Nancy filed for divorce on April 8, 2008.
On April 24, 2003, Naney was working the 2:80-10:30 p.m. shift at the hospital. That day, Collier went to the home of his neighbor, Charles Cameron, at approximately 3:00 p.m. According to Cameron, Collier was upset because "he thought he was gonna lose his home because him and his wife were gettin' divorced." T'r. p. 170. Collier told Cameron that "he was gonna kill his wife and himself" and then went home. Id. Cameron thought Collier "was just talking" because Collier had said similar things before but "had never actually done anything." Id. at 171.
At approximately 5:80 p.m., Collier returned to Cameron's home and said, "Tonight's the night." Id. at 172. As the two walked back to Collier's house, Collier again told Cameron that he was going to kill his wife and himself. Onee back in Collier's house, each of them drank a beer and Collier eventually "dozed off in his chair." Id. Cameron "thought it was over" and went back home. Id. At some point during the day, Cameron called Charter Beacon, Northeastern Center, and Collier's ex-boss because he thought Collier needed psychiatric help.2
Collier went to Cameron's house again at 8:45 p.m. and told Cameron that he wanted to talk to him. The two walked back to Collier's house and each of them drank another beer. Collier took Cameron upstairs, showed him where the cat litter boxes and cats were, and told him that he could let the cats outside or take them to a shelter. Collier then showed Cameron where the dog food was, asked him to feed his dog, and gave him spare keys to his house and his pickup. Cameron says that Collier then went into his bedroom and "started prayin', you know, telling-saying, 'God, forgive me for what I'm gonna do."' Id. at 178. Collier "IsItarted kinda eryin'. Then he ... started kinda chuckling." Id. He then came out of his room, hugged Cameron, and told him, "Tonight's the night. I'm gonna do it." Id. Collier collected an ice pick, a box cutter, and a pair of binoculars and said, "I'm gonna stab her in the effin' heart twice. I'm gonna cut her effin' throat." Id. Collier also said that he would ram Nancy with his pickup. Id. at 174. Collier *343left in his pickup at approximately 9:00 p.m. and headed towards Angola.
A few minutes after Collier left, Cameron himself left to drive to work. During the drive, he saw Collier driving back toward his house and away from Angola. Sometime between 9:80 and 10:00 p.m., Collier arrived at the house of another of his neighbors, Billy Fansler. Fansler says that Collier told her that "he was going to end it and he had had enough." Id. at 198. Collier also told Fansler "to tell [her] husband thank you and tell [her] children God bless them{[.]" Id. When Collier was at Fansler's house, "he looked kind of wobbly," "he wasn't quite steady on his feet," "he kinda slurred [his speech] a little," and he was depressed and "[mlaybe a little angry[.]" Id. at 201-08.
After Collier left, Fansler called Cameron's wife, who told her that Cameron had planned to speak with the police onee he reached Hamilton, Indiana, on his way to work. Indeed, Cameron had already stopped and spoken with a police officer, Deputy Marshall Jeremy Warner of the Hamilton Police Department. Cameron says that he told Deputy Warner that Collier was planning to kill Naney and himself. Deputy Warner, on the other hand, says that Cameron told him only that Collier was planning to kill himself. After speaking with Cameron, Deputy Warner called the Steuben County Sheriffs Department. Deputy Warner and officers from the Steuben County Sheriff's Department then went to Collier's house to try to find him. Fansler went out and explained to the officers that Collier had been at her house but had just left in his pickup and was not at his home.
A friend of Nancy called her at the hospital and told her that the police were searching for Collier. That prompted Naney to phone the police, who told her to stay in the hospital until she heard otherwise. At approximately 10:40 p.m., Officer Sandy Justice and Officer Robert Cunningham of the Angola Police Department received a radio dispatch to attempt to locate Collier. Shortly thereafter, Officer Justice and Officer Cunningham arrived at the hospital and spotted Collier's pickup. The pickup was backed into a parking space in the last row of the parking lot across the street from the emergency area of the hospital so that Collier would have been able to see the emergency room entrance/exit. This door was the only exit available to those leaving the hospital after 10:00 p.m.3
When the officers approached Collier's vehicle, they observed that the vehicle was off, the lights were off, and Collier was inside asleep or passed out. The officers opened the doors of the vehicle and told Collier to exit. It was not until the officers opened the doors that Collier awoke. Once Collier was out of the vehicle, the officers noticed that he was intoxicated and took him into custody. They then searched the interior of the pickup and found an ice pick, a box cutter, a pair of binoculars, and an open container of beer that was partially full. The officers explained to Collier that they were arresting him for invasion of privacy for violating the terms of the protective order and also for public intoxication.
Eventually, however, the State charged Collier with Attempted Murder, a Class A felony.4 A jury trial was held October 27 *344and 28, 2004, at the conclusion of which the jury found Collier guilty. On February 28, 2005, the trial court sentenced Collier to the presumptive sentence of thirty years and suspended five of those years, for a total executed prison term of twenty-five years to be followed by five years of probation. Collier now appeals.
Discussion and Decision
On appeal, Collier argues that the evidence is insufficient to support his conviction for attempted murder. "Upon a challenge to the sufficiency of evidence to support a conviction, a reviewing court does not reweigh the evidence or judge the credibility of the witnesses, and respects the jury's exclusive province to weigh conflicting evidence." McHenry v. State, 820 N.E.2d 124, 126 (Ind.2005) (internal quotations omitted). We must consider only the probative evidence and reasonable inferences supporting the verdict. Id. We must affirm if the probative evidence and reasonable inferences drawn from the evidence could have allowed a reasonable trier of fact to find the defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. Id. "To establish attempted murder, the State must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that (1) the defendant acted with the specific intent to kill; and (2) the defendant engaged in conduct constituting a substantial step toward commission of the crime" of murder. Osborne v. State, 754 N.E.2d 916, 924 (Ind.2001) (citing Mitchem v. State, 685 N.E.2d 671, 676 (Ind.1997)); see also Ind.Code § 35-41-5-1; Ind.Code § 35-42-1-1. Collier contends that his conduct on the day in question did not, as a matter of law, constitute "a substantial step toward commission of the crime" of murder. We must agree.
We have said that a "substantial step" for purposes of the attempt statute is any overt act beyond mere preparation and in furtherance of intent to commit an offense. Asghar v. State, 698 N.E.2d 879, 883 (Ind.Ct.App.1998), reh'g denied, trans. denied. Whether a defendant has taken a substantial step toward the commission of a crime is generally a question of fact to be decided by the trier of fact based on all the particular circumstances of the case. Washington v. State, 517 N.E.2d 77, 79 (Ind.1987); see also Asghar, 698 N.E.2d 879 at 883 (citing Williams v. State, 685 N.E.2d 730, 735 (Ind.Ct.App.1997)). In making this determination, the focus is on what acts have been completed, not what remains to be done. Jackson v. State, 683 N.E.2d 560, 566 (Ind.1997). The completed acts must be strongly corroborative of the firmness of the defendant's criminal intent. Mitchem, 685 N.E.2d at 676. Stated differently, the liability of the defendant turns on his purpose as manifested through his conduct. Zickefoose v. State, 270 Ind. 618, 628, 388 N.E.2d 507, 510 (1979). Our Supreme Court has described the substantial step requirement as a "minimal one." State v. Van Cleave, 674 N.E.2d 1293, 1304 (Ind.1996). How conduct can simultaneously be described as both "substantial" and "minimal" is the dilemma with which we grapple.
Collier acknowledges that the jury could have reasonably found each of the facts alleged in the amended charging information, to wit: (1) he was found in the parking lot at Naney's place of employment, in a position from which he could see the door Naney would use to exit the building; (2) when he was found he had in his possession an ice pick, a box cutter, and binoe-ulars; (@) before he was found he had made a statement that he was going to wait for Naney to come out of work and run her over with his pickup, stab her in *345the heart, and cut her throat. Appellant's App. p. 46. Nevertheless, he argues that the evidence is insufficient as a matter of law to constitute a substantial step toward murder; he contends that his conduct was mere preparation. We must decide, then, whether evidence that Collier drove to Nancy's place of employment with an ice pick, a box cutter, and binoculars, parked outside the door through which he knew Naney would exit, then fell asleep or passed out is sufficient to have allowed a reasonable jury to find that Collier had taken a substantial step toward the commission of murder.
The answer to our question is not to be found by analogy to other Indiana cases applying the attempt statute. This is because most Indiana cases in which the substantial step prong of the attempt statute has been at issue have involved some appreciable, direct, physical contact or attempted contact between the defendant and the alleged victim. In the attempted murder context, several cases involve instances in which the victim was shot, stabbed or beaten but did not die. See, e.g., Harris v. State, 425 N.E.2d 112 (Ind.1981) (vietim shot in head); Zickefoose, 270 Ind. at 618, 388 N.E.2d at 507 (victim beaten, stabbed, and choked); Cohen v. State, 714 N.E.2d 1168 (Ind.Ct.App.1999) (victim shot in head), trans. denied. In others, the defendant shot or stabbed at the victim but missed entirely. See, e.g., Bethel v. State, 730 N.E.2d 1242 (Ind.2000) (defendant shot at intended victim but missed); Evans v. State, 727 N.E.2d 1072 (Ind.2000) (defendant swung knife at victim but missed); Bartlett v. State, 711 N.E.2d 497 (Ind.1999) (defendant shot at intended victim but missed).
Nor have the cases involving other attempt crimes presented questions as close as the instant case. See, eg., Himes v. State, 273 Ind. 416, 403 N.E.2d 1377 (1980) (affirming attempted rape conviction where defendant pointed gun at intended victim, directed her into a tent, told her, "You know what I want," threatened to shoot her if she ran, grabbed the front of her pants, and struggled with her); Hampton v. State, 468 N.E.2d 1077 (Ind.Ct.App.1984) (see section II, below); Haskett v. State, 467 N.E.2d 32 (Ind.Ct.App.1984) (affirming attempted robbery conviction where defendant's accomplice went into store with toy gun but then left without pointing gun or demanding money), reh'g denied, trams. denied.
So where do we go from here? The Indiana Supreme Court has recognized that "[dleciding what constitutes an attempt has always been a burden upon the common law, challenging even the most respected judges." Ward v. State, 528 N.E.2d 52, 58 (Ind.1988) (citing Oliver Wendell Holmes, The Common Law 68 (1881)). One principle the Court has approved is as follows:
[TJhe more serious the crime attempted or the greater the menace to the social security from similar efforts on the part of the defendant or others, the further back in the series of acts leading up to the consummated crime should the criminal law reach in holding the defendant guilty for attempt.
Id. at 54 (quoting Francis B. Sayre, Criminal Attempts, 41 Harv. L.Rev. 821, 846 (1928)). In this case, then, the seriousness of the crime of murder weighs in favor of affirming Collier's conviction.5 Still, "Tilt *346is impossible to lay down any general rule to determine what acts are too remote to constitute an attempt."6 Williams v. State, 261 Ind. 385, 391, 304 N.E.2d 311, 315 (1973). Therefore, we will not try to formulate a bright-line test to be used to determine whether a defendant's conduct constitutes a "substantial step" for purposes of Indiana's attempt statute. Rather, we will review the origins of Indiana's attempt statute and compare the instant case with another decision from this Court in an effort to provide some measure of clarity in the area of attempt law.
I. When is Conduct "Strongly Corroborative" of Intent?
Indiana's general attempt statute is based on the Model Penal Code approach to attempt lability. Zickefoose, 270 Ind. at 622, 388 N.E.2d at 509. The "substantial step" requirement found in Indiana Code § 35-41-5-l(a) was taken directly from Model Penal Code § 5.01(1)(c), and much of the language found in our Supreme Court's watershed decision Zickefoose was borrowed from Model Penal Code § 5.01 and the Comment thereto. Compare Zickefoose, 270 Ind. at 622-28, 388 N.E.2d at 509-10 with Model Penal Code § 5.01 (Official Draft and Revised Comments 1985), Comment at 297, 329, 331. Specifically, the requirement that the defendant's conduct be "strongly corroborative" of the defendant's criminal purpose, see Zickefoose, 270 Ind. at 623, 388 N.E.2d at 510, is grounded in Model Penal Code § 5.01(2). It is to this requirement that we now turn our focus.
We require that a defendant's completed acts be "strongly corroborative" of his criminal purpose because a defendant's conduct is often more indicative of his intent than are his statements, and "equivocal acts may well reflect an equivocal purpose."7 Wayne R. LaFave, Substan*347tive Criminal Law § 11.4(d) (2d ed.2008) (hereinafter "LaFave"). "Statements of intent made prior to equivocal acts or a confession made subsequent thereto give no assurance of that firmness of purpose which manifests the actor's dangerousness." Id. Stated differently, "(alo attempt is an act of such a nature that it is itself evidence of the criminal intent with which it is done. A criminal attempt bears criminal intent upon its face." Id. (quoting J. Salmond, Jurisprudence 404 (7th ed.1924)); see also Hamiel v. Wisconsin, 92 Wis.2d 656, 285 N.W.2d 639, 644 (1979) ("[In the erime of attempt, it is primarily the acts of the accused which provide evidence of the requisite mental intent."). Therefore, we must necessarily evaluate any statements a defendant may have made together with his conduct in order to determine whether that which he has done strongly corroborates that which he said he would do.8 As the South Dakota Supreme Court has stated:
The reason for requiring evidence of a direct act, however slight, toward consummation of the intended crime, is ... that in the majority of cases up to that time the conduct of the defendant, consisting merely of acts of preparation, has never ceased to be equivocal; and this is necessarily so, irrespective of his declared intent. It is that quality of being equivocal that must be lacking before the act becomes one which may be said to be a commencement of the commission of the crime, or an overt act, or before any fragment of the crime itself has been committed, and this is so for the reason that, so long as the equivocal quality remains, no one can say with certainty what the intent of the defendant is.
South Dakota v. Martinez, 88 S.D. 369, 220 N.W.2d 530, 531 (1974) (quoting California v. Miller, 2 Cal.2d 527, 42 P.2d 308, 310 (1985)); see also Michigan v. Burton, 252 Mich App. 130, 651 NW 143, 150 (2002).
With this framework in mind, we now proceed to determine whether Collier's conduct was sufficient to constitute a substantial step toward the commission of murder. Model Penal Code § 5.01(2) includes an illustrative list of conduct that, if strongly corroborative of the actor's crimi-mal purpose, shall not be held insufficient to constitute a substantial step as a matter of law. Specifically, that subsection provides:
Without negativing the sufficiency of other conduct, the following, if strongly corroborative of the actor's eriminal purpose, shall not be held insufficient as a matter of law:
(a) lying in wait, searching for or following the contemplated victim of the crime;
(b) enticing or seeking to entice the contemplated victim of the crime to go to the place contemplated for the commission of the crime;
(c) reconnoitering the place contemplated for the commission of the crime;
(d) unlawful entry of a structure, vehicle or enclosure in which it is contemplated that the crime will be committed;
*348(e) possession of materials to be employed in the commission of the crime, that are specially designed for such unlawful use or that can serve no lawful purpose of the actor under the cireumstances;
(£) possession, collection or fabrication of materials to be employed in the commission of the crime, at or near the place contemplated for its commission, if such possession, collection or fabrication serves no lawful purpose of the actor under the circumstances;
(¢) soliciting an innocent agent to engage in conduct constituting an element of the crime.
Model Penal Code § 5.01(2). Though not an exhaustive list of the types of conduct that could constitute a substantial step, the Model Penal Code formulation guides our resolution of this case. Collier's conduct falls into three of the seven Model Penal Code categories, namely, lying in wait, reconnoitering, and possession of materials to be employed in the commission of the crime at or near the place contemplated for its commission. Nevertheless, we cannot say that his conduct was strongly corroborative of his stated intent.
First, there is undisputed evidence that when the officers apprehended Collier, he was either passed out or asleep. While we do not reject the possibility that lying in wait or reconnoitering may in some cases be deemed sufficient to constitute a substantial step, this is not such a case. Simply driving to the place contemplated for the commission of crime before allowing oneself to fall into unconsciousness cannot be said to be strongly corroborative of a firm eriminal purpose, as is the requirement in Indiana. See Zickefoose, 270 Ind. at 628, 388 N.E.2d at 510; see also Mitchem, 685 N.E.2d at 676. Rather, such evidence of equivocal behavior supports Collier's claim that he never moved beyond mere preparation.
Second, there is undisputed evidence that Collier took an ice pick and a box cutter and drove to Nancy's place of employment, where he waited outside in a position from which he would be able to see Nancy exit. But the corroborative significance of a defendant's possession of the weapons he intends to use in committing a crime must be evaluated in light of the types of weapons he possesses. This is because the level of threat or the apparent danger posed by weapons is inversely proportionate to the distance between the defendant and the alleged victim. See Richeson v. State, 704 N.E.2d 1008, 1010 (Ind.1998) ("[Wle think that the distance between perpetrator and victim in many attempted murder cases poses special problems of 'intent ambiguity." "). Therefore, we must consider the nature and capability for injury of the particular weapon or weapons possessed by the defendant. The defendant's conduct must "be something more than mere preparation, remote from the time and place of the intended erime[.]" LaFave § 11.4(b) at n. 33 (citing Minnesota v. Dumas, 118 Minn. 77, 186 N.W. 311, 318 (1912)).
Here, Collier was found in his pickup with a box cutter and an ice pick, but given the distance between he and Nancy at the time of his arrest, those items were virtually useless to Collier in terms of an attempted murder. Inasmuch as a pickup, a box cutter, and an ice pick are potentially harmful, it is nonetheless necessary to make direct, close contact with the intended victim in order to do harm. Compare this to the case of a defendant who parks a truck full of explosives near a building. Though the defendant may be the same physical distance from his intended victim or victims as Collier was from Nancy, the defendant with a truck full of explosives *349certainly poses a more imminent and significant danger. Likewise, a defendant with a gun is objectively more dangerous from a few hundred feet away than a defendant with a knife or a vehicle In other words, depending on all the surrounding cireumstances, it would seem that a defendant who has come within a few hundred feet of his intended victim with a gun has taken a more substantial step than has a defendant who has come within a few hundred feet of his intended victim with a knife or a pickup. Under the cireumstances of this case, we cannot say that Collier's possession of his pickup, a box cutter, and an ice pick was strongly corroborative of a firm criminal intent.
The undisputed facts demonstrate that Collier's conduct never ceased to be equivocal. See Martinez, 220 N.W.2d at 531. He drove to Nancy's place of employment but then fell asleep or passed out. Furthermore, while he possessed the weapons he planned to use in commission of the crime, he never moved close enough to Nancy to make those weapons dangerous, that is, to demonstrate a present intent to use the weapons against her. Because Collier's conduct was not strongly corroborative of a firm criminal purpose, he never took a substantial step toward commission of the erime of murder.
II. What About Hampton v. State?
Both parties discuss in their briefs this Court's decision in Hampton v. State, 468 N.E.2d 1077 (Ind.Ct.App.1984). Hampton was convicted of attempted robbery based on the following facts:
Hampton parked his car near the Pizza Hut next to a busy highway, which would have provided an easy escape route. He hid between bushes and the building, attempting to avoid light from passing cars. When arrested he was found wearing a ski mask, which could be pulled down over his face, and he was armed. He was aware a large amount of cash would be taken by the assistant manager when he departed, and other money would be left in the restaurant. If not for the arrival of the police, Hampton would have been able to rob the assistant manager and anyone else still with him.
Id. at 1081. On appeal, Hampton argued that he did not take a "substantial step" toward the commission of robbery because he never entered the Pizza Hut or placed anyone in fear. Id. Noting that Hampton interpreted the "substantial step" requirement too narrowly, we held that the facts demonstrated that Hampton took a substantial step toward commission of robbery. Id.
The State argues that the facts of Hampton are instructive for this case. We first note that the Indiana Supreme Court has said that the facts in Hampton are "much flimsier" than in other attempted robbery cases. Van Cleave, 674 N.E.2d at 1304. Also, several distinctions make the facts of Collier's case even more flimsy than those in Hampton. First, Hampton, though somewhat intoxicated, was awake when police apprehended him, while Collier was either asleep or passed out. Second, Hampton, after his arrest, gave a detective a statement in which he acknowledged he had gone to the Pizza Hut to rob it because he needed money. Collier made no such statement to police. Third, while Hampton actually left his vehicle and positioned himself near the building with a gun, there is no evidence that Collier ever made such physical progress toward murder after arriving at the hospital. Furthermore, the holding in Hampton is consistent with our holding because Hampton's conduct strongly corroborated his stated intent. With his weapon in hand, he exited his vehicle, approached the restaurant, hid behind the *350bushes next to the building, and stayed awake as he lay in wait. Given these distinctions and our Supreme Court's comments that the facts therein were flimsy, the Hampton decision, though it affirmed a conviction, weighs in favor of reversing Collier's conviction.
Summary and Conclusion
Taken as a whole, the acts that Collier completed before being apprehended did not constitute a substantial step. Collier's conduct never ceased to be equivocal. Because "equivocal acts may well reflect an equivocal purpose," LaFave § 11.4(d), we cannot say that Collier's conduct was "strongly corroborative of the firmness of [his] criminal intent." See Mitchem, 685 N.E.2d at 676. Furthermore, a comparison of this case with Hampton, the only Indiana case presenting facts substantially similar to the instant case, reveals several important factual distinctions that weigh in favor of reversing Collier's conviction.
We may have reached a different result had Collier been awake and alert, had he begun his approach toward the building, either in his pickup or on foot, or even if he had simply opened the door and taken a step out. But those are not the facts before us. Even still, the State would have us find that Collier's act of driving to the hospital with a box cutter and an ice pick constituted a substantial step. The State may be correct, but it was not a substantial step toward murder. Collier concedes that the State's evidence proved beyond a reasonable doubt that Collier committed the crimes of Invasion of Privacy as a Class A misdemeanor 9 or Criminal Stalking as a Class B, C, or D felony.10 Unfortunately for the State, Collier was not tried for these crimes. Stated differently, we reverse Collier's conviction not because he did not commit a crime, but because he did not commit the crime with which the prosecutor charged him. As the New York Court of Appeals rightfully remarked nearly eighty years ago:
The police of the city of New York did excellent work in this case by preventing the commission of a serious crime. It is a great satisfaction to realize that we have such wide-awake guardians of our peace. Whether or not the steps which the defendant had taken up to the time of his arrest amounted to the commission of a crime, as defined by our law, is, however, another matter.
New York v. Rizzo, 246 N.Y. 334, 158 N.E. 888 (1927) (emphasis added).
We remain cognizant that the question of whether a defendant has taken a substantial step toward the commission of a crime is generally a question of fact to be decided by the trier of fact. See Washington, 517 N.E.2d at 79. Here, however, the probative evidence and reasonable inferences drawn from the evidence are insufficient, as a matter of law, to have allowed the jury to find beyond a reasonable doubt that Collier took a substantial step toward *351murdering Nancy. See McHenry, 820 N.E.2d at 126.
Reversed.
CRONE, J., concurs.
BARNES, J., dissents with separate opinion.
. We heard oral argument in this cause on February 20, 2006, at Valparaiso University School of Law. We thank counsel for their able presentations and the students, faculty, and staff of the law school for their hospitality.
. Charter Beacon and Northeastern Center provide behavioral health services in northeast Indiana. See http://www.ft-wayne.in.us/health_living/mental_health_sub-stance_abuse.html (last visited March 28, 2006) and http://www.nec.org/ (last visited March 28, 2006).
. This had been the case since before Nancy separated from Collier, when Nancy usually worked until 11:00 p.m.
. Ind.Code § 35-41-5-1(a); Ind.Code § 35-42-1-1(1). In the original information, the State alleged that Collier had attempted to "knowingly or intentionally kill" Nancy. Appellant's App. p. 8. On the first day of the *344trial, however, the trial court allowed the State to amend the information to say that Collier had attempted to "intentionally kill" Nancy. Id. at 46.
. We note, however, that because of the stringent penalties for attempted murder and the ambiguity often involved in its proof, our Supreme Court has "singled out attempted murder for special treatment." Hopkins v. State, 759 N.E.2d 633, 638 (Ind.2001); see also Richeson v. State, 704 N.E.2d 1008, 1010 *346(Ind.1998) (”Attemﬁted murder is a special case, deserving special treatment.").
. See also Rollin M. Perkins & Ronald N. Boyce, Criminal Law 621 (3d ed. 1982) ("'The prepatory-perpetrating dichotomy is useful in discussing situations of a rather general nature, but the actual dividing line between the two is shadowy in the extreme."); Jeffrey F. Ghent, Annotation, What Constitutes Attempted Murder, 54 A.L.R.3d 612, 617 (1973) ('The authorities agree that it is impossible to formulate a general rule or definition of what constitutes an attempt (to murder), which may be applied as a test in all cases[.]") (citing California v. Miller, 2 Cal.2d 527, 42 P.2d 308 (1935)); Francis B. Sayre, Criminal Attempts, 41 Harv. L.Rev. 821, 846 (1928) ("It is [] manifestly impossible to lay down any mechanical or hard and fast rule for the drawing of the line between preparation and indictable attempts; and such efforts in this direction ... must be unhesitatingly rejected.").
. Indeed, the "strongly corroborative" requirement is an extension of what the drafters of the Model Penal Code labeled as the "res ipsa loquitur test."" See Model Penal Code § 5.01, Comment at 330 (''The basic rationale of the requirement that the actor's conduct shall strongly corroborate his purpose to commit a crime is, of course, the same as that underlying the res ipsa loquitur view."); see also Black's Law Dictionary 1336 (8th ed.2004) (res ipsa loquitur is Latin for "the thing speaks for itself"). One commentator has described the res.ipsa loquitur test, or "equivocality approach," this way:
[It is as though a cinematograph film, which had so far depicted merely the accused person's acts without stating what was his intention, had been suddenly stopped, and the audience were asked to say to what end those acts were directed. If there is only one reasonable answer to this question then the accused has done what amounts to an "attempt" to attain that end. If there is more than one reasonably possible answer, then the accused has not yet done enough.
Turner, Attempts to Commit Crimes, 5 Cambridge L.J. 230, 236 (1934) (as quoted in Wayne R. LaFave, Substantive Criminal Law § 11.4(d) (2d ed.2003)). The Wisconsin Supreme Court has called this the "stop the film *347test." Wisconsin v. Stewart, 143 Wis.2d 28, 420 N.W.2d 44, 50 (1988) (concluding that test was met in attempted robbery case where ''film", if stopped, would have shown the defendant demanding money and appearing to reach for a gun).
. An emphasis on the equivocality of a defendant's conduct will be especially important in those cases, unlike this one, in which the defendant has not made any statements, either before or after his conduct.
. Ind.Code § 35-46-1-15.1.
. Ind.Code § 35-45-10-5. " 'Stalk' means a knowing or an intentional course of conduct involving repeated or continuing harassment of another person that would cause a reasonable person to feel terrorized, frightened, intimidated, or threatened and that actually causes the victim to feel terrorized, fright, ened, intimidated, or threatened." Ind.Code § 35-45-10-1. Stalking is generally a Class D felony, but is elevated to a Class C felony if the defendant stalks the victim and makes an explicit or an implicit threat with the intent to place the victim in reasonable fear of sexual battery, seriously bodily injury, or death or violates of certain protective orders. LC. § 35-45-10-5(b). Stalking is elevated to Class B felony if "the act or acts were committed while the person was armed with a deadly weapon." 1C. § 35-45-10-5(c)(1).

=== CASE 9739541 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:17:12.843697+00 ===

BARNES, Judge,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent. In the majority opinion, Judge Vaidik lucidly frames the question we are faced with here as, "whether evidence that Collier drove to Nancy's place of employment with an ice pick, a box cutter, and binoculars, parked outside the door through which he knew Naney would exit, then fell asleep or passed out is sufficient to have allowed a reasonable jury to find that Collier had taken a substantial step toward the commission of murder." Op. pp. 344-45. I say yes.
I believe it is most important to put this answer in the context of not only the factual posture of this case, but also its legal posture,. These facts were tried to a jury without any serious evidentiary dispute. There is no legal "arm-wrestling" over the instructions that were given or the evidence that was introduced. Neither party argued in its oral presentation to us any serious legal matter other than, are these facts enough to legally sustain an attempted murder conviction?
I agree with the vast majority of the legal principles related in the majority opinion and need not repeat all of them here, except to say that the analysis was thoughtful and erudite. I would emphasize that, in my opinion, the most important principle in this case is, "The determination of what constitutes a substantial step is left to the province of the jury." Newhoff v. State, 708 N.E.2d 889, 893 (Ind.Ct.App.1999). Our criminal attempt law allows "some preventive action by police and courts to stop the criminal effort at an earlier stage, thereby minimizing the risk of substantive harm without providing immunity for the offender." Zickefoose v. State, 270 Ind. 618, 622, 388 N.E.2d 507, 509 (1979).
What constitutes a substantial step towards murder is, as the majority points out, usually litigated when a direct attempt is made to take a life. We all could agree that a shot and a miss, a stabbing or shooting that does not result in death, or similar acts push the attempt "needle" to guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. See, e.9., Bethel v. State, 730 N.E.2d 1242 (Ind.2000), Harris v. State, 425 N.E.2d 112 (Ind.1981). This case presents a unique fact pattern unlike those in any reported Indiana case concerning attempted murder.
The majority recognizes and concedes that the severity and gravity of the crime, here attempted murder, "weighs in favor of affirming Collier's conviction." Op. p. 345 (citing Ward v. State, 528 N.E.2d 52, 54 (Ind.1988)). They do not affirm, however. Part of the reason for not doing so is because of our supreme court's recognition, in the context of jury instructions, "Attempted murder is a special case, deserving special treatment." Richeson v. State, 704 N.E.2d 1008, 1010 (Ind.1998). The flip side of this argument is that attempted murder is the only felony in Indiana for which the punishment is less than what may be imposed for the completed crime. See Ind.Code § 85-41-5-l(a). A person convicted of attempted Class A felony child molesting can be sentenced from twenty to fifty years, the same as a person convicted of completed Class A felony child molesting. See I.C. §§ 35-50-2-1(a), 85-50-24. By contrast, a person convicted of murder can be sentenced in a range of forty-five to sixty-five years, but a person convicted of attempted *352murder can only be sentenced in the Class A felony range of twenty to fifty years. See 1.C. §§ 35-50-2-8, 35-50-2-4. Unlike the majority, I would not extend our supreme court's "special treatment" of attempted murder cases to sufficiency of the evidence questions.1 There is no reason to treat a defendant convicted of attempted murder differently. from a defendant con-viected of any other Class A felony attempted crime.
Some guidance from the Model Penal Code, upon which Indiana's attempt law is based, is instructive, as the majority recognizes. I agree with the majority's citation to section 5.01(2) of the Code, which lists several examples of conduct that, if strongly corroborative of the actor's criminal purpose, should be deemed sufficient as a matter of law to constitute a substantial step toward committing a crime. I also agree with the majority that Collier's conduct falls within at least three of those explicit examples: lying in wait for the victim, Nancy; reconnoitering the place contemplated for the commission of the crime, the hospital; and possession of materials to be employed in the commission of the erime, a box cutter and an ice pick, at or near the place contemplated for its commission, the hospital. I disagree, of course, with the majority's conclusion that these factors are not strongly corroborative of Collier's criminal purpose.
The majority is correct when it states, "we must necessarily evaluate any statements a defendant may have made together with his conduct in order to determine whether that which he has done strongly corroborates that which he said he would do." Op. p. 847. After making this observation, however, I submit that the majority fails to follow it, especially when it diseuss-es the lack of immediate danger presented by Collier's possession of an ice pick and box cutter without mentioning his stated intention to stab Nancy in the heart and cut her throat. Our case law strongly suggests that clear statements of intent can support eriminal attempt convictions, even where the conduct at issue is by itself perfectly legal and does not pose an immediate threat of harm to the intended victim.
For example, in Johnston v. State, 541 N.E.2d 514 (Ind.1989), the defendant was convicted of three counts of attempted child molesting. The evidence supporting the convictions was that the defendant had told the parents of three children that he wanted to molest them, and then went to the parents' house with sexual devices, lubricants, and sedatives to give to the children; there was no evidence that the parents ever actually intended to allow the defendant to molest their children. Our supreme court affirmed, finding sufficient evidence of the defendant's intent to molest the three children and that he had taken a substantial step towards committing the crimes. The court observed,
Appellant clearly stated his intentions to the parents of the children. The fact that he approached the parents with a bag of paraphernalia which he stated he intended to use in his molestation of the children and the fact that he gave the parents specific instructions as to how the children were to be prepared for the *353molestation is evidence which supports the verdict of the jury.
Id. at 517. Our supreme court believed it was necessary and proper to consider what the defendant had done in conjunction with his stated intentions prior to performing those acts. The fact that the defendant's actions by themselves were not illegal and posed no actual imminent threat to the children was not enough for the defendant to escape criminal liability for attempted child molesting.
Likewise, here I conclude that Collier's actions are strongly corroborative of his intent as revealed in his statements to Cameron. Those statements included, immediately before going to the hospital, that he was going to kill Naney "tonight" by stabbing her in the heart and cutting her throat, and giving instructions to Cameron as to how to take care of the family pets. Collier's conduct included collecting a box cutter, ice pick, and a pair of binoculars, and driving to the hospital and parking in an area where he could see the only exit persons leaving the hospital could use at the time Nancy was expected to leave. I agree that in isolation possessing a box cutter, ice pick, and pair of binoculars might appear "innocent" and not much of a threat, but not when combined with Collier's stated intention to kill Nancy by cutting and stabbing her and Collier's having parked across the street from the hospital exit while there was a protective order in effect requiring Collier to stay away from the hospital Additionally, although ice picks and box cutters have legitimate uses other than as weapons, under these cireumstances there is no indication that Collier had any legitimate reason for possessing the box cutter and ice pick, such as that he intended to open cardboard boxes or go ice fishing. This is especially true in light of the evidence that Collier did not usually have these items in his truck, but specifically collected them and placed them in his truck before driving to the hospital.
I also disagree that because Collier was passed out asleep when police arrived that his conduct before passing out should be disqualified as strongly corroborative of his criminal intent. Was he dozing until he knew Nancy was scheduled to get off work? Did his ingestion of aleohol overtake him?2 Does it legally make any difference? What if police, properly warned, had interrupted Collier as he drove into the parking lot? Would Collier be more or less culpable if he were awake? We cannot answer these questions with certainty, but, to me, they are legally of little consequence. The law "focuses on the substantial step that the defendant has completed, not on what was left undone." Zickefoose, 270 Ind. at 623, 388 N.E.2d at 510. Also, "It is not necessary that there be a present ability to complete the crime ...." Id. Obviously, Collier could not have completed the crime while asleep in his truck, but I submit that is of no moment in analyzing whether he took a substantial step toward murdering Naney.
I also am not persuaded by the majority's attempt to distinguish or discredit Hampton v. State, 468 N.E.2d 1077 (Ind.Ct.App.1984), a case where a would-be robber waited outside a restaurant while armed and wearing a ski mask but never actually entered the restaurant. First, although our supreme court later did de-seribe the facts in Hampton as "flimsy," it in no way indicated that the case was incorrectly decided but instead cited it
*354with apparent approval as support for affirming the conviction before it. See State v. Van Cleave, 674 N.E.2d 1293, 1304 (Ind.1996). Second, as I have discussed, I believe the fact that Collier was asleep in his truck is of no legal significance. Third, although Collier made no post-arrest confession to the police, he did make pre-arrest statements to Cameron clearly delineating his intent. Finally, the fact that Collier made no physical progress toward murder after arriving at the hospital is not significant because it is reasonable to infer from where Collier parked and his possession of binoculars that he intended to wait until Nancy left the hospital before attacking her. Therefore, I strongly disagree with the majority that Hampton "weighs in favor of reversing Collier's conviction." Op. p. 350. I believe the opposite is true.
I appreciate that the conduct by Collier could have been charged, as the majority suggests, as stalking or invasion of privacy. However, the prosecutorial decision was to charge attempted murder only and to try to prove that charge to a jury. That decision resulted in a guilty verdict. Where a defendant's conduct arguably violates more than one criminal statute, the prosecutor has the discretion to decide whether to prosecute and under what statute or statutes to file charges. Lampitok v. State, 817 N.E.2d 630, 636 (Ind.Ct.App.2004), trans. denied.
Were I the prosecutor in Steuben County, I might have exercised my discretion differently when charging Collier. I am not. Additionally, had I been a juror in this case, it is possible I could have been persuaded to vote for Collier's acquittal of attempted murder. I was not. The bottom line is that this jury, on these facts, returned a guilty verdict. To conclude otherwise amounts to infringing on this prosecutor's charging discretion and this jury's exclusive prerogative to weigh the evidence. This is a close case, and my dissent should not be taken to mean that in another case, with different facts and legal issues, that I necessarily would vote to sustain an attempted murder conviction. I do so here.
. Additionally, the degree to which a defendant has taken a "substantial step" toward committing attempted murder is something that a trial court may take into consideration in determining the defendant's sentence because it reflects the "nature and circumstances of the crime" under Indiana Code Section 35-38-1-7.1(a) and something that appellate courts may take into consideration in determining whether a sentence is "inappropriate" because it reflects the "nature of the offense" under Indiana Appellate Rule 7(B).
. Collier does not claim he was involuntarily intoxicated, and voluntary intoxication is no longer a defense in Indiana to a criminal charge. See Sanchez v. State, 749 N.E.2d 509, 517 (Ind.2001). He also does not argue that he voluntarily abandoned any effort to commit a crime. See I.C. § 35-41-3-10.

=== CASE 2220232 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:37.127904+00 ===

846 N.E.2d 667 (2006)
In the Matter of MacArthur DRAKE.
No. 45S00-0201-DI-71.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
May 3, 2006.
ORDER FINDING MISCONDUCT AND IMPOSING DISCIPLINE
Upon review of the report of the hearing officer appointed by this Court to hear evidence on the Disciplinary Commission's Verified Complaint for Disciplinary Action, and the parties' briefs, we find that the respondent engaged in attorney misconduct.
Facts: Respondent, representing both husband and wife in a dissolution of marriage petition, failed to properly provide the wife with an enforceable right to her husband's pension. The Respondent then stated in response to the wife's grievance against him that he never represented her, when in fact he had. The respondent also failed, as required, to protect his client's interests in a bankruptcy proceeding.
Violations: By his conduct respondent violated Ind. Professional Conduct Rule 1.1, which requires a lawyer to provide competent representation to a client. He violated Indiana Professional Conduct Rule 8.1(a), which prohibits a lawyer in a disciplinary matter from knowingly making a false statement of material fact. He *668 also violated Indiana Professional Conduct Rule 1.3, which requires a lawyer to act with reasonable diligence and promptness in representing a client.
For the misconduct found herein, this Court now finds that the respondent should receive a public reprimand, as recommended by the Hearing Officer.
IT IS, THEREFORE, ORDERED that the respondent, MacArthur Drake, is hereby reprimanded and admonished for his misconduct in this case. Costs of this proceeding are assessed against the respondent.
The Clerk of this Court is directed to forward notice of this order to the respondent and his attorney; to the Indiana Supreme Court Disciplinary Commission, to the Hearing Officer, Hon. John R. Pera, Lake Superior Court, 2293 N. Main Street, Crown Point, IN 46307, and to all other entities as provided in Admis.Disc.R. 23(3)(d).
All Justices concur.

=== CASE 2220233 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:37.152002+00 ===

846 N.E.2d 1094 (2006)
In the Matter of the PATERNITY OF N.R.R.L.
No. 50A03-0508-JV-372.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
May 12, 2006.
Transfer Denied August 17, 2006.
*1095 Ralph R. Huff, Plymouth, IN, Attorney for Appellant.
Tom A. Black, June E. Bules, Plymouth, IN, Attorneys for Appellees.
OPINION
NAJAM, Judge.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
Curtis Rogge appeals from the trial court's denial of a motion to dismiss the action filed by Joshua Milner to establish paternity of the minor child N.R.R.L. ("the child"). Rogge presents a single issue for our review, namely, whether the trial court erred when it denied the motion to dismiss Milner's paternity action.
We affirm.
FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
N.R.R.L. ("the child") was born to Mary Loftus ("Mother") on October 12, 2002. At the time of the birth, Mother and Rogge executed a paternity affidavit. In February 2003, Mother sought child support from Rogge. The Marshall County prosecutor filed the paternity affidavit and a petition for support on her behalf in the Marshall Circuit Court, and the circuit court subsequently established paternity in Rogge. Although the court held a hearing on the request for child support, no action was taken on that request because, at the time of the hearing, Mother and Rogge were living together, Rogge was employed, and Mother was a stay-at-home mom.
On October 8, 2004, Milner filed the instant petition to establish paternity of the child, naming Mother as the sole respondent. Milner and Mother stipulated to submit to genetic testing, which showed that Milner is the child's biological father. At a subsequent hearing, the Marshall Superior Court adjudged Milner to be the child's father, ordered that Milner is to have visitation with the child, and ordered the parties to submit to a custody evaluation. The case was then transferred to the circuit court.
In April 2004, Mother filed a motion to dismiss Milner's paternity action, and Rogge filed a motion to intervene. Shortly thereafter, Rogge filed his Notice of Joinder in Motion to Dismiss, and Milner then filed a motion to join Rogge. After a hearing, the circuit court denied the motion to dismiss but granted Milner's motion to join Rogge as a party. Rogge's interlocutory appeal ensued.
DECISION AND DISCUSSION
Rogge contends that the trial court erred when it denied the motion to dismiss Milner's paternity action. Although not framed as such, Rogge's motion to dismiss essentially alleges Milner's failure to state a claim under Indiana Trial Rule 12(B)(6), and we will treat it as such. A Trial Rule 12(B)(6) motion to dismiss for failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted tests the legal sufficiency of a claim rather than the facts supporting the claim. Gorski v. DRR, Inc., 801 N.E.2d 642, 644-45 (Ind.Ct.App.2003). *1096 Dismissal for failure to state a claim is proper if it is apparent that the facts alleged in the complaint are incapable of supporting relief under any set of circumstances. Id.
Rogge asserts that the trial court should have dismissed Milner's paternity action because Rogge was a necessary party but was not named a party in that action.[1] A man's paternity may be established in an action filed under Indiana Code title 31, article 14, or by execution of a paternity affidavit under Indiana Code Section 16-37-2-2.1. Ind.Code § 31-14-2-1. A man is a child's legal father if the man executed a paternity affidavit in accordance with Indiana Code Section 16-37-2-2.1 and the paternity affidavit has not been rescinded or set aside under Indiana Code Section 16-37-2-2.1. Ind.Code § 31-14-7-3. A man is presumed to be a child's biological father if "the man undergoes a genetic test that indicates with at least a ninety-nine percent (99%) probability that the man is the child's biological father." Ind.Code § 31-14-7-1(3). A man's paternity can only be established as described in Indiana Code Section 31-14-2-1. Ind.Code § 31-14-7-2(b).
Rogge contends that he was a necessary party to Milner's paternity action. Necessary parties to a paternity action include "each person alleged to be the father" of the child. Ind.Code § 31-14-5-6. Here, Rogge is listed as the father on the child's birth certificate. Also, Rogge and Mother jointly executed a paternity affidavit on October 14, 2002, two days after the child's birth, making Rogge the child's legal father. See Ind.Code § 31-14-7-3. When Mother later sought child support, the prosecutor filed the affidavit in the circuit court. In that case, the court's Chronological Case Summary ("CCS") entry of February 20, 2004, reads in relevant part, "PATERNITY ESTABLISHED."[2] (Emphasis in original.) Milner filed the instant paternity action on October 8, 2004. But Milner did not name Rogge as a party to the action, nor has he shown that Rogge's paternity affidavit has been set aside or rescinded. See Ind.Code § 31-14-7-3. Rogge is the child's legal father pursuant to Indiana Code Section 31-14-7-3. As the legal father, Rogge is a necessary party to Milner's paternity action. See Ind.Code § 31-14-5-6.
While Rogge is a necessary party to Milner's paternity action, any error arising from Milner's failure to name Rogge as a party was remedied when the trial court allowed Rogge to intervene. Thus, in order to determine whether the trial court erred when it denied the motion to dismiss, we must still determine whether Milner's petition states a claim upon which relief can be granted under any set of circumstances. We find that Milner's petition does state a claim for which relief can be granted.
This court addressed a similar set of facts in In re Paternity of K.L.O., 816 N.E.2d 906 (Ind.Ct.App.2004). There, the mother and her boyfriend executed a paternity affidavit when the child was born. Later the mother asked a second man, Lakins, to take a paternity test, the results of which revealed a probability of 99.99995% that he was the child's biological father. The mother then filed a paternity *1097 action against Lakins, but the trial court dismissed the action because the boyfriend had not been joined as a party. The mother filed a second paternity petition, alleging that the boyfriend was the child's father, in order to disestablish the boyfriend's paternity. The trial court dismissed the second petition after a DNA test revealed that the boyfriend was not the child's biological father. The mother then filed a third petition to establish paternity, alleging that Lakins was the father. Lakins filed a motion to dismiss the petition because the boyfriend was a necessary party and had not been joined in the action. The trial court denied that motion.
On appeal, this court reversed, noting that the boyfriend was still the child's legal father because the paternity affidavit had not been rescinded or set aside. Id. at 908. "A paternity affidavit that is properly executed under this section may not be rescinded more than sixty (60) days after the paternity affidavit is executed unless a court has determined that fraud, duress, or material mistake of fact existed in the execution of the paternity affidavit." Ind. Code § 16-37-2-2.1(i). At the time the mother filed the second petition to establish paternity in Lakins, the trial court had not found fraud, duress, or material mistake of fact in the execution of the paternity affidavit by the boyfriend. Thus, the boyfriend
remained the legal father of [the child] and, as such, he should have been joined as a necessary party in the [second paternity action against Lakins]. For this reason, the trial court erred in denying Lakins's motion to dismiss the paternity action filed against Lakins because [the mother] did not join [the boyfriend], a necessary party, to the action.
Id. at 908.
The facts of the instant case are similar to those in K.L.O. Here, Mother and Rogge, her boyfriend at the time of the child's birth, filed a paternity affidavit pursuant to Indiana Code Section 16-37-2-2.1 shortly after the child's birth. As a result, Rogge is the child's legal father. See Ind. Code § 31-14-7-3. Subsequently, Milner filed a petition to establish paternity, alleging that he is the child's father, but did not name Rogge as a party. But the similarities between this case and K.L.O. end there. While the legal father in K.L.O. was never a party to any action to establish paternity in Lakins, here, the trial court allowed Rogge to intervene in Milner's paternity action. As noted above, Rogge's intervention remedied any error arising from Milner's failure to name Rogge as a party to Milner's paternity action. Thus, K.L.O. is not dispositive.
The legislature has stated that it "favors a public policy of establishing paternity under [title 31, article 14] of a child born out of wedlock." Indiana Code Section 31-14-1-1. Although Rogge's execution of the paternity affidavit established him as the child's legal father, that does not preclude another man from attempting to establish paternity of the child. Genetic testing has established that Milner is the child's biological father. Thus, under Indiana Code Section 31-14-7-1(3) Milner is presumed to be the child's biological father.[3]
*1098 Thus, Milner has not failed to state a claim, and we hold that the trial court did not err when it denied Rogge's motion to dismiss Milner's paternity action.[4]
Affirmed.
SHARPNACK, J., and ROBB, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Rogge also asserts that the failure to name him as a party to the paternity action resulted in a violation of his due process rights. Because we resolve the case on statutory grounds, we do not address Rogge's constitutional claim.
[2]  In a subsequent CCS entry, the court noted that "paternity was previously established in this cause[.]" Appellant's App. at 28.
[3]  Under Indiana Code Section 16-37-2-2.1(k), "[t]he court shall set aside the paternity affidavit upon a showing from a genetic test that sufficiently demonstrates that the person who executed the paternity affidavit is excluded as the child's biological father." We do not reach the issue of whether the genetic test establishing Milner to be the child's biological father necessarily excludes Rogge as the child's biological father. Such a finding would be grounds for the trial court to set aside Rogge's paternity affidavit. See Indiana Code Section 16-37-2-2.1.
[4]  Because we determine that the trial court did not err when it denied the motion to dismiss Milner's paternity action, we need not address Milner's equitable estoppel argument.

=== CASE 9739542 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:17:19.76999+00 ===

OPINION OF THE COURT
ClPARICK, J.
The question presented by this appeal is whether plaintiffs reckless behavior was of such a nature as to constitute the sole legal cause of his injuries, vitiating the duty of care of a train operator. We conclude under the circumstances of this case that it was not, and that the evidence was sufficient to support the verdict. We further conclude that plaintiffs estimate of his own running speed at the time of the accident was admissible and sufficient to lay a proper foundation for plaintiff’s accident reconstruction expert to use in forming his opinion.
Plaintiff—then 18 years old—and three of his friends spent the evening of January 24, 1997 in Manhattan and, over the course of about five hours, each consumed a quantity of alcohol. In the early hours of January 25, plaintiff and his friends attempted to return home to Queens. They waited some time for the number 7 train at Queensboro Plaza—an elevated subway station—where red tape indicating track work extended across the platform. The group eventually decided that the train was not running and walked along the “catwalk”—a three-foot wide path abutting the track—to the next station (33rd Street). They made it safely to 33rd Street and, after again waiting for a while, *490decided to walk along the catwalk to the next station (40th Street). As they proceeded along the northbound route, the tracks were to the left of the catwalk and to the right was a short railing.
Before they reached the 40th Street station, the group became aware of a train approaching from behind and began running along the catwalk in an attempt to reach the station before the train. Their intent was to board the train to continue their trip home. The four teens ran in single file, with plaintiff third in line. The train struck plaintiff in the vicinity of a signal box located on the catwalk, resulting in bilateral below-the-knee amputation.1 Plaintiff was the only one of the four hit by the train.
At trial, plaintiff was permitted to testify to an estimate of his running speed at the time of the accident.2 Plaintiff established that he was familiar with his running speed because he had been a member of a gym for about two years prior to the accident and would frequently run on a treadmill calibrated in terms of miles per hour. He would usually run at seven or eight miles per hour and, based on that experience, estimated that he was running about seven or eight miles per hour at the time of the accident.
Plaintiffs expert then used that estimate in making his calculations. Computing the train’s stopping distance assuming the train operator perceived the boys on the catwalk from 151.5 feet away—the distance allegedly illuminated by the train’s headlights—and factoring in reaction time, the expert determined that the train could have stopped 51 feet before it reached plaintiff if he had been running eight miles per hour and 37 feet before it reached plaintiff if he had been running seven miles per hour.
*491The train operator offered several inconsistent versions of his conduct at the time of the accident. The police report taken at the scene indicates that the train operator stated he did not see the boys “until he was passing them because they were hidden from his view by a signal device” and that the train stopped as a result of its own emergency devices before he was able to apply the brake. However, later that night, the train operator also filled out a report for NYCTA, this time stating that he saw an object behind the signal device and then placed the train into emergency mode. At trial he gave a third account, testifying that his first reports were inaccurate in that he saw a person on the catwalk in front of the signal box from about a train car’s length away. He also testified that he placed the train into emergency stopping mode when he saw the person. The road car inspector for NYCTA who examined the train at the scene, however, only found blood on the train’s “trip cock.” The trip cock hangs in front of the train’s wheels as an emergency device that automatically stops the train if it comes into contact with an obstruction.
At the close of plaintiffs case, NYCTA moved to dismiss the complaint for plaintiffs failure to establish a prima facie case of negligence. NYCTA also moved for a directed verdict on the issue of liability at the close of proof. The trial judge reserved decision on both motions. The jury returned a verdict finding NYCTA negligent, determining that its negligence was a substantial factor in causing the accident and assigning it 25% of the fault.3 The jury allocated the remaining 75% of liability to plaintiff. NYCTA moved to set aside the verdict and Supreme Court denied all motions.
A majority of the Appellate Division affirmed, finding legally sufficient evidence to support the jury verdict as against NYCTA. Two Justices dissented in part and voted to reverse. They would have dismissed the complaint for failure to establish a prima facie case because they believed “plaintiffs own reckless conduct constituted an intervening and unforeseeable act which broke any causal connection between his injury and any alleged negligence” by NYCTA (19 AD3d at 581-582). The dissent also stated that plaintiff should not have been permitted to testify as to an estimate of his running speed, nor should the *492accident reconstruction expert have been allowed to use plaintiffs testimony as a basis for his opinion, since no foundation was properly laid and thus the testimony was “pure speculation and conjecture” (19 AD3d at 582). NYCTA appeals as of right, and we affirm.
A jury verdict rests on legally insufficient evidence where there is “simply no valid line of reasoning and permissible inferences which could possibly lead rational [individuals] to the conclusion reached by the jury on the basis of the evidence presented at trial” (Cohen v Hallmark Cards, 45 NY2d 493, 499 [1978]). We have held that this inquiry is similar to that of a trial judge determining whether to direct a verdict (see Cohen, 45 NY2d at 499). If there is a question of fact and “it would not be utterly irrational for a jury to reach the result it has determined upon . . . the court may not conclude that the verdict is as a matter of law not supported by the evidence” (Cohen, 45 NY2d at 499; Campbell v City of Elmira, 84 NY2d 505, 510 [1994]).
NYCTA argues that plaintiffs own reckless conduct—entering the catwalk after consuming several alcoholic beverages and attempting to catch the train—was the sole proximate cause of his injuries. Significantly, NYCTA did not request any instruction that the jury consider whether plaintiffs conduct was the sole proximate cause of his injuries. Neither did defendant request a jury charge on superseding or intervening cause. Rather, the jury was instructed that plaintiffs “negligence was a substantial factor in causing the accident,” and was asked to determine further whether NYCTA was also negligent, whether that negligence was a contributing factor to plaintiffs accident and the percentage of fault attributable to each party.
Plaintiffs conduct was undeniably reckless, but the jury appropriately considered plaintiffs actions and determined that he bore a far greater share of the fault. This is in keeping with the doctrine of comparative negligence {see CPLR 1411). Contrary to NYCTA’s argument and the dissent, plaintiffs conduct, although a substantial factor in causing the accident, was not so egregious or unforeseeable that it must be deemed a superseding cause of the accident absolving defendant of liability.
This case does not involve the type of dangerous, illegal conduct presented in Barker v Kallash (63 NY2d 19 [1984]) where the plaintiff was severely injured while constructing a pipe bomb. There, the Court denied plaintiff recovery for *493injuries sustained as a direct result of a serious violation of law, “not because the plaintiff contributed to his injury, but because the public policy of this State generally denies judicial relief to those injured in the course of committing a serious criminal act” (Barker, 63 NY2d at 24). Here, plaintiff surely and very substantially contributed to his injury, but did not engage in the type of dangerous criminal conduct that prohibited recovery in Barker. Nor can it be said that his conduct was such as to vitiate the duty of reasonable care owed to him by the train operator to see what there was to be seen through the proper use of his senses and to bring the train to a safe stop.
We have held that a train operator may be found negligent if he or she sees a person on the tracks “from such a distance and under such other circumstances as to permit him [or her], in the exercise of reasonable care, to stop before striking the person” (Coleman v New York City Tr. Auth., 37 NY2d 137, 140 [1975]; see Noseworthy v City of New York, 298 NY 76, 79 [1948]). The train operator’s duty certainly is not vitiated because plaintiff was voluntarily walking or running along the tracks or because of any reckless conduct on plaintiffs part.
Thus, it was not irrational for the jury to find NYCTA negligent. There is a reasonable view of the evidence that the train operator failed to see the teenagers from a distance from which he should have seen them, and that he failed to employ emergency braking measures. The jury’s determination that the operator could have avoided this accident is an affirmed finding of fact with support in the record and is beyond our further review. Plaintiffs conduct did not constitute such an unforeseeable or superseding event as to break the causal connection between his injury and defendant’s negligence.
The trial court also properly permitted plaintiff to testify regarding an estimate of his running speed. Plaintiff established a sufficient foundation demonstrating the basis of his knowledge—two years’ experience running on a treadmill calibrated to measure miles per hour. In comparable situations, both police and civilian witnesses with an appropriate basis for knowledge have been permitted to give testimony estimating the speed of moving motor vehicles (see People v Olsen, 22 NY2d 230, 231-232 [1968]; Senecal v Drollette, 304 NY 446, 448 [1952]). The reliability of plaintiffs testimony and the weight it should have been accorded were issues for the finders of fact. The jury, which was best able to observe plaintiffs testimony and evaluate his credibility, resolved the question of reliability in plaintiffs favor. *494It cannot be said that the jury’s conclusion was utterly irrational.
Additionally, the jury was entitled to credit the testimony of plaintiffs expert who used the estimated running speed in making his calculations. The expert did not express an opinion as to how fast plaintiff was running, but used plaintiffs own estimate to determine where the train could have come to rest if plaintiff was running at the speeds he asserted. As a result, it was not “pure speculation and conjecture,” but admissible and reliable evidence from which the jury properly concluded that the train could have stopped before striking plaintiff.
Accordingly, the order of the Appellate Division should be affirmed, with costs.
. New York City Transit Authority (NYCTA) argues that plaintiff was struck when he attempted to circumvent the signal box and came too close to the train. At trial, plaintiff testified that he did not recall whether he had passed any signal boxes between 33rd and 40th Streets, or his position in relation to the signal box when he was struck. However, the road car inspector from NYCTA testified that plaintiff was found “[u]p against the signal [box]” on the 33rd Street side—closer to the station he was coming from.
. This was the second trial of this matter. The first trial resulted in a jury verdict in plaintiff’s favor—finding defendant and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority (MTA) 100% liable—but was reversed by the Appellate Division (295 AD2d 419 [2002]). That Court granted a new trial, finding the jury’s determination that plaintiff’s conduct was not a proximate cause of the accident against the weight of the evidence, and that plaintiffs expert’s opinion testimony about plaintiffs running speed at the time of the accident was speculative.
. The jury actually found both NYCTA and MTA liable, but the Appellate Division dismissed the complaint as against defendant MTA, finding that it could not be held liable for the conduct of NYCTA’s employees (19 AD3d 579, 581 [2005]). That finding is not challenged here.

=== CASE 9739543 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:17:19.7748+00 ===

R.S. Smith, J. (dissenting).
Since the enactment of CPLR 1411 in 1975, it has been the general rule that plaintiffs own culpability will not bar his claim, but will only be grounds for apportioning fault. In several cases, however, we have recognized that a plaintiffs fault may be so egregious in comparison to the defendant’s that it “supersede^] defendants’ conduct” (Egan v A.J. Constr. Corp., 94 NY2d 839, 841 [1999]) and becomes the “sole legal cause” (Olsen v Town of Richfield, 81 NY2d 1024, 1026 [1993]) or “sole proximate cause” (Howard v Poseidon Pools, 72 NY2d 972, 975 [1988]) of the plaintiff’s injuries. I believe the facts of this case bring it within the superseding cause doctrine.
Plaintiff here was reckless twice. It was, of course, very foolish for him and his companions to choose a narrow catwalk next to the subway tracks for pedestrian travel. But plaintiff would have escaped unharmed if he and the others, when they heard a train coming, had done what minimal common sense would require—stand still, as far as they could get from the tracks, and let the train pass by. Instead, they chose to race the train to the next station. On these facts, I think it is fair to say that plaintiffs injuries were entirely his own fault, even if a nonnegligent motorman might have been able to stop the train in time to avoid the accident.
While no two cases are identical, precedents support the view that this plaintiffs recklessness was serious enough to be a “superseding cause.” In Merino v New York City Tr. Auth. (89 NY2d 824, 825 [1996]) we refused recovery to a plaintiff who had fallen onto the subway tracks as a result of his own intoxication, holding, as an alternative ground for dismissal, that *495plaintiff “failed to show that the defendant’s alleged negligence was a substantial factor in causing his injury.” Several Appellate Division cases also deny recovery on superseding cause grounds to plaintiffs who put themselves in the paths of trains (e.g., Wadhwa v Long Is. R.R., 13 AD3d 615 [2d Dept 2004]; Lassalle v New York City Tr. Auth., 11 AD3d 661 [2d Dept 2004]; Snyder v New York City Tr. Auth., 2 AD3d 162 [1st Dept 2003], lv denied 2 NY3d 707 [2004]; Gao Yi Feng v Metropolitan Transp. Auth., 285 AD2d 447 [2d Dept 2001]). Gao Yi Feng is perhaps the closest to this case on its facts: the plaintiff there was struck while standing “directly adjacent to the train tracks with his back to oncoming trains” (285 AD2d at 447).
Cases denying recovery, even under a comparative negligence regime, to highly reckless plaintiffs speak of causation in defending their results, but in each case it is clear that the extraordinary degree of the plaintiffs fault—not just the foreseeability of the plaintiffs conduct—has been decisive. A pure foreseeability analysis does not explain the cases. For example, I would not hesitate to uphold an award if this plaintiff had been pushed by someone else into the path of the train, rather than recklessly placing himself there, though there is not much difference in the foreseeability of the two events.
The principle we have applied in previous cases, and should apply here, is that people whose failure to take care of themselves is extreme may not shift any of the consequences to others. Anyone of normal human compassion will sympathize with plaintiff; he is not the only 18 year old who ever acted recklessly, and he has paid a much higher price for it than most. But I do not think it consistent with law or wise policy to hold, as the majority does, that the New York City Transit Authority must compensate him in part for his loss. The Transit Authority moved, before the case was submitted to the jury, for a directed verdict, asserting that plaintiffs reckless conduct was the sole legal cause of the accident. I think that motion should have been granted.
Chief Judge Kaye and Judges G.B. Smith and Read concur with Judge Ciparick; Judge R.S. Smith dissents and votes to reverse in a separate opinion in which Judges Rosenblatt and Graffeo concur.
Order affirmed, with costs.

=== CASE 2220249 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:37.657279+00 ===

846 N.E.2d 363 (2006)
Jonathan J. ROSE, Appellant-Defendant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee-Plaintiff.
No. 56A03-0601-CR-15.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
April 28, 2006.
*364 James R. Reed, Morocco, for Appellant.
*365 Steve Carter, Attorney General of Indiana, Arthur Thaddeus Perry, Deputy Attorney General, Indianapolis, for Appellee.
OPINION
NAJAM, Judge.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
Jonathan Rose appeals his conviction for Child Molesting, as a Class A felony. He presents a single issue for our review, namely, whether he was denied the effective assistance of trial counsel.
We reverse and remand.[1]
FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
On November 4, 2004, Rose lived with his brother Josiah Rose and Josiah's wife, Teresa, and their three children in Newton County. On that date, Teresa went to a friend's house to paint and wallpaper and left Josiah at home with their three children, including A.G., a six-year-old girl, and Rose. While at her friend's house, Teresa called Josiah and asked him to come over and help work on the house. Josiah agreed and left Rose to watch the children.
After her parents had left, A.G. watched a movie with her brother and sister. Eventually, Rose put A.G.'s siblings to bed while A.G. continued to watch the movie. Rose then called A.G. into the bathroom, and once she was there, he put his penis in her mouth. Thereafter, he took her to the living room and, while on the couch, he put his penis in her mouth again. Rose also put his tongue in A.G.'s mouth. While in the living room, Rose put on a movie where "people put their privates in privates." Transcript at 21. Rose turned off the movie and took A.G. upstairs to Teresa and Josiah's room where he told A.G. to take off her underwear. He then "stuck his tongue in [A.G.'s] private" and also attempted to penetrate her vaginally. Id. at 27. While upstairs, Rose heard Teresa and Josiah return home, and A.G. put her underwear on and went to her bedroom.
Teresa went to check on her children and found A.G. crying. She asked A.G. why she was crying, and A.G. responded that she missed Teresa. Upon further questioning, A.G. told Teresa that Rose had been "teaching her how to love." Id. at 29. A.G. also told Teresa that Rose had put his penis in her mouth. That evening, Teresa took A.G. to a hospital for a physical examination. Dr. Mallik Chaganti conducted the examination of A.G. and testified, without objection, that he decided to take photographs of A.G. because "she was so convincing in the way she talked. I was very convinced about it[.]" Id. at 83. Dr. Chaganti's examination revealed redness around A.G.'s vagina and rectum, and he concluded that the trauma resulted from a "failed forced entry," and that the physical observations were consistent with A.G.'s allegations. Id. at 86.
When asked if A.G. cried during the examination, Dr. Chaganti testified, "She was not crying. Like I said, she was totally accepting of [Rose]. It was like he was the authority figure. Everything she did was accurate." Id. at 87. He also testified that A.G. complained of pain in her vaginal area. Then, near the end of his testimony, the following colloquy between the State and Dr. Chaganti occurred:
*366 State: The fact that swabs weren't performed correctly, or not at all essentially, does that change your opinion at all as far as what happened?
Dr. Chaganti: No, this was not about it's not about medical evidence. This is about how a six-year-old can use such detail, such accurate [sic] and in such a convincing manner, that's what I think this case is about.
State: The subjective part.
Dr. Chaganti: Yes.
* * * * * *
State: That's based on your experience?
Dr. Chaganti: Yes. And I have a five-year-old daughter, too, so I know what they talk about and there'sthere was a calmness about her. There was athere was no nervousness in her voice, such a lucid manner, the way she talked about this, or else I probably would've ended it there[.] So ... the main evidence here is what the child said and what I felt, you know, what the child said.
Id. at 98.
At the conclusion of the trial the jury found Rose guilty of child molesting, as a Class A felony, and the trial court entered judgment of conviction. This appeal ensued.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
Rose contends that his trial counsel was ineffective because his counsel did not object to vouching testimony by Dr. Chaganti. A defendant claiming a violation of the right to effective assistance of counsel must establish the two components set forth in Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 104 S.Ct. 2052, 80 L.Ed.2d 674 (1984). Young v. State, 746 N.E.2d 920, 926 (Ind.2001). First, the defendant must show that counsel's performance was deficient. Strickland, 466 U.S. at 687, 104 S.Ct. 2052. This requires a showing that counsel's representation fell below an objective standard of reasonableness, Id. 466 U.S. at 688, 104 S.Ct. 2052 and that the errors were so serious that they resulted in a denial of the right to counsel guaranteed the defendant by the Sixth Amendment, Id. 466 U.S. at 687, 104 S.Ct. 2052. Second, the defendant must show that the deficient performance prejudiced the defense. Id. To establish prejudice, a defendant must show that there is a reasonable probability that, but for counsel's unprofessional errors, the result of the proceeding would have been different. Id. at 694. A reasonable probability is a probability sufficient to undermine confidence in the outcome. Id.
Counsel is afforded considerable discretion in choosing strategy and tactics, and we will accord those decisions deference. Id. at 689, 104 S.Ct. 2052. A strong presumption arises that counsel rendered adequate assistance and made all significant decisions in the exercise of reasonable professional judgment. Id. at 690, 104 S.Ct. 2052. The Strickland Court recognized that even the finest, most experienced criminal defense attorneys may not agree on the ideal strategy or the most effective way to represent a client. Id. at 689, 104 S.Ct. 2052. Isolated mistakes, poor strategy, inexperience, and instances of bad judgment do not necessarily render representation ineffective. Ingram v. State, 508 N.E.2d 805, 808 (Ind.1987).
Deficient Performance
In the present case, Rose claims that Dr. Chaganti's testimony that he was "very convinced" by the way A.G. described the incident to him is improper because "[n]o witness ... is competent to testify that another witness is or is not telling the truth." Stewart v. State, 555 N.E.2d 121, 125 (Ind.1990) (abrogated on *367 other grounds by Lannan v. State, 600 N.E.2d 1334 (Ind.1992)). Thus, he maintains that his trial counsel should have objected to Dr. Chaganti's repeated testimony that he was convinced by A.G.'s allegations. When an appellant predicates an ineffective assistance of counsel claim on counsel's failure to object, the appellant must demonstrate that a proper objection would have been sustained. Nuerge v. State, 677 N.E.2d 1043, 1049 (Ind.Ct.App. 1997), trans. denied.
Indiana Evidence Rule 704(b) provides in relevant part that a witness may not offer an opinion concerning the truth or falsity of allegations or whether a witness has testified truthfully. (Emphasis added). Such testimony is an invasion of the province of the jurors in determining what weight they should place upon a witness's testimony. See Head v. State, 519 N.E.2d 151, 153 (Ind.1988). In the context of child molesting, however, our supreme court has recognized that where children are called upon to describe sexual conduct, a special problem exists in assessing credibility since children often use unusual words to describe sexual organs and their function and since they may be more susceptible to influence. Stewart, 555 N.E.2d at 125. Therefore, testimony is allowed which permits
some accrediting of the child witness in the form of opinions from parents, teachers, and others having adequate experience with the child, that the child is not prone to exaggerate or fantasize about sexual matters. Such opinions... facilitate an original credibility assessment of the child by the trier of fact....
Id. (quoting Lawrence v. State, 464 N.E.2d 923, 925 (Ind.1984), abrogated on other grounds by Lannan, 600 N.E.2d at 1338-39). Thus, adult witnesses are allowed to state an opinion as to the child's general competence and ability to understand the subject, but are prohibited from making direct assertions as to their belief in the child's testimony. Id. (citations omitted).
In the present case, Dr. Chaganti's testimony did not address whether A.G. was prone to exaggerate or fantasize about sexual matters. Instead, he referred to her credibility and how convincing her allegations were at least eight times during his testimony. Specifically, Dr. Chaganti testified that the case was "not about medical evidence. This is about how a six-year-old can use such detail, such accurate [sic] and in such a convincing manner. That's what I think this case is about." Transcript at 98. He also stated that during his examination of A.G. "she was so convincing in the way she talked. I was very convinced about [her allegation], so I proceeded to [conduct an examination]." Id. at 83. When asked about A.G.'s allegation, Dr. Chaganti testified that "she kind of went step by step and explained everything. Those are not the things that you can coach other people to say. You know, or put words in her mouth. That spontaneousyouyou would believe it. I mean that'sI mean she was so convincing." Id. Further, when the State questioned Dr. Chaganti on redirect about the physical evidence he documented during his examination of A.G., he stated, [I]t's not the medical details that are kind of intriguing about this case. It's the manner a[sic] six-year-old was able to tell me in such a lucid manner that really got me entrusted [sic] in this case. Id. at 97.
In Shepherd v. State, 538 N.E.2d 242, 243 (Ind.1989), our supreme court held that the State's witness should not have been allowed to state an opinion as to whether she believed that Shepard's pretrial denials of murder were true. In Shepherd, one of the State's witnesses testified that she was an inmate in jail with *368 Shepard and that she had often talked with Shepard about the alleged murder. The State's witness testified that Shepard had always denied having anything to do with the murder. The prosecuting attorney then asked "Do you believe that to be the truth?" Id. Over Shepard's attorney's objection, the trial court allowed the witness to answer. She responded that she "did not believe that [Shepard] was telling the truth when she denied killing the victim." Id. Our supreme court held that "such a question is highly improper," and reversed Shepard's conviction and remanded her case for a new trial. Id.
In the present case, Dr. Chaganti repeatedly testified about how "convincing" A.G. was when she described what had happened to her. Transcript at 83. Like Shepherd, this testimony was highly improper because Dr. Chaganti's testimony that he believed and was convinced by A.G.'s allegations invaded the province of the jury. See Head, 519 N.E.2d at 153. Therefore, Rose has demonstrated that a proper objection to Dr. Chaganti's vouching testimony would have been sustained.
Prejudice
Next, Rose must demonstrate that there is a reasonable probability that, but for counsel's deficient performance, the result of the trial would have been different. Strickland, 466 U.S. at 694, 104 S.Ct. 2052. A reasonable probability is a probability sufficient to undermine confidence in the outcome. Id. Rose alleges that Dr. Chaganti's testimony "left the jury firmly convinced of his belief in the truthfulness of A.G.'s statements." Brief of Appellant at 13. The State, on the other hand, claims that Dr. Chaganti's testimony that this case is about "how a six-year-old can use such detail, ... in such a convincing manner" is the "subjective part" of his examination and refers to the victim's "history" as provided to him. Brief of Appellee at 12. Thus, according to the State, "[Dr. Chaganti's] evaluation of the history given by the child was an integral part of his arrival at his diagnosis[,] ... [and] it was entirely proper for [him] to say that he considered [A.G.'s] manner, her lucidity and tranquility, and the amount of detail she gave in arriving at his diagnosis." Id. at 13.
But, again, it is well-settled that a witness may testify "as to whether or not the child is prone to exaggerate or fantasize and also to express an opinion as to the child's ability to accurately describe a sexual occurrence .... so long as they do not take the direct form of `I believe the child's story,' or `In my opinion the child is telling the truth.'" Head, 519 N.E.2d at 153 (quoting Lawrence, 464 N.E.2d at 925). While Dr. Chaganti did not use the words "I believe the child's story," or "In my opinion the child is telling the truth," that was certainly the import of his testimony.
Further, despite the State's insistence, Dr. Chaganti's statement that A.G. was "convincing" was not necessary to arrive at his diagnosis that there was a "failed forced entry." Transcript at 86. In Walker v. State, 621 N.E.2d 627 (Ind.1993) (modified on reh'g by 632 N.E.2d 723 (Ind. 1994)), the State charged Walker with two counts of murder. At trial, Walker "invoked the defense of insanity and a psychiatric examination disclosed that he was brain damaged at birth, was both retarded and mentally ill, and had a history of bizarre behavior including the torturing and killing of animals." Id. at 628. He was found competent to stand trial. A jury found him guilty on both counts, and the trial court entered judgment of conviction. Walker appealed and claimed that "it was fundamental error for the State to elicit from several experts their opinion of [his] guilt." Id. at 630. Our supreme court disagreed and stated that "the experts *369 were testifying as to their examination of appellant and their impressions of his truthfulness as it affected their examination. None of the witnesses undertook to testify concerning the truthfulness of appellant's testimony." Id. In contrast, Dr. Chaganti's testimony that he found A.G. convincing was not essential to his diagnosis and conclusion that there was a "failed forced entry." Transcript at 86.
Ultimately, Rose has demonstrated that Dr. Chaganti's vouching testimony was prejudicial. In fact, on cross-examination of Dr. Roberta Hibbard the State elicited testimony from Dr. Hibbard that the most important information used to determine what happened to a child in a molestation case is the child's own statement. She also stated that without A.G.'s statement, the physical evidence in this case, namely, the redness around A.G.'s vagina and rectum, is not helpful in determining whether she was molested because it does not "prove it one way or the other." Id. at 144. Thus, according to Dr. Hibbard, A.G.'s statement is absolutely necessary "to know what happened." Id.
Here, A.G. alleged that Rose put his penis in her mouth at least twice and that he told her that he was "trying to teach [her] how to love." Id. at 29. She also testified that Rose "stuck his tongue in my private" and "put his private in my private." Id. at 26. As noted above, Dr. Chaganti testified without objection that he "was very convinced about [her allegations]." Id. at 83. He also stated that "you would believe [her story]." Id. Dr. Chaganti's vouching statements were neither inadvertent nor incidental but were the centerpiece of his testimony. Indeed, his testimony was not based on medical evidence but on his belief that A.G. was telling the truth.
In light of the inconclusive physical evidence, Dr. Chaganti's vouching testimony, in which he stated that he found A.G.'s allegations convincing, improperly bolstered A.G.'s credibility and impinged upon the province of the jury to determine the witness's credibility. Because much of the evidence supporting Rose's conviction is based on A.G.'s allegations and testimony, Rose has demonstrated that there is a reasonable probability that, but for counsel's failure to object to the admission of Dr. Chaganti's vouching testimony, the result of the trial would have been different. See Strickland, 466 U.S. at 694, 104 S.Ct. 2052. Thus, we are constrained to reverse and remand for a new trial.
Reversed and remanded.
BAKER, J., and BAILEY, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Rose also claims that he was denied the effective assistance of counsel because his attorney did not object to the admission of cumulative evidence and that the admission of improper vouching testimony constituted fundamental error. But because we reverse and remand, we need not consider these claims.

=== CASE 2220250 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:37.669025+00 ===

741 N.W.2d 292 (2007)
2007 WI App 226
Jack SCHUETT and Diana Schuett, Plaintiffs-Respondents,
v.
Richard L. HANSON, Jr.,[] Defendant-Appellant.
No. 2006AP3014.
Court of Appeals of Wisconsin.
Submitted on Briefs August 27, 2007.
Opinion Filed September 25, 2007.
*293 On behalf of the defendant-appellant, the cause was submitted on the briefs of Sheila M. Sullivan of Bell, Gierhart & Moore, S.C. of Madison.
On behalf of the plaintiffs-respondents, the cause was submitted on the brief of Judith M. Bostetter of Schober, Bostetter & Heiden, S.C. of Brookfield.
Before HOOVER, P.J., PETERSON and BRUNNER, JJ.
¶ 1 BRUNNER, J.
Richard Hanson, Jr., appeals a default judgment rendered against him after he failed to timely answer an amended complaint. Hanson argues he had no obligation to answer the amended complaint because it was not filed within six months of the original complaint and was therefore untimely pursuant to WIS. STAT. *294 § 802.09(1).[1] He also argues that a default judgment was unavailable because he joined issue when he answered the original complaint. Finally, he contends the circuit court erroneously exercised its discretion when rejecting Hanson's argument that his failure to answer was the result of excusable neglect. We affirm the judgment.
BACKGROUND
¶ 2 On April 7, 2005, Jack and Diana Schuett filed a summons and complaint against Hanson, alleging misrepresentations in a real estate transaction. On October 6, 2005, the Schuetts served an amended complaint upon Hanson. Also on October 6, the Schuetts mailed the amended complaint to the court for filing, which occurred on October 11. While Hanson answered the original complaint, he failed to answer the amended complaint.
¶ 3 Several months later, the Schuetts moved for a default judgment based upon Hanson's failure to answer the amended complaint. Hanson opposed the Schuetts' motion, arguing a default judgment could not be rendered because he joined issue by answering the original complaint. Hanson also moved to strike the amended complaint, contending it was untimely, and to enlarge the time to answer, asserting his failure to timely do so was the result of excusable neglect. The circuit court rejected Hanson's arguments and granted the default judgment. Hanson appeals.
DISCUSSION
A. Timeliness of the Amended Complaint
¶ 4 We first address whether the Schuetts' amended complaint was timely pursuant to WIS. STAT. § 802.09(1).[2] This is a question of statutory interpretation, which we review de novo. See Garcia v. Mazda Motor of Am., Inc., 2004 WI 93, ¶ 7, 273 Wis.2d 612, 682 N.W.2d 365. Statutory interpretation begins with a statute's text, which we give its common, ordinary, and accepted meaning, except that we give technical or specially defined words their technical or special definitions. Kroeplin v. Wisconsin DNR, 2006 WI App 227, ¶ 11, 297 Wis.2d 254, 725 N.W.2d 286. We do not interpret statutory language in isolation, but rather in the context in which it is used. Id.
¶ 5 The parties focus on the portion of WIS. STAT. § 802.09(1) that states, "A party may amend the party's pleading once as a matter of course at any time within 6 months after the summons and complaint are filed. . . ." The parties dispute when a complaint is "amended." The Schuetts contend a pleading is amended when it is served, while Hanson argues a pleading is amended only after it is filed. Here, the *295 Schuetts' amended complaint was served by mail on October 6, 2005, within six months of when the original complaint was filed on April 7, 2005. However, the amended complaint was not filed until after six months, on October 11.
¶ 6 We conclude that an amended pleading is "amended," pursuant to WIS. STAT. § 802.09(1), when it is served upon the parties. While the statutes do not explicitly define when a pleading is "amended," our conclusion is supported by the context of § 802.09(1) within the civil procedure statutes.
¶ 7 An amended pleading is subject to the service and filing requirements of WIS. STAT. § 801.14.[3] Section 801.14 assumes that an amended pleading will be served before it is filed and only requires an amended pleading to be filed "within a reasonable time" after service. See WIS. STAT. § 801.14(4). The time for responding to an amended pleading begins after "service of the amended pleading." WIS. STAT. § 802.09(1). Using Hanson's reasoning, one could never serve an "amended pleading" because the pleading would not be "amended" until later filed. Therefore, Hanson's assertion that an amended pleading is not amended until it is filed is contrary to the plain language of WIS. STAT. § 802.09(1), when read in conjunction with § 801.14(4).
¶ 8 Because WIS. STAT. § 802.09(1) contemplates the service of amended pleadings, pleadings are necessarily "amended" no later than the time they are served. Therefore, in order to amend a pleading within six months of when the original summons and complaint are filed, a party must only serve the amended pleading upon the parties within that timeframe. Pursuant to WIS. STAT. § 801.14(4), the amended pleading must then be filed within a reasonable time after service.
B. Whether Issue Was Joined
¶ 9 We also reject Hanson's argument that a default judgment was inappropriate because issue was joined when he answered the original complaint. He relies on the default judgment statute, specifically that portion stating: "A default judgment may be rendered . . . if no issue of law or fact has been joined and if the time for joining issue has expired." WIS. STAT. § 806.02(1). Hanson cites our supreme court's decision in Snowberry v. Zellmer, 22 Wis.2d 356, 126 N.W.2d 26 (1964), for the proposition that issue was joined because he answered the original complaint.
¶ 10 In Snowberry, the court addressed whether a motion for summary judgment was timely filed. The relevant statute required the motion to be filed within forty days after issue was joined. Id. at 357-58, 126 N.W.2d 26. The court concluded that issue was joined at the time of the original answer, not the amended answer, even though the amended answer asserted a "somewhat-different issue. . . ." Id. at 358, 126 N.W.2d 26.
¶ 11 We first note an obvious distinction between Snowberry and this case, which is that Snowberry involved only an amended answer, whereas this case involves an amended complaint. See id. Where an amended complaint makes no *296 reference to the original complaint and incorporates no part of the original complaint by reference, the amended complaint supplants the original. Holman v. Family Health Plan, 227 Wis.2d 478, 487, 596 N.W.2d 358 (1999). In doing so, the "amended complaint becomes the only live, operative complaint . . . on which default judgment [may] be entered." Id. at 484, 596 N.W.2d 358.
¶ 12 Here, unlike Snowberry, the original complaint was rendered a nullity when supplanted by the amended complaint. See Holman, 227 Wis.2d at 484-87, 596 N.W.2d 358. Further, because WIS. STAT. § 802.09(1) requires an amended complaint to be answered, Hanson's answer to an original complaint does not stand as an answer to an amended complaint. See Bell v. Employers Mut. Cas. Co., 198 Wis.2d 347, 363, 541 N.W.2d 824 (Ct.App. 1995).
¶ 13 Therefore, once the amended complaint supplanted the original, the amended complaint stood alone, waiting to be answered pursuant to WIS. STAT. § 802.09. Any previous joining of issue resulting from Hanson answering the original complaint was, by this point, nullified. To join issue, Hanson was required to answer the amended complaint, which he did not do. Because no issue has been joined with the only live, operative complaint in this case, we reject Hanson's argument that a default judgment was precluded by WIS. STAT. § 806.02(1).
C. Excusable Neglect
¶ 14 Hanson's final argument is that the circuit court erred when declining to find that Hanson's failure to answer the amended complaint was the result of excusable neglect. Pursuant to WIS. STAT. § 801.15(2)(a), the circuit court could enlarge the time to answer the amended complaint if Hanson's failure to timely do so was the result of excusable neglect. Excusable neglect is that neglect which might have been the act of a reasonably prudent person under the same circumstances. Hedtcke v. Sentry Ins. Co., 109 Wis.2d 461, 468, 326 N.W.2d 727 (1982). It is not synonymous with neglect, carelessness, or inattentiveness. Id.
¶ 15 Hanson makes a number of arguments regarding excusable neglect. Referencing his argument about the timeliness of the amended complaint, Hanson argues a reasonable person would not believe an answer was necessary. He also asserts he acted promptly to strike the amended complaint and to enlarge the time to answer after the Schuetts filed their motion for default judgment. Finally, he contends there is no assertion he acted in bad faith or that the Schuetts were prejudiced by his failure to answer.
¶ 16 Hanson conspicuously avoids the central question of why he actually failed to answer the amended complaint. In fact, he never offered an explanation to the circuit court. The closest Hanson came to doing so was asserting, in his brief to the court, that he mistakenly believed an answer had been filed.[4] While this might explain why he did not move for an enlargement of time sooner, it does not explain why he failed to answer initially. The circuit court was therefore presented with no basis for concluding that Hanson's failure to answer was the result of excusable neglect.
Judgment affirmed.
NOTES
[]  Petition for Review filed.
[1]  All references to the Wisconsin Statutes are to the 2005-06 version unless otherwise noted.
[2]  The full text of WIS. STAT. § 802.09(1) states:
A party may amend the party's pleading once as a matter of course at any time within 6 months after the summons and complaint are filed or within the time set in a scheduling order under s. 802.10. Otherwise a party may amend the pleading only by leave of court or by written consent of the adverse party; and leave shall be freely given at any stage of the action when justice so requires. A party shall plead in response to an amended pleading within 20 days after service of the amended pleading unless: a) the court otherwise orders; or b) no responsive pleading is required or permitted under s. 802.01(1). If a defendant in the action is an insurance company, if any cause of action raised in the original pleading, cross-claim, or counterclaim is founded in tort, or if the party pleading in response is the state or an officer, agent, employee, or agency of the state, the 20-day time period under this subsection is increased to 45 days.
[3]  WISCONSIN STAT. § 801.14(4) states:
All papers after the summons required to be served upon a party, except as provided in s. 804.01(6), shall be filed with the court within a reasonable time after service. The filing of any paper required to be served constitutes a certification by the party or attorney effecting the filing that a copy of such paper has been timely served on all the parties required to be served, except as the person effecting the filing may otherwise stipulate in writing.
[4]  We note that this assertion was not in the form of an affidavit or testimony.

=== CASE 9739547 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:17:22.981485+00 ===

BAKER, Judge,
dissenting.
I must respectfully dissent because the result reached by the majority is the ultimate example of elevating form over substance.
The fact is that Walker is suing Wausau on a contract-an insurance policy-but does not want to be bound by its terms. The policy clearly states that it does not apply to "[alnoy obligation for which the 'nsured' or the 'insured's' insurer may be held liable under any workers' [sic] compensation ... law or any similar law." *1106Appellant's App. p. 47. There is no dispute but that Walker was operating the tractor-trailer in the course of his employment, which means that worker's compensation applies, and this incident is exeluded under the clear terms of the policy. Therefore, the insurance company would be entitled to summary judgment on this basis but for a technicality-it responded too late to the requests for admission, which were then deemed admitted.
Without the admission that none of the defenses listed in the policy apply to Walker's claim, Walker would have no case. Walker could not possibly win this case in a trial on the merits, and I cannot condone this type of "gotcha" litigation. I would therefore find that the trial court erred in denying Wausau's motion for leave to withdraw the admission, but affirm its grant of summary judgment on the basis that the policy prevents recovery where worker's compensation applies.

=== CASE 2220256 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:38.01524+00 ===

846 N.E.2d 271 (2006)
Nicholas BIDDINGER, Appellant-Defendant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee-Plaintiff.
No. 49A05-0504-CR-234.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
April 25, 2006.
Rehearing Denied June 29, 2006.
Transfer Granted August 24, 2006.
*274 Richard Kammen, Gilroy, Kammen & Hill, Indianapolis, for Appellant.
Steve Carter, Attorney General of Indiana, Richard C. Webster, Deputy Attorney General, Indianapolis, for Appellee.
OPINION
BAKER, Judge.
Appellant-defendant Nicholas Biddinger appeals from the sentence imposed by the trial court after Biddinger pleaded guilty to one count of Aggravated Battery,[1] a class B felony. In particular, Biddinger argues that the trial court erred in: (1) refusing to permit him to make a statement in allocution; (2) considering the type of gun and ammunition Biddinger used in committing the crime as an aggravating circumstance when it was lawful for him to own and possess them; (3) overlooking the fact that Biddinger suffered from post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) as a mitigator; and (4) imposing a sentence that is inappropriate in light of the nature of the offense and his character.
We conclude that the trial court erred in considering the type of weapon and ammunition that Biddinger used in committing the instant offense as an aggravating circumstance. We also conclude that the trial court should have considered Biddinger's PTSD to be a mitigator. But because the trial court sentenced Biddinger to the minimum amount of executed time permitted by the plea agreement  ten years  we do not have authority to reduce his sentence. Consequently, we affirm the judgment of the trial court.
FACTS
In March 2002, just prior to his graduation from high school in Shelbyville, Biddinger obtained a permit to carry a gun. The gun, which Biddinger carried frequently, was a .40-caliber Glock that was loaded with hollow-point bullets.[2] In May 2003, Biddinger was vacationing in Miami, Florida, with his parents, when he was attacked by two men who pistol-whipped and threatened to shoot him.
On January 17, 2004, Biddinger and his girlfriend, Jessica Powell, planned to spend the night at Powell's house because her mother and her mother's boyfriend would be gone for the weekend. That evening, Powell received a telephone call from eighteen-year-old Jason Gross, seventeen-year-old Grant Hoefener, and nineteen-year-old Kris Holzhausen, who wanted to come and spend time at Powell's house that night.
After Powell's mother and her boyfriend left, Powell, Gross, Hoefener, and Holzhausen went to a nearby liquor store and paid someone to buy vodka and beer for them. They returned to Powell's house and began to drink and play drinking games. Biddinger did not join in, remaining in another room watching television while Powell stayed with the three others, drinking and dancing. At some point, Biddinger *275 told Hoefener and Holzhausen that he thought that Gross was flirting with Powell, and that if Gross continued to flirt with her, Biddinger was going to shoot him. Gross later learned of Biddinger's threat, which precipitated an argument between Biddinger and the three other men, who were intoxicated. The argument continued as the night progressed.
Biddinger also argued with Powell, saying that the three other men should leave and go home. But Powell did not want them to leave because they had been drinking and were too intoxicated. Powell finally told Biddinger to call his parents to come and get him because Biddinger did not have a driver's license and was unable to drive himself home.
After Biddinger telephoned his parents, he and Powell waited in her bedroom until they arrived. When they arrived, Biddinger grabbed his bag and began to walk to the kitchen so that he could exit the home through the kitchen door. Hoefener, Gross, and Holzhausen began arguing with Biddinger again as he exited the house. After Biddinger left through the kitchen door, Gross and Holzhausen followed him outside and stood at the top of the driveway, yelling at him. As the two men were yelling at Biddinger, he walked to the end of the driveway and placed his bag in his parents' vehicle.
Biddinger's father, Robb, exited his vehicle, told Biddinger to get inside the vehicle, walked up the driveway followed by his wife, Ginger, and entered the door into the kitchen of Powell's house. Robb, who had a gun in his hand, pushed Hoefener against the stove, pointed the gun at his stomach, told him not to bother Biddinger again, and threatened to shoot him. Powell began pushing Robb, telling him to get out, while at the same time, Ginger grabbed Robb, told him, "Let's go," and began pulling him toward the door. Tr. p. 25, 259.
While the activity was taking place in the kitchen, Biddinger began walking up the driveway toward the house, but was prevented from re-entering the home by Holzhausen, who had remained outside. Biddinger pulled his gun, told Holzhausen to back off, and then shot Holzhausen in the left side of his chest near his heart. Police and emergency medical technicians (EMTs) were called and came to the scene. The EMTs transported Holzhausen to the hospital, where he died later that morning as a result of the gunshot wound.
On January 18, 2004, Biddinger was arrested for killing Holzhausen. He was eventually charged with murder, class C felony battery, class D felony pointing a firearm, class D felony criminal recklessness, and class B felony aggravated battery. A jury trial commenced on October 7, 2004.
On October 13, 2004, Biddinger entered into a guilty plea, whereby he pleaded guilty to aggravated battery in exchange for the State dismissing the remaining charges against him. The parties were free to argue aggravating and mitigating circumstances but agreed that Biddinger would receive an executed sentence of at least ten, and at the most, twenty years of incarceration. By the terms of the plea agreement, Biddinger waived the Blakely requirement and requested that the trial court determine the aggravating circumstances.
At the sentencing hearing on December 3, 2004, Biddinger presented evidence concerning the possibility that he might be suffering from PTSD and the effect that PTSD might have had on him at the time he shot and killed Holzhausen. At the conclusion of the evidence, Biddinger sought to make a statement at the appropriate time, but the trial court ruled that *276 allocution was not available because Biddinger had pleaded guilty. According to the trial court, allocution only applies when a defendant pleads not guilty, a trial is held, and a verdict is rendered. The trial court ruled that Biddinger could make a statement with respect to his remorse but could not address any other mitigating factors. Biddinger's counsel proffered Biddinger's full written statement, which he would have given if not for the trial court's ruling, in an envelope and entered the envelope into evidence. Biddinger then made a statement in which he apologized for committing the crime and asked the trial court to impose a sentence that it deemed to be fair.
The trial court found the following aggravating circumstances: (1) Biddinger's weapon was of large caliber and was loaded with hollow-point bullets; (2) Biddinger knew that he was the only person at Powell's house that night who was armed with a gun; (3) Biddinger was told to leave, it was not his idea to leave; neither Biddinger nor Robb had the right to reenter Powell's residence; Holzhausen was acting in defense of others in not allowing Biddinger to reenter the residence with a gun; (4) Biddinger could have retreated at any time once he was outside the home; and (5) Biddinger intended to and did shoot Holzhausen in the left side of his chest, near his heart. The trial court found that the most significant aggravating circumstance, which outweighed all mitigators, was the fact that Holzhausen was not armed, which Biddinger knew at the time he shot him.
The trial court also found the following mitigating circumstances: (1) Biddinger accepted responsibility by pleading guilty; (2) there was provocation until Biddinger exited the house; (3) the crime involved circumstances unlikely to recur; (4) Biddinger's lack of a prior criminal history; and (5) Biddinger was unlikely to commit any other crimes.
Ultimately, the trial court concluded that the aggravators outweighed the mitigators. It imposed a twelve-year sentence on Biddinger, with ten years executed and two years suspended to probation. The trial court also ordered Biddinger to undergo a mental health evaluation and treatment for PTSD through his probation.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
I. Right of Allocution
Biddinger first argues that the trial court erred in refusing to permit him to make a statement of allocution. Indiana Code section 35-38-1-5 provides that when a defendant appears for sentencing, he may "make a statement personally on his own behalf and, before pronouncing sentence, the Court shall ask him whether he wishes to make such a statement."
The purpose of the right of allocution is to give the trial court the opportunity to consider the facts and circumstances relevant to the sentencing of the defendant in the case before it. Vicory v. State, 802 N.E.2d 426, 429 (Ind.2004). When the defendant is given the opportunity to explain his view of the facts and circumstances, the purpose of the right of allocution has been accomplished. Id. at 430. A defendant claiming that he was denied his right to allocution carries a strong burden in establishing his claim. Id. at 429.
Here, the trial court ruled that Biddinger could make a statement but could not argue mitigating circumstances therein. Biddinger claimed that it was an improper restriction on his right of allocution, but agreed to make an abbreviated statement in which he limited himself to an expression of remorse for his actions. Additionally, *277 Biddinger's attorney proffered Biddinger's full written statement in a sealed envelope, submitting it as Exhibit K.
The State argues that a defendant is only entitled to make a statement of allocution when he pleads not guilty and trial has occurred, resulting in a verdict or finding of guilty. Fuller v. State, 485 N.E.2d 117, 122 (Ind.1985); Devore v. State, 658 N.E.2d 657, 660 (Ind.Ct.App.1995). Biddinger essentially contends that Devore has been implicitly overruled by the rule announced in Blakely v. Washington, 542 U.S. 296, 124 S.Ct. 2531, 159 L.Ed.2d 403 (2004).
We need not resolve this debate, however, as Biddinger has not established that the full statement he would have offered  contained in Exhibit K  would have reduced the sentence imposed by the trial court. See Robles v. State, 705 N.E.2d 183, 187 (Ind.Ct.App.1998) (observing that defendant had not made any assertion as to the content of any purported statement that he might have made nor how the statement may have benefited him). Biddinger does not argue that his full statement would have benefited him, and, indeed, having reviewed Exhibit K, we do not believe that it would have affected the trial court's imposition of his sentence in any way. Aside from Biddinger's remorse, which the trial court permitted him to express at sentencing, the full statement essentially contains a recitation of the evening's events from Biddinger's point of view, which parallels the statement of facts in his brief on appeal. Indeed, the brief notes that Biddinger "made a complete statement describing the events that led to the shooting of Holzhausen," Appellant's Br. p. 8, and the trial court was able to refer to that statement in imposing Biddinger's sentence. Consequently, we conclude that even if the trial court erred in refusing to permit Biddinger to make a full statement of allocution, it was harmless error, inasmuch as Biddinger's full statement contains no additional information that would have affected his sentence.
II. Aggravators and Mitigators
Biddinger next contends that the trial court erred in considering an improper aggravator and in declining to give mitigating weight to a proffered mitigator. As we consider these arguments, we observe that sentencing determinations are within the sound discretion of the trial court, and we will only reverse for an abuse of discretion. Krumm v. State, 793 N.E.2d 1170, 1186 (Ind.Ct.App.2003). An abuse of discretion occurs if the trial court's decision is clearly against the logic and effect of the facts and circumstances before the court. Id.
In a sentencing statement, a trial court must identify all significant aggravating and mitigating factors, explain why such factors were found, and balance the factors in arriving at the sentence. Bryant v. State, 841 N.E.2d 1154, 1156 (Ind.2006). A trial court is not obligated to weigh a mitigating factor as heavily as the defendant requests. Smallwood v. State, 773 N.E.2d 259, 263 (Ind.2002). A single aggravating factor may support the imposition of an enhanced sentence. Payton v. State, 818 N.E.2d 493, 498 (Ind.Ct. App.2004), trans. denied.
A. Type of Weapon and Ammunition
Biddinger contends that the trial court erred in considering the type of weapon and ammunition he used to kill Holzhausen as an aggravating factor. In particular, Biddinger argues that because he was legally entitled to carry a large caliber weapon loaded with hollow-point bullets, it was an inappropriate aggravator.
*278 The "nature and circumstances" of a crime may be a proper aggravating circumstance. McCann v. State, 749 N.E.2d 1116, 1120 (Ind.2001). To enhance a sentence based upon the nature and circumstances of the time, there should be "some indication that the manner in which the crime was committed was particularly egregious, beyond what the legislature contemplated when it prescribed the presumptive sentence for that offense." Pagan v. State, 809 N.E.2d 915, 927 (Ind.Ct. App.2004).
The State argues that "[t]he nature of a weapon, the manner in which it is used[,] and the circumstances surrounding the case are sufficient to find that aggravating circumstances exist in the use of a weapon." Appellee's Br. p. 8. As support for this argument, the State directs our attention to a number of opinions that allegedly consider the nature of the weapon used in a crime as an aggravating circumstance. But our review of these cases establishes that, to the contrary, the aggravators are focused on the nature of the crime or shooting rather than the weapon itself. See Adkins v. State, 561 N.E.2d 787, 789 (Ind.1990) (considering nature of shooting); Washington v. State, 422 N.E.2d 1218, 1221 (Ind.1981) (same); Smith v. State, 580 N.E.2d 298, 303 (Ind.Ct.App.1991) (considering nature of shooting). Here, however, Biddinger's possession of a large-caliber weapon and hollow-point bullets alone was the aggravator.
As Biddinger observes, it is well established that the "right of Indiana citizens to bear arms for their own self-defense and for the defense of the state" is protected by the State and Federal Constitutions. Kellogg v. City of Gary, 562 N.E.2d 685, 694 (Ind.1990); see also Schubert v. DeBard, 398 N.E.2d 1339 (Ind.Ct. App.1980). Indeed, it is undisputed that Biddinger's possession of the large-caliber weapon and hollow-point bullets was legal and constitutionally protected. We agree with our sister court in Illinois that "[t]he lawful exercise of one's constitutional rights is not, and must not be, a factor in aggravation or mitigation in determining a criminal sentence." People v. McCumber, 132 Ill.App.3d 339, 87 Ill.Dec. 548, 477 N.E.2d 525, 529 (1985). Thus, because Biddinger's mere possession of the weapon and ammunition was lawful and constitutionally protected, the trial court erred in considering that conduct to be an aggravating factor.
Once we remove Biddinger's possession of the weapon and ammunition as an aggravator, however, there are still a number of proper remaining aggravating factors: (1) Biddinger knew that he was the only person at Powell's house that night who was armed with a gun;[3] (2) Biddinger was told to leave, it was not his idea to leave; neither Biddinger nor Robb had the right to reenter Powell's residence; Holzhausen was acting in defense of others in not allowing Biddinger to reenter the residence with a gun; (3) Biddinger could have retreated at any time once he was outside the home; and (4) Biddinger intended to and did shoot Holzhausen in the left side of his chest, near his heart. Under these circumstances, the trial court's error in considering Biddinger's possession of the weapon and ammunition was harmless, inasmuch as we can say *279 with confidence that the trial court would have imposed the same sentence even if it had not considered the inappropriate aggravating circumstance.
B. Biddinger's PTSD
Biddinger next contends that the trial court erred in refusing to consider the possibility that he suffered from PTSD as a mitigating circumstance. The trial court is not obligated to accept the defendant's arguments regarding what constitutes a mitigating circumstance. Legue v. State, 688 N.E.2d 408, 411 (Ind.1997). And as our Supreme Court commented in Legue, finding mitigating circumstances "may involve the consideration and evaluation of various factors .... These matters are best left to the sound discretion of the trial court." Id. But when the trial court fails to find a significant mitigator that is clearly supported by the record, there exists a reasonable belief that it was overlooked. Id.
As support for this argument, Biddinger directs us to a series of cases in which our Supreme Court has held that proven mental illness should be given significant mitigating weight. See, e.g., Crawford v. State, 770 N.E.2d 775 (Ind.2002); Weeks v. State, 697 N.E.2d 28, 30-31 (Ind.1998); Archer v. State, 689 N.E.2d 678, 686 (Ind. 1997). But these and other cases cited by Biddinger all involve defendants who pleaded or were found guilty but mentally ill, which is easily distinguishable from the situation herein. Consequently, we conclude that the trial court was not required by these cases to consider Biddinger's PTSD as a mitigator.
That conclusion does not end our inquiry, however, inasmuch as there is no evidence in the record contradicting Biddinger's claim that he suffers from PTSD as a result of the Miami attack. Moreover, the trial court clearly concluded that Biddinger suffered from PTSD, inasmuch as it ordered that he receive treatment for PTSD through his period of probation. Appellant's App. p. 90. But the trial court never mentioned Biddinger's PTSD in its discussion of mitigating factors even though it explicitly considered and rejected other proffered mitigators. Indeed, the trial court was silent on the subject until it ordered that Biddinger be treated for PTSD as part of his sentence. Under these circumstances, we conclude that Biddinger's PTSD was overlooked as a mitigating circumstance.
But Biddinger and the State entered into a plea agreement, which provided that "[t]here shall be a range of executed time the Court may impose, from ten (10) to twenty (20) years." Appellant's App. p. 57. The trial court imposed a twelve-year sentence on Biddinger, with ten years executed and two years suspended to probation. Because the plea agreement is binding, we do not have authority to reduce Biddinger's sentence. Bennett v. State, 802 N.E.2d 919, 921-22 (Ind. 2004). Consequently, we are compelled to affirm the sentence imposed by the trial court.
III. Appropriateness
Finally, Biddinger argues that the sentence imposed by the trial court is inappropriate in light of the nature of the offense and his character. But Biddinger entered into a plea agreement providing that the trial court was entitled to impose a sentence of ten to twenty years. Inasmuch as the trial court sentenced Biddinger to the lowest end of the term provided by the plea agreement, we need not address this argument. And in any event, because his plea agreement provided a cap on sentencing, Biddinger is not entitled to raise an argument with respect to the appropriateness of his sentence. Edwards v. *280 State, 842 N.E.2d 849, 854 (Ind.Ct.App. 2006).
The judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
SULLIVAN, J., and MAY, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Ind.Code § 35-42-2-1.5.
[2]  A hollow-point bullet has "a pit, or hollowed out shape, in its tip, meant to cause it to expand upon entering a target. When the bullet strikes a soft target the pressure created in the pit forces the lead around it to expand greatly into a mushroom-shape. This causes considerably more soft-tissue damage and energy transfer than if the nose had not been hollow.... [H]ollow point bullets are one of the most common types of civilian and police ammunition, due largely to the reduced risk of bystanders being hit by over penetrating or ricocheted bullets, and the increased speed of incapacitation." Wikipedia, the free Encyclopedia, Hollow point bullet, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hollow_point_bullet (last visited Mar. 22, 2006).
[3]  Biddinger argues that this aggravator is improper because it is also punishing him for being armed, which is constitutionally protected conduct. To the contrary, however, this aggravator centers on Biddinger's knowledge that he was the only person at Powell's house that night who was armed, which shows that he was not in fear of being shot and killed by one of the other people who were present. Accordingly, this aggravator properly focuses on the nature and circumstances of the crime.

=== CASE 2220262 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:38.184945+00 ===

741 N.W.2d 628 (2007)
274 Neb. 467
Rick EASTLICK, Appellant
v.
LUEDER CONSTRUCTION COMPANY, a dissolved Nebraska corporation, et al., Appellees.
No. S-06-721.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
November 16, 2007.
*631 Michaela Skogerboe and James E. Harris, of Harris Kuhn Law Firm, L.L.P., Omaha, for appellant.
Patricia McCormack and Eugene L. Hillman, of Hillman, Forman, Nelsen, Childers & McCormack, Omaha, for appellees.
HEAVICAN, C.J., WRIGHT, CONNOLLY, GERRARD, STEPHAN, and MILLER-LERMAN, JJ.
WRIGHT, J.
NATURE OF CASE
Rick Eastlick was employed as a bricklayer for Monona Masonry, Inc. (Monona), which was doing masonry work at a church construction site in Fremont, Nebraska. Eastlick was working on scaffolding when it collapsed, and he sustained serious injuries. The general contractor for the project was Lueder Construction Company (Lueder). Eastlick sued Lueder for damages. *632 The district court concluded that Lueder owed no duty to Eastlick related to the accident, and it granted Lueder's motion for summary judgment. Eastlick appeals.
SCOPE OF REVIEW
Summary judgment is proper when the pleadings and evidence admitted at the hearing disclose no genuine issue as to any material fact or as to the ultimate inferences that may be drawn from those facts and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Papillion Rural Fire Prot. Dist. v. City of Bellevue, 274 Neb. 214, 739 N.W.2d 162 (2007). In reviewing a summary judgment, an appellate court views the evidence in a light most favorable to the party against whom the judgment is granted and gives such party the benefit of all reasonable inferences deducible from the evidence. Id.
FACTS
On October 24, 2000, Eastlick was working on scaffolding at a church construction project. The scaffolding collapsed, and Eastlick fell approximately 20 feet to the ground, sustaining injuries, including a fracture of the right femur that required surgery. Eastlick also developed post-traumatic stress disorder.
The metal scaffolding was described as a "Morgan scaffold." The sections of scaffolding stacked on top of each other, with planks in between to allow workers to walk on the scaffolding. The scaffolding was held together by straight braces and "X" braces. The planks were mechanically raised as brickwork was finished and the work area became higher from the ground.
On the day of Eastlick's accident, two sections of scaffolding were in place, but no planks had been set up. Another bricklayer, Jesse Stout, said he and Eastlick were directed by a Monona employee to change the straight brace at the top of the scaffolding. They climbed to the top of the scaffolding, and Eastlick removed an X brace rather than a straight brace, resulting in a collapse of the scaffolding.
Richard Gegzna, who worked as a bricklayer foreman for Monona at the time of the accident, explained that a Morgan scaffold is a single tower connected together in 9-foot sections with a cable crank. Sections can be added using X braces and straight braces. Eastlick and Stout climbed the scaffolding to change a straight brace that held the scaffolding together because one of the bars was bent. Gegzna's back was turned when the accident occurred, but he saw the two men hit the ground. He examined the scaffolding later and determined that pins had been removed from the X brace on Eastlick's side of the scaffolding. Gegzna testified that if an X brace and a straight brace were both removed, the scaffolding could fall.
According to Gegzna, Lueder did not recommend the type of scaffolding or provide instructions on setup or dismantling. Lueder did not direct Monona as to the tools to be used, but Lueder had specifications on how the work should be done, and it had a safety program and policy. Gegzna did not recall whether Monona employees participated in Lueder's safety program.
Wayne Schiltz, a field supervisor for Monona at the time of the accident, stated that the Morgan scaffolding owned by Monona was used on the jobsite. Lueder did not deliver or make repairs to the Morgan scaffolding and had nothing to do with how the scaffolding was erected. Schiltz said that Eastlick had experience with scaffolding and usually helped with repairs of scaffolding or replacement of parts.
*633 Schiltz described the X brace as a unit with a pin through the center of it. The straight brace holds the scaffolding together and stabilizes the X brace. It takes three people to safely erect or dismantle the scaffolding. Schiltz said that Eastlick had damaged a brace with a forklift as the scaffolding was brought in and that Schiltz directed Eastlick and Stout to replace the brace. They leaned a section of scaffolding against another section and then removed the bent brace without first replacing it. The scaffolding then fell. Schiltz did not see the accident, but he saw that the scaffolding had collapsed.
Schiltz opined that it was "[u]nbelievable for two men that has [sic] worked for us for many years with the same very equipment and do something so horrendous as that. It's unbelievable." Eastlick and Stout told Schiltz that they had pulled the pins out of the brace. Three pins were missing from the collapsed scaffolding.
Eastlick filed a complaint against Lueder, Monona, and American Family Mutual Insurance Company on October 20, 2004, alleging that Lueder, as the general contractor, had control and supervision over all aspects of the construction project and had a duty to foresee that the masonry work was likely to create peculiar risks or involve peculiar or inherent dangers. Eastlick alleged that Lueder (1) violated its nondelegable duty to provide a reasonably safe place to work; (2) violated its statutory duties under the requirements of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA); (3) violated its nondelegable duties to see that the work performed by the independent contractors involving peculiar risks was done with a requisite degree of care by taking adequate safety precautions and measures; and (4) failed to ensure that the scaffolding was erected, moved, and dismantled under the supervision of or by a competent, qualified person.
Eastlick alleged that as a result of the accident, he was injured and incurred hospital, medical, and related health care expenses. He claimed that he was totally disabled from October 24 through December 4, 2000, resulting in lost wages of $6,945, and that he would continue to sustain lost earnings and loss of earning capacity in the future.
Lueder denied Eastlick's allegations but admitted it was the general contractor for the construction project. Lueder alleged that Eastlick's exclusive remedy was workers' compensation; that Lueder owed no duty of care to Eastlick, who was an employee of a subcontractor; and that the use of scaffolding did not involve a peculiar risk or constitute an ultrahazardous activity.
The district court sustained Lueder's motion for summary judgment and overruled Eastlick's motion for partial summary judgment. The court found that the peculiar risk doctrine did not apply. There was no dispute that Monona owned the scaffolding and that the scaffolding had been erected by Monona employees. The court found that Lueder's duty to Eastlick extended only to provide a reasonably safe place to work and did not include a duty to inspect equipment that was owned, directed, or controlled by Monona. There was no dispute that Monona was cited by OSHA for safety violations and that Lueder was not cited for any OSHA violation. The court concluded that the record did not support an action for negligence against Lueder.
Eastlick's motion to reconsider was overruled, and he timely perfected this appeal.
*634 ASSIGNMENTS OF ERROR
Eastlick assigns the following errors, summarized and restated: The district court erred (1) in finding that Lueder, as general contractor, owed no duty to Eastlick and that Eastlick had no claim against Lueder for his injuries; (2) in dismissing Eastlick's claim based on the finding that Lueder had no duty to inspect equipment owned, directed, and controlled by its subcontractor (Monona), where Eastlick's claim was based on an unsafe condition and activity on the premises; (3) in finding that the work performed by Eastlick at the time of the accident did not create a peculiar risk of physical harm without the taking of special precautions; (4) in finding that there was no breach of Lueder's duty to Eastlick, which was an issue of fact; and (5) in failing to find that Lueder owed Eastlick a duty to keep the premises in a reasonably safe condition.
ANALYSIS
Eastlick, who was employed as a bricklayer for Monona, sustained serious injuries when the scaffolding he was standing on collapsed. Eastlick alleged that Lueder's negligence resulted in his injuries. In order to prevail in a negligence action, a plaintiff must establish the defendant's duty to protect the plaintiff from injury, a failure to discharge that duty, and damages proximately caused by the failure to discharge that duty. National Am. Ins. Co. v. Constructors Bonding Co., 272 Neb. 169, 719 N.W.2d 297 (2006).
The first issue is whether Lueder, the general contractor, owed Eastlick a duty to protect him from the injury that occurred. Related to this issue is whether Lueder maintained control over Eastlick's workplace and whether Lueder breached any of its nondelegable duties to Eastlick by failing to provide a safe place to work, violating a statute or rule of law, or violating its duty of due care if Eastlick's work involved a special risk.
Whether a legal duty exists for actionable negligence is a question of law dependent on the facts in a particular case. Didier v. Ash Grove Cement Co., 272 Neb. 28, 718 N.W.2d 484 (2006). When reviewing questions of law, an appellate court has an obligation to resolve the questions independently of the conclusions reached by the trial court. Id.
Lueder was the general contractor on the jobsite pursuant to a written construction contract with the owner. The contract provided that Lueder was required to supervise and direct the work at the site; that the contractor was responsible to the owner for acts and omissions of the contractor's employees, subcontractors, and their agents or employees; and that the contractor was responsible for initiating, maintaining, and supervising all safety precautions and programs. The subcontract between Lueder and Monona included a provision that the subcontractor, Monona, agreed to assume the entire responsibility and liability for all damages or injury to all persons arising out of or resulting from the execution of the work provided for in the subcontract.
Generally, one who employs an independent contractor is not liable for physical harm caused to another by the acts or omissions of the contractor or his servants. Id. There are two recognized exceptions to the general rule which may allow the employer of an independent contractor to be held vicariously liable to a third party. "Those two exceptions are where (1) the employer retains control over the contractor's work or (2) the employer has a nondelegable duty to protect another from harm." Id. at 34, 718 N.W.2d at 490. Nondelegable duties include (1) the duty of an owner in possession *635 and control of premises to provide a safe place for work by an independent contractor's employee, (2) a duty imposed by statute or rule of law, and (3) the duty of due care when the independent contractor's work involves special risks or dangers. See id.
The contract between Lueder and Monona required that Monona assume the entire responsibility and liability for any injury to any person arising out of the work done by Monona. There was no evidence that Lueder had control over the work being done by Eastlick. Although Lueder had control of the jobsite, it did not control Eastlick's work or the tools and scaffolding that he was using.
There is no dispute that the scaffolding was owned, maintained, erected, and dismantled by Monona. It was intended for use by Monona and its employees. Although Lueder had a supervising role, it did not direct the masonry work done by Monona, nor did it have control over the manner in which the masonry work was done. There was no evidence that Lueder had control over the work performed by Monona.
Eastlick argues that Lueder owed a nondelegable duty to him to keep the premises in a reasonably safe condition. "A nondelegable duty means that an employer of an independent contractor, by assigning work consequent to a duty, is not relieved from liability arising from the delegated duties negligently performed." Dellinger v. Omaha Pub. Power Dist., 9 Neb.App. 307, 311-12, 611 N.W.2d 132, 137 (2000), citing Parrish v. Omaha Pub. Power Dist., 242 Neb. 783, 496 N.W.2d 902 (1993). Liability for breach of a nondelegable duty is an exception to the general rule that one who employs an independent contractor is not liable for the independent contractor's negligence. Dellinger v. Omaha Pub. Power Dist., supra.
Lueder has not disputed that it had a nondelegable duty to provide a safe place to work for Monona employees. The record shows that Eastlick was not injured because the workplace was unsafe. Rather, he was injured when he removed a brace on the scaffolding in an incorrect manner. The scaffolding was owned, erected, and maintained by Monona, Eastlick's employer, and not by Lueder, the general contractor. There was no evidence presented to show that Lueder breached any nondelegable duty to provide a safe workplace.
Eastlick also argues that Lueder was negligent by statute or rule of law because OSHA regulations provide that Lueder should have ensured that Eastlick had proper training to work on the scaffolding. He also claims that the court cannot infer that Lueder did not violate an OSHA standard because Lueder was not cited by OSHA.
As the district court noted, there was no dispute in the evidence that the scaffolding was owned and erected by Monona and that Monona was cited for OSHA violations. There was no evidence that Lueder was cited for any OSHA violation. The court stated that Nebraska statutes pertaining to scaffolding place the responsibility for proper erection and dismantling of scaffolding on the company that owns and maintains the scaffolding in use. See Neb. Rev.Stat. §§ 48-425 and 48-428 (Reissue 2004). The Nebraska statutes pertaining to scaffolding safety have been applied by this court to persons who erect, construct, or supply the scaffolding. See Hand v. Rorick Constr. Co., 190 Neb. 191, 206 N.W.2d 835 (1973). The district court found no support for an action for negligence against Lueder by rule of law or statute, and we agree.
*636 Eastlick also argues that the overwhelming weight of the evidence supports a finding that the acts of moving and dismantling scaffolding involve special risks or dangers, which imposed a duty of due care on Lueder. A peculiar risk must involve some special hazard resulting from the nature of the work done, which calls for special precautions. Dellinger v. Omaha Pub. Power Dist., supra.
Examples of types of work which this court has previously held to demonstrate peculiar risks include steel construction work (Parrish v. Omaha Pub. Power Dist., supra), painting the inside of an underground tank creating highly combustible paint fumes (Anderson v. Nashua Corp., 246 Neb. 420, 519 N.W.2d 275 (1994)), and steamfitter work near the opening on a floor deck that exposed vertical reinforcing rods (Simon v. Omaha P.P. Dist., 189 Neb. 183, 202 N.W.2d 157 (1972)).
In Dellinger v. Omaha Pub. Power Dist., 9 Neb.App. 307, 611 N.W.2d 132 (2000), the Nebraska Court of Appeals distinguished cases in which an injury can be traced to an act of negligence, such as the failure to fasten one end of a board on a scaffold-like structure, from those in which a peculiar risk is associated with the work being done. Although there may have been peculiar risks associated with the steel construction work the employee was doing, the actual risk he faced was the result of a failure to properly secure a piece of equipment.
The case at bar is similar. The injury Eastlick sustained was not the result of merely working on the scaffolding, but was the result of a failure to follow proper procedures. There was no evidence that the acts of erecting, repairing, or dismantling the scaffolding carried with them a peculiar risk, although certain safety precautions were necessary. The record does not show that the district court erred in finding that the peculiar risk doctrine did not apply to the facts of this case. There is no evidence that Lueder breached any nondelegable duty arising as a result of any peculiar risk associated with Eastlick's work on the scaffolding.
Eastlick relies on Parrish v. Omaha Pub. Power Dist., 242 Neb. 783, 496 N.W.2d 902 (1993), in which this court reversed the award of summary judgment granted to the owner and the general contractor. However, in that case, the owner of the construction site specifically retained the right to inspect all work, the right to monitor overall progress of the work, and the right to take over the construction if the general contractor failed to perform the work according to the contract. A licensed professional engineer who worked for the owner was stationed at the site for daily contact with the work. He exerted some supervisory control over the construction. The project manager for Omaha Public Power District was involved in coordinating and supervising the work of the general contractor throughout the construction. This court noted that the district's personnel at the construction site were active participants and not just passive observers.
Hand v. Rorick Constr. Co., 190 Neb. 191, 206 N.W.2d 835 (1973), is more applicable to the case at bar. An employee of a masonry subcontractor sued a general contractor for injuries the employee sustained in a fall from a scaffold. The contract between the owner and the general contractor provided that the contractor would take all necessary precautions for the safety of employees.
This court noted that the instrumentality which caused the injury was not the premises, but, rather, was the equipment owned, controlled, and erected by the subcontractor, who was the employer of *637 the injured worker. The evidence did not establish that the general contractor had any right to control the instrumentalities used by the subcontractor. We held that "the duty of a general contractor to employees of a subcontractor extends only to providing a reasonably safe place to work as distinguished from apparatus, tools, or machinery furnished by the subcontractor for the use of his own employees." Id. at 197, 206 N.W.2d at 838.
"[A] general contractor's mere failure to inspect a scaffold owned, erected, and controlled by the subcontractor and furnished by the subcontractor for the use of his own employees does not make the general contractor liable to the subcontractor's employees for injuries caused by defects in the scaffold." Id. at 197, 206 N.W.2d at 838-39. A contractual provision stating that the general contractor would take all necessary precautions for the safety of employees working on the jobsite did not enlarge the common-law duty of the general contractor to a subcontractor's employees such that the general contractor would be required to inspect tools, equipment, and apparatus furnished by the subcontractor for the exclusive use of its own employees. Id.
In the present case, the record shows that Eastlick was injured after he and Stout climbed the scaffolding to change a brace. Eastlick removed the brace before its replacement had been fastened, and the scaffolding fell to the ground. Gegzna, a foreman for Monona, Eastlick's employer, testified that Lueder did not recommend the type of scaffolding, provide instructions on its setup or dismantling, or direct Monona as to the tools to be used. Schiltz, a field supervisor for Monona, stated that the scaffolding was owned by Monona. Lueder did not deliver or make repairs to the scaffolding and had no part in its erection. It was Schiltz who directed Eastlick and Stout to repair the scaffolding. Eastlick had experience working with the scaffolding and frequently helped with repairs or replacement. Schiltz found it "unbelievable" that employees with the experience of Eastlick and Stout would attempt to change the brace without first replacing it.
Summary judgment is proper when the pleadings and evidence admitted at the hearing disclose no genuine issue as to any material fact or as to the ultimate inferences that may be drawn from those facts and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Papillion Rural Fire Prot. Dist. v. City of Bellevue, 274 Neb. 214, 739 N.W.2d 162 (2007). In reviewing a summary judgment, an appellate court views the evidence in a light most favorable to the party against whom the judgment is granted and gives such party the benefit of all reasonable inferences deducible from the evidence. Id.
We have reviewed the evidence in a light most favorable to Eastlick and given him the benefit of all reasonable inferences deducible from the evidence. We find that there was no genuine issue of material fact as to whether Lueder owed any nondelegable duty to Eastlick beyond providing a safe place to work. Eastlick's injuries were not the result of an unsafe premises, but, rather, the result of work completed in a negligent manner. Thus, the evidence supports the district court's finding that Lueder was entitled to summary judgment.
CONCLUSION
The judgment of the district court is affirmed.
AFFIRMED.
McCORMACK, J., not participating.

=== CASE 9739548 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:17:25.207912+00 ===

OPINION
BAKER, Judge.
Appellant-defendant Byron Carter appeals from the trial court's order granting summary judgment in favor of appellee plaintiff Property Owners Insurance Company (Property Owners). In particular, Carter contends that the trial court erred in, among other things, concluding that he was an employee, rather than an independent contractor, such that his injury on the job was not covered by Property Owners' insurance policy issued to Three Star Properties, Inc. (Three Star). Concluding, among other things, that there is an issue of material fact with respect to Carter's employment status and that Property Owners is not entitled to judgment as a matter of law at this juncture, we reverse the judgment of the trial court and remand for trial.
FACTS
On July 17, 2000, Carter sustained personal injuries in an accident that occurred while he was assisting Three Star and Benhower Building Movers, Inc. (Benhower) in moving a house in Grant County. Three Star is a business that renovates and moves houses from one location to another, Whenever it planned to move a house, Three Star hired laborers and a moving company to help with the move. Mike Helms, Three Star's president and part owner, explained that Three Star hired laborers in addition to a moving company because, "If you've got a big building or a lot of work, you hire more than one laborer." Appellant's App. p. 188.
The parties dispute the nature of Carter's relationship to Three Star. According to Property Owners, Carter was an employee of Three Star. But according to Carter, Three Star, and Helms, Carter was an independent contractor. Indeed, at the time that Three Star hired Carter, Helms informed him that he would be working as an independent contractor, not as an employee. Three Star required Carter to sign an independent contractor affidavit of exemption with the Worker's Compensation Board, stating that he was an independent contractor working in the construction trades. When Carter filed a request for assistance with the Worker's Compensation Board, Three Star's attorney filed a response, stating that "Carter was an independent contractor and not an employee." Appellant's App. p. 55.
Carter began working on certain Three Star projects in March 1999. Three Star paid Carter between eleven and twelve dollars per hour, and Helms understood that Carter worked as a general laborer. Carter kept track of his hourly work and was paid on that basis by Three Star. Three Star provided certain tools for Carter's use in the moving process. Generally, Carter performed whatever kind of work Helms instructed him to do. Ben-hower instructed Carter with regard to loading the house onto the truck, but Carter's other instructions came from Helms. Additionally, Three Star relied upon Carter to supervise temporary help obtained for Three Star through temporary employment agencies.
On the day of the accident, Three Star hired Benhower to transport a house. On that day, Helms instructed Carter to climb on top of the house to push any overhead wires out of the way during the move. Benhower informed Carter that it was not a good idea to be on the roof during the move; indeed, Benhower did not permit anyone to be on the roof during a move because of the risk of electrocution. During *715the move, Carter was electrocuted and sustained injuries as a result of the electrocution.
At the time of the accident, Three Star was insured by a Commercial General Liability Insurance Policy (Policy) issued by Property Owners. The Policy contains the following exelusions on liability coverage:
2. Exelusions
This insurance does not apply to:
* "t * * * *
d. Any obligation of the insured under a workers' compensation, disability benefits or unemployment compensation law or any similar law.
e. "Bodily injury" to: (1) An employee of the insured arising out of and in the course
of employment by the insured
[[Image here]]
* * * * * *
This exclusion applies:
(1) Whether the insured may be liable as an employer or in any other capacity; and
(2) To any obligation to share damages with or repay someone else who must pay damages because of injury.
This exclusion does not apply to liability assumed by the insured under an "insured contract."
# * x B # x
5. "Insured contract" means:
[[Image here]]
f. That part of any other contract or agreement pertaining to your business ... under which you assume the tort liability of another party to pay for "bodily injury" or "property damage" to a third person or organization. Tort liability means a liability that would be imposed by law in the absence of any contract or agreement.
Appellant's App. p. 208-04.
On February 15, 2001, Carter filed a lawsuit (the Carter Lawsuit) against Three Star, Helms, and Benhower, seeking damages for the injuries he sustained as a result of the electrocution. Property Owners is defending Three Star and Helms in that action pursuant to a reservation of rights in the underlying action herein.
On May 14, 2003, Property Owners filed a complaint for declaratory judgment against Carter, arguing that the Policy does not cover Carter's injuries, inasmuch as he was an employee of Three Star and sustained the injuries in the course of his employment. On April 18, 2005, Property Owners filed a motion for summary judgment, arguing that there are no genuine issues of material fact and that it is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Following briefing and a hearing, on October 11, 2005, the trial court entered summary judgment in favor of Property Owners. Carter now appeals.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
Carter argues that the trial court erred in granting summary judgment in favor of Property Owners. In particular, he contends that: (1) the trial court should have allowed the trial court in the Carter Lawsuit to determine whether Carter was an employee of Three Star; (2) the Policy is ambiguous; and (@) there is a genuine issue of material fact with respect to Carter's status as employee or independent contractor.
I. Standard of Review
As we consider Carter's arguments, we observe that summary judgment is appropriate only if the pleadings and evidence *716considered by the trial court show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Owens Corning Fiberglass Corp. v. Cobb, 754 N.E.2d 905, 909 (Ind.2001); see also Ind. Trial Rule 56(C). On a motion for summary judgment, all doubts as to the existence of material issues of fact must be resolved against the moving party. Owens Corning, 7454 N.E.2d at 909. Additionally, all facts and reasonable inferences from those facts are construed in favor of the nonmoving party. Id. If there is any doubt as to what conclusion a jury could reach, then summary judgment is improper. Id.
An appellate court faces the same issues that were before the trial court and follows the same process. Id. at 908. The party appealing from a summary judgment decision has the burden of persuading the court that the grant or denial of summary judgment was erroneous. Id. When a trial court grants summary judgment, we carefully scrutinize that determination to ensure that a party was not improperly prevented from having his or her day in court. Id.
II. The Carter Lawsuit
Carter first argues that the trial court should have declined to address whether he is an employee or an independent contractor of Three Star. According to Carter, the trial court here should have permitted the trial court in the Carter Lawsuit to decide that issue. He contends that Property Owners' conduct is having a direct effect on the outcome of both cases, inasmuch as it is defending Three Star and Helms in the Carter Lawsuit and is a party to this one. The defendants in the Carter Lawsuit are not raising a defense that he was an employee, in which case his tort claim would be barred by worker's compensation laws. Thus, Carter contends that Property Owners has taken inconsistent positions with respect to Carter's employment status and that the trial court herein should not have permitted "Property Owners to assert that Carter was an employee and not an independent contractor when Property Owners was asserting just the opposite in the Carter Lawsuit." Appellant's Br. p. 14.
Property Owners, however, is not a party to the Carter Lawsuit. To the contrary, it is merely defending its insured, as it is obligated to do. Property Owners has a duty to defend its insured regardless of the insureds' factual contentions. Wilson v. Cont'l Cas. Co., 778 N.E.2d 849, 852 (Ind.Ct.App.2002). It is Property Owners' insureds, not Property Owners, who admit in the Carter Lawsuit that Carter was an independent contractor of Three Star. Because Property Owners' contentions are adverse to its insureds, it acted properly in filing a separate complaint for declaratory judgment even as it continued to defend its insureds in the Carter Lawsuit. Under these cireumstances, the trial court herein appropriately considered the issue of Carter's employment status.
TII. The Policy
Carter next argues that the Policy is ambiguous, inasmuch as it fails to define the terms "employee" and "subcontracted work." Insurance contracts are subject to the same rules of interpretation as are other contracts. Allstate Ins. Co. v. Dana Corp., 759 N.E.2d 1049, 1053-54 (Ind.2001). If the policy language is clear and unambiguous, it should be given its plain and ordinary meaning. Id. at 1054. In ascertaining a contract's clarity, or lack thereof, a court considers the whole document, not just the disputed language. In re Kemper Ins. Cos., 819 N.E.2d 485, 490 (Ind.Ct.App.2004). If the terms of the *717contract are unclear, ambiguous, or capable of more than one interpretation, courts will construe the contract to determine and give effect to the intent of the parties at the time they entered into it. Id. A contract is ambiguous when it "is susceptible to more than one interpretation as measured by the standard of whether reasonable minds could differ as to its meaning." Id. at 491.
Carter contends that the Policy is ambiguous because the terms "sub-contracted work" and "employee" are not defined. He directs our attention to the premium charged by Property Owners. In particular, Carter notes that Property Owners charged Three Star $1.281 for each $1,000 of "Sub-Contracted Work." 1 Appellant's App. p. 69. The distinction between subcontractors and employees is not apparent from the Policy; accordingly, we agree with Carter that the Policy is ambiguous. Next, therefore, we will turn to the common law ten-factor test designed to distinguish between employees and independent contractors.
IV. Employee vs. Independent Contractor
Finally, we must determine whether the trial court properly concluded that Carter was an employee of, rather than an independent contractor for, Three Star.2 Whether one acts as an employee or an independent contractor is generally a question for the finder of fact. Moberly v. Day, 757 N.E.2d 1007, 1009 (Ind.2001). If the significant underlying facts are undisputed, however, the court may properly determine a worker's classification as a matter of law. Id.
In Indiana, a ten-factor analysis is used to distinguish employees from independent contractors. Id. at 1009-10. These factors are:
"(a) The extent of control which, by the agreement, the master may exercise over the details of the work;
(b) Whether or not the one employed is engaged in a distinct occupation or business;
(c) The kind of occupation, with reference to whether, in the locality, the work is usually done under the direction of the employer or by a specialist without supervision;
(d) The skill required in the particular occupation;
(e) Whether the employer or the workman supplies the instrumentalities, tools, and the place of work for the person doing the work;
*718(£) The length of time for which the person is employed;
(g) The method of payment, whether by the time or by the job;
(h) Whether or not the work is a part of the regular business of the employer;
(i) Whether or not the parties believe they are creating the relation of master and servant; and
(J) Whether the principal is or is not in business."
Id. at 1010 (quoting Restatement (Second) of Ageney § 220(2) (1958)). In applying the analysis, all factors are considered, and no single factor is dispositive. Id.
A. Extent of Control
Our Supreme Court looks to the definition of "employee" offered by the Restatement (Second) of Agency section 220(1) for guidance: one who is "'employed to perform services in the affairs of another and whol[,] with respect to the physical conduct in the performance of the services[,] is subject to the other's control or right to control'" Moberly, 757 N.E.2d at 1010. Additionally, comment (d) describes control or right to control as " "important and in many situations ... " Id. determinative.
Here, Helm initially testified that Three Star gave Carter only general instructions regarding the work to be done: "Just like any other contractor, he's got X amount of work to do and this is when it will take place and this is what's to be done." Appellant's App. p. 187. Helms also testified that Benhower, not Three Star, exercised primary control over Carter:
Q. What was he supposed to be doing? What were his specific instructions from Three Star as to what he was to be doing that day:
A. Just general labor.
Q. Well what specifically in terms of general labor? Could he mow the yard? I'm trying to figure out exactly what it is you wanted him to do. ©
A. Whatever needed to be done. That's all I know. Whatever Ben-hower had him to be, to be doing.
Was he supposed to do whatever Benhower told him to do? ©
\ As far as I know. p
Is that what you told him to do? $
I didn't tell him nothing specifically he, [sic] do exactly as Benhower says. >
|__ Q. Well I'm trying to figure out what instructions Three Star gave this man that, ub, it had hired a general labor to do that particular day that he was injured?
A. They basically did what they needed to do, what needed to be done. We weren't there to instruct them on any of it. '
Q. Well, what was it that needed to be done that you expected Mr. Carter to do?
A. They were told when we started work on a house what needed to be done, by this time he knew what to do and that.
Id. at 140. Similarly, Helms also testified as follows:
Q. What was [Carter's] role on the jobs of [Benhower]?
A. Just general labor. tractor. General con-
Q. Hired by you?
A. I paid him. Benhower would tell him what he wanted.
Id. p. 128.
But Property Owners directs us to the following portion of Helms's testimony as support for its assertion that Three Star, *719not Benbhower, exercised primary control over Helms:
Q. With respect to Mr. Carter, if I understand your testimony, he was instructed to show up for work, but you didn't tell him what he needed to do.
They were given the instruction on the houses when we was starting on them and that was it.
Okay. What were the instructions you gave generally?
Remove anything underneath that needed to be removed to get the I-beams under them. Get the foundation knocked out to where they could get it under there and then we found out whatever the height was, well cut it down to there. He could assist on that [but] for a lot of times he didn't.
Okay. And those are the instrue-tions that came from Three Star?
Yeah.
Were there any instructions pertaining to what to do while the house was being moved?
A. No.
Id. at 142.
Additionally, Carter testified that for moves involving Benhower, he took instructions from Benhower regarding the work to be done. Id. at 147. But Carter later testified as follows:
Q. When you received instructions about your work assignments and described, you know, helping getting the houses up, that kind of thing. Did, was it Mr. Helms that told you how to do that or what to do?
Right.
Other than taking some instruction from Mr. Benhower about moving some beams to get it loaded on the truck, did he ever give you any other instructions about what to do on any of these moves?
Not that I can recall.
Okay. Um. When you were involved in the house moves, um, did you have an understanding as to your role in the move? And what I mean by that is, were you the representative on behalf of Three Star that was present during these moves? Or were you just a laborer?
I was just a laborer. I just, just know whatever had to be done, I just, you know, knows what had to be done, so?
Id. at 156.
After considering the above evidence, we can only conclude that there is a conflict with respect to the degree of control exercised over Carter, and by whom the primary control was exercised. Both Helms and Carter attested that Helms gave Carter little instruction, that Helms gave Carter more substantial instruction, that Benhower gave Carter his primary instructions, and that Benhower only instructed Carter on very specific portions of the move. Given that we must construe all facts and reasonable inferences against Property Owners, for the purposes of summary judgment, we conclude that this factor weighs in favor of Carter being an independent contractor rather than an employee. At the very least, the evidence tends to reveal a rather substantial issue of material fact appropriate for resolution by the trier of fact.
B. Occupation or Business of One Employed
The Restatement notes that this factor examines "whether or not the one employed is engaged in a distinct occupation or business." Restatement (Second) *720Agency § 220(2). Helms's and Carter's testimony establish that Carter worked as a general laborer for Three Star. Appellant's App. p. 126, 146. Additionally, Helms's testimony demonstrates that he sought to hire Carter because he knew that Carter "did odd jobs and contracting work and painting ...." Id. at 126. But Three Star requested that Carter sign an affidavit when he began working, which states that Carter is "an independent contractor working in the construction trades ...." Appellant's App. p. 58. The affidavit notwithstanding, all of the testimony describing Carter's actual function on the worksite and employment prior to being hired by Three Star establishes that he is engaged in a more general, less distinct, occupation. Consequently, this factor weighs slightly in favor of an employee conclusion.
C. Kind of Occupation
As noted above, this factor examines whether the work is generally done under the direction of the employer or by a specialist without supervision. While there is conflicting evidence regarding whether Carter was primarily following the directions of Helms or Benhower, there is no suggestion in the record that Carter was operating without supervision, nor is there evidence that a general laborer would generally work as a specialist without supervision. Although we conclude that this factor weighs in favor of an employee conclusion for the purposes of summary judgment, we note that the evidence in the record before us is not conclusive with respect to whether Carter was employed by Three Star or Benhower.
D. Skill Required
As already established herein, Carter was employed as a general laborer who assisted Three Star in moving houses. He was required to ride atop the house being moved to handle overhead wires, to assist in inserting the I-beams under the house, to adjust the foundation, and to assist in cutting the house down to size before it was moved. While Carter was not operating without supervision and direction, we are persuaded that these tasks require at least a modicum of special skill. Consequently, this factor weighs slightly in favor of an independent contractor conclusion.
E. Supplier of Equipment, Tools, and Work Location
With respect to equipment and tools, Helms testified as follows:
Q. What tools had [Carter], had you known him to bring to the job?
A. Whatever he needed. I didn't go check what he brought.
Q. Did you ever provide any tools for him to use, or Three Star?
A. Yes.
Q. What kind of tools?
A. If he needed a shovel, we usually had a shovel. If he needed a rake or a hammer or ...
Q. Saw?
A. Or asaw. General hand tools.
Q. That's what Three Star would provide to him? '
A. Right.
Q. Would it be fair to say that Three Star would provide, generally provide whatever tools he needed on -__ the job? ___
A. No. He had his own too.
Q. What kind of tools did he have?
A. I have no idea.
Appellant's App. p. 141. Helms's testimony, therefore, establishes that while Carter had his own tools, Three Star also provided certain tools for his use. Thus, this factor does not tilt the scale in either *721direction, but this evidence may be considered by the trier of fact in light of all the other evidence with respect to Carter's status.
As to work location, "it was the nature of their task that defined their work boundaries ...." Moberly, 757 N.E.2d at 1012. Consequently, physical work location is "not particularly helpful," id., given the nature of the work.
F. Length of Employment
Our Supreme Court observed that "a long-term relationship can indicate employee status," id., but also noted that the Restatement refers to " 'employment over a considerable period of time with regular hours"" Id. (quoting Restatement (See-ond) Ageney § 220(1) cmt. h) (emphasis in Moberly ).
Here, Helms and Carter acknowledge that Carter had been working for Three Star since March 1999, which was when Helms formed Three Star. But Helms testified that Carter was only involved in approximately six of the "nine or ten" house moves undertaken by Three Star. Appellant's App. p. 126. There is no evidence regarding the hours Carter worked, whether the work was full- or part-time, or whether the work was constant. Because we must construe the facts and reasonable inferences therefrom in Carter's favor, we conclude that this factor weighs slightly in favor of an independent contractor conclusion for the purposes of summary judgment.
G. Method of Payment
Three Star paid Carter by the hour rather than by the job, though Carter was responsible for keeping his time in a book and reporting the hourly figures to Three Star. The Restatement notes that payment by hour or month tends to indicate an employer-employee relationship. Restatement (Second) of Agency § 220(2) emt. h. Thus, this factor weighs in favor of an employee conclusion.
H. Regular Business of the Employer
Three Star's regular business was to oversee house-moving operations. Consequently, this factor weighs in favor of an employee conclusion.
I. Belief of the Parties
The Restatement provides that "[i]t is not determinative that the parties believe or disbelieve that the relation of master and servant exists, except insofar as such belief indicates an assumption of control by the one and submission to control by the other." Restatement (Second) of Agency § 220(2) emt. m. Here, the evidence is overwhelming that Three Star, Helms, and Carter all believed that Carter was an independent contractor rather than an employee. Indeed, as noted above, Three Star required Carter to complete an independent contractor affidavit of exemption for the Indiana Worker's Compensation Board. Property Owners directs our attention to testimony indicating that Carter took instruction from Three Star and Helms, but the mere fact that Carter took instruction is not determinative, inasmuch as even an independent contractor may require instruction from the principal. Accordingly, this factor weighs heavily in favor of an independent contractor conclusion.
J. Whether the Principal Is in Business
Three Star was in business to perform house-moving operations for profit. Consequently, this factor weighs in favor of an employee conclusion.
K. Summary
The "leading factor of control," Moberly, 757 N.E.2d at 1012, leans toward indepen*722dent contractor status and presents an issue of material fact. The remaining factors are split between employee status-Carter's occupation, kind of occupation, method of payment, regular business of employer, and whether the principal is in business-independent contractor status-skill required, length of employment, and belief of parties-and neutral-supplier of equipment and tools. Taken as a whole, therefore, the factors are split fairly evenly and reveal at least one substantial issue of material fact. Under these circumstances, we conclude that the trial court improperly granted summary judgment in favor of Property Owners. We observe that we were necessarily limited to the evidence available in the record on appeal in drawing our conclusions regarding each of the ten factors. To that end, we emphasize that our conclusions herein are drawn solely for the purposes of summary judgment. Because it is likely that additional evidence will be offered at trial regarding Carter's relationship to Helms and Three Star, the trial court is not bound by our Moberly analysis herein.3
The judgment of the trial court is reversed and remanded for trial.
MAY, J., concurs.
SULLIVAN, J., concurs in result, with opinion.
. Carter argues that there is a genuine issue of material fact with respect to whether he was a sub-contractor who performed "SubContracted Work" within the meaning of the Policy. Similarly, he contends that if Property Owners received a. premium based on Carter's wage as a "sub-contractor," it is es-topped from denying that he is an independent contractor. But he cites neither to any facts supported by the record nor to any reasonable inferences therefrom that his work was "Sub-Contracted Work" or that Property Owners received a premium based on Carter's wage. Accordingly, this argument must fail. Additionally, contrary to Property Owners's contention, Carter did not waive this argument, inasmuch as he included it in his memorandum in support of his opposition to summary judgment. Appellant's App. p. 31-32. Indeed, Property Owners responded to this argument in its reply brief on summary judgment. Id. at 20.
. Carter also argues that the Policy exclusion does not apply because he was working for Benbhower, not Three Star, at the time he was injured. While there is evidence that Carter took direction from Benbower, there is no evidence that he was employed by Benhower. Carter was paid by Three Star and answerable to Helms, and nothing in the record supports a contrary conclusion. Consequently, this argument must fail.
. The concurring opinion concludes that, in evaluating a grant of summary judgment, it is inappropriate for us to "assess the evidence and conclude, with regard to any particular factor, that such factor weighs in favor of one status or the other." Op. p.722. But we have conducted precisely such an analysis in the past. Frohardt v. Bassett, 788 N.E.2d 462 (Ind.Ct.App.2003). We have emphasized herein that our conclusions are drawn only for the purposes of summary judgment and are not binding on the parties or the trial court if the case proceeds to trial. But to determine whether the trial court properly granted summary judgment, we are compelled to analyze each factor and to evaluate the trial court's conclusion that Carter was an employee of Three Star based upon the record before us, just as we did in Frohardt.

=== CASE 9739549 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:17:25.212543+00 ===

SULLIVAN, Judge,
concurring in result.
I concur in the reversal of the summary judgment entered in favor of Property Owners Insurance Company and in the remand for further proceedings as to the factual status of Byron Carter whether as an employee or as an independent contractor of Three Star, Inc.
However, I respectfully dissent from the gratuitous conclusions reached by the majority with respect to the ten-factor analysis drawn from the Restatement of Agency.
I agree that the evidence designated to the trial court for purposes of summary judgment does not lead to a conclusion, as a matter of law, that Carter was an employee of Three Star, Inc. However, I believe it to be inappropriate for this court to assess that evidence and to conclude, with regard to any particular factor, that such factor weighs in favor of one status or the other.
The analysis of the evidence by the trier of fact should be governed by the instructions given by the court if there is a trial by jury or, if by bench trial by independent application of the evidence adduced at trial. That evidence assessment and the conclusion drawn from all of the evidence should not be tainted by our premature suggestions.

=== CASE 9739550 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:17:25.484201+00 ===

JUSTICE APPLETON delivered the opinion of the court: On March 1, 2005, the trial court entered an order denying plaintiffs’ motion to amend the complaint. On May 13, 2005, the trial court entered an order finding that its denial of the motion to amend was a final and appealable order under Supreme Court Rule 304(a) (155 111. 2d R. 304(a)). Plaintiffs appeal, seeking reversal of the trial court’s order of March 1, 2005. We affirm. I. BACKGROUND On January 18, 2001, plaintiff, Richard L. Grove, was admitted to Carle Foundation Hospital for a routine colonoscopy to be performed by Dr. Eugene Greenberg. During the procedure, a wire snare became incarcerated around a tumor in plaintiffs colon. Greenberg could not remove the wire snare. As a result of that complication, further emergency surgery was required to remove both the tumor and the wire snare. The emergency surgery did not allow time to treat plaintiff prophylactically with antibiotics 24 hours prior to the procedure, as is typically done. Dr. David Orcutt and Dr. Paul Tender performed the second surgery that same day. Plaintiff developed a postoperative wound infection during his hospitalization, for which he was treated by Orcutt and Tender. Plaintiff remained in the hospital until January 27, 2001. Within two years of the colonoscopy, on January 13, 2003, plaintiffs, Richard L. Grove and his wife, Shirley T. Grove, filed a complaint for personal injuries against defendants, Carle Foundation Hospital, Carle Clinic Association, Dr. David Orcutt, and Dr. Paul Tender. The original complaint alleged negligence against Orcutt and Tender for their treatment of the infection after the second surgery. The original complaint alleged negligence against the hospital for the actions of Orcutt and Tender under a theory of respondeat superior. Further, the original complaint asserted acts and omissions that took place during the Greenberg surgeiy but did not assert that those acts deviated from an acceptable standard of care. On December 9, 2004, plaintiffs deposed Dr. Samuel Feinburg, a subsequent treating physician. Plaintiffs assert it was not until the Feinburg deposition that they became aware that Greenberg’s conduct and surgical techniques, in attempting to remove a tumor with a colonoscopic wire snare, may have fallen below the minimum standard of medical care. On December 14, 2004, plaintiffs filed a motion to amend the complaint in order to add additional elements of negligence based on information gained during the Feinburg deposition. The amendment did not seek to add Greenberg as a defendant. Instead, the amendment sought to add the following substantive changes, as indicated by the italicized language below: “At all times mentioned herein, defendants Orcutt and Tender, as well as Dr. Eugene Greenberg, were employees and/or agents of Carle Clinic and Carle Foundation Hospital and were acting within the scope of their employment.” (Emphasis added.) (Paragraph 6) “As a result of complications during the colonoscopic surgical procedure performed on January 18, 2001, by Dr. Eugene Green-berg, further emergency surgery was required and necessitated to remove a wire snare that was incarcerated in the colon of the plaintiff. Furthermore, the aforesaid complication and the entrapment of the wire snare, and the resulting emergency surgery, was a result of the improper utilization, technique or application by Dr. Eugene Greenberg of the wire snare for the purpose or procedure he was attempting to perform.” (Emphases added.) (Paragraph 8) (language specifying that the subsequent surgery was performed by Tender and Orcutt was removed in the amended paragraph) “In disregard [of] their duty to plaintiff in connection with his medical care and treatment, defendants were then and there guilty of one or more of the following negligent acts or omissions: (a) Failed to perform a deep tissue culture of the wound infection; (b) Failed to administer type[-]IV antibiotics longer than 3 days; (c) Following cessation of type[-]IV antibiotics, failed to place the plaintiff on oral antibiotics at discharge for a period of time to be determined through out-patient follow-up; (d) Improperly utilized and/or applied the wire snare device for the purpose or procedure Dr. Eugene Greenburg was attempting to perform, which purpose or procedure was beyond the scope of his skills or medical specialty as well as beyond the manufacturer’s design or intended purpose or usage of the device.” (Emphasis added.) (Paragraph 13) On January 12, 2005, defendants filed an objection to the motion for leave to amend the complaint, arguing (1) that the amended complaint sought to add elements of negligence based on conduct of which plaintiffs were aware both at the time the conduct occurred and at the time the original suit was filed; (2) that the amended complaint sought to add a new legal theory which raised facts and issues not previously raised and not previously the subject of any discovery; and (3) that the new legal theory was barred by the two-year statute of limitations. On January 28, 2005, plaintiffs filed a response to defendant’s objection to the motion to amend the complaint. Plaintiffs argued that the trial court should allow the amendment pursuant to the relation-back exception to the statute of limitations. 735 ILCS 5/2 — 616(b) (West 2004). On February 22, 2005, the trial court heard oral argument on the motion to amend. Defendants claimed surprise and prejudice, arguing that the original complaint never focused on conduct in the original surgery; rather, it focused on negligence occurring as a result of the infection that manifested itself after the original surgery. Also at the February 22 hearing, the trial court vacated the case-management order that had previously required all discovery to be completed by February 5, 2005, allowing more time for further discovery. On March 1, 2005, the trial court entered an order denying plaintiffs’ motion to amend the complaint. The court held that the proposed amendment was untimely because it did not relate back to the filing of the original complaint. On May 13, 2005, the trial court entered an order finding that its earlier order denying plaintiffs’ motion to amend the complaint was a final and appealable order under Supreme Court Rule 304(a) (155 111. 2d R. 304(a)). This appeal followed. II. ANALYSIS A. Our Subject-Matter Jurisdiction Before proceeding to the merits of this appeal, we must first consider defendants’ motion to dismiss the appeal on the ground that we lack jurisdiction under Supreme Court Rule 304(a) to review the denial of plaintiffs’ motion to amend the complaint. 155 Ill. 2d R. 304(a).  An order must be final for an appellate court to have jurisdiction over an appeal. Rice v. Burnley, 230 Ill. App. 3d 987, 990, 596 N.E.2d 105, 107 (1992). An order is final if it terminates litigation between parties on the merits or disposes of rights of parties, either on the entire controversy or on a separate branch thereof. Hull v. City of Chicago, 165 Ill. App. 3d 732, 733, 520 N.E.2d 720, 721 (1987).  Rule 304(a) permits appeals from orders that do not dispose of an entire proceeding: “ ‘If multiple parties or multiple claims for relief are involved in an action, an appeal may be taken from a final judgment as to one or more but fewer than all of the parties or claims only if the trial court has made an express written finding that there is no just reason for delaying enforcement or appeal.’ ” (Emphasis added.) Rice, 230 Ill. App. 3d at 990-91, 596 N.E.2d at 107, quoting 134 Ill. 2d R. 304(a). Defendants argue that the order denying plaintiffs’ motion for leave to amend is not a final order and is, therefore, not appealable. See Hull, 165 Ill. App. 3d at 733, 520 N.E.2d at 721. We recognize that Rule 304(a) does not enable a trial court to confer appellate jurisdiction simply by using the Rule 304(a) language that there is no just reason for delaying enforcement or appeal. Rice, 230 Ill. App. 3d at 991, 596 N.E.2d at 107. Further, we recognize that stating a single claim of negligence in several ways, by multiple subparagraphs, does not warrant separate appeal upon dismissal of less than all of the subparagraphs. Hull, 165 Ill. App. 3d at 733-34, 520 N.E.2d at 721; see also Brown v. K.J.S. Co., 189 Ill. App. 3d 768, 770, 545 N.E.2d 555, 556 (1989). We do not believe, however, that the above cases cited by defendants speak either to the facts of the instant case, the liberality with which amendments should be allowed, or the policy behind Rule 304(a). None of the cases cited by defendants involves a ruling as to finality on a motion for leave to amend. The Illinois Supreme Court has long recognized that substance, not form, determines whether an order is final. Pfaff v. Chrysler Corp., 155 Ill. 2d 35, 62-63, 610 N.E.2d 51, 63 (1992), citing St. Joseph Data Service, Inc. v. Thomas Jefferson Life, 73 Ill. App. 3d 935, 938, 393 N.E.2d 611, 614 (1979). “The law is more than a game of semantics. *** [FJinality of the judgment or order depends on the basis and substance of the dismissal and the effect of the adjudication.” (Emphasis added.) Martin v. Masini, 90 Ill. App. 2d 348, 354, 232 N.E.2d 770, 773 (1967).  Here, the trial court denied plaintiffs’ motion for leave to amend the complaint, because the proposed amendment was not timely filed, was barred by the statute of limitations, and did not relate back to the original complaint. The court thereby treated the proposed amendment as a separate claim. In so denying the proposed amendment, the court made a final disposition as to that separate claim. For these reasons, we find the court correctly conferred appellate jurisdiction under Rule 304(a), and we deny defendants’ motion to dismiss the appeal. B. Motion for Leave To Amend Illinois law supports a liberal policy of allowing amendments to the pleadings so as to enable parties to fully present their alleged cause or causes of action. Simon v. Wilson, 291 Ill. App. 3d 495, 508, 684 N.E.2d 791, 800 (1997). Moreover, medical malpractice plaintiffs in particular are to be afforded every opportunity to establish a case, and amendments to the pleadings are to be liberally allowed to enable the action to be heard on the merits, rather than brought to an end because of procedural technicalities. Castro v. Bellucci, 338 Ill. App. 3d 386, 391, 789 N.E.2d 784, 787 (2003), citing Avakian v. Chulengarian, 328 Ill. App. 3d 147, 154, 766 N.E.2d 283, 290 (2002).  Litigants, however, have no absolute right to amend their complaint. Hadley v. Ryan, 345 Ill. App. 3d 297, 303, 803 N.E.2d 48, 54 (2003). The court generally considers four factors in determining whether an amendment to a complaint should be allowed: (1) whether the proposed amendment would cure a defect in the pleading, (2) whether the proposed amendment would surprise or prejudice the opposing party, (3) whether the proposed amendment was timely filed, and (4) whether the moving party had previous opportunities to amend the complaint. Board of Directors of Bloomfield Club Recreation Ass’n v. Hoffman Group, Inc., 186 Ill. 2d 419, 432, 712 N.E.2d 330, 337 (1999).  The Illinois Code of Civil Procedure provides further guidance as to the factors of timeliness and prejudice, stating that any cause of action set up in an amended pleading shall not be time-barred, and shall be said to relate back to the date of the filing of the original pleading, so long as (1) the original pleading was timely filed and (2) it appears from the original and amended pleadings that the cause of action asserted grew out of the same transaction or occurrence set up in the original pleading. 735 ILCS 5/2- — 616(b) (West 2004). Additionally, a “pleading may be amended at any time, before or after judgment, to conform the pleadings to the proofs, upon terms as to costs and continuance that may be just.” 735 ILCS 5/2 — 616(c) (West 2004). The standard of review for the trial court’s decision to allow or deny a motion to amend a complaint is whether the court abused its discretion. Bloomfield Club, 186 Ill. 2d at 432, 712 N.E.2d at 337.  Plaintiffs first argue that the amendment to the complaint should have been allowed because the purpose of the amendment was to conform the pleadings to what plaintiffs believed the evidence at trial would be, based upon facts adduced during the course of discovery. Plaintiffs’ primary position is that the amendment did not assert a new cause of action and should have been allowed under section 2- — 616(c). We do not find adequate grounds, under the authority of section 2 — 616(c), to interfere with the trial court’s discretion in denying the amendment. Case law presented by plaintiffs in support of allowing the amendments under section 2 — 616(c) is not persuasive as applied to the facts of the instant case. See Lee v. Chicago Transit Authority, 152 Ill. 2d 432, 605 N.E.2d 493 (1992); Mills v. County of Cook, 338 Ill. App. 3d 219, 788 N.E.2d 169 (2003); Zook v. Norfolk & Western Ry. Co., 268 Ill. App. 3d 157, 642 N.E.2d 1348 (1994); Giacalone v. Chicago Park District, 231 Ill. App. 3d 639, 596 N.E.2d 731 (1992). Amendments conform the pleadings to the proofs, and are allowed pursuant to section 2 — 616(c), if the evidence that supports the amendments is “inextricably intertwined” with evidence relating to other alleged acts and omissions already alleged in the original complaint. Zook, 268 Ill. App. 3d at 167, 642 N.E.2d at 1356. Thus, the focus is on whether the amendment alters the nature and quality of proof required for the defendant to defend itself. Lee, 152 Ill. 2d at 469, 605 N.E.2d at 509. The proposed amendment in the present case would require defendants to produce different testimony than the testimony required to defend against the original complaint. Allegations in the original complaint required defendants to defend themselves against the claim that the treatment of plaintiff by Dr. Tender and Dr. Orcutt, including plaintiffs infection, fell below the reasonable standard of care. Thus, defendants would need to present evidence relating to the original alleged acts or omissions of failure to perform a deep-tissue culture, failure to administer type-IV antibiotics for longer than three days, and failure to place plaintiff on oral antibiotics at discharge. Such testimony would inevitably include testimony from surgical and infectious disease experts regarding Dr. Tender’s and Dr. Orcutt’s treatment of plaintiffs infection. In contrast, evidence supporting the allegations contained in the proposed amendment would at the very least require (1) testimony regarding Dr. Greenberg’s training, skills, and experience to determine if the procedure was “beyond the scope of his skills or medical specialty” and (2) testimony regarding the wire snare’s design and intended purpose. The evidence supporting the amendment is not “inextricably intertwined” with the evidence supporting the alleged negligent acts or omissions already present in the original complaint. See Zook, 268 Ill. App. 3d at 167, 642 N.E.2d at 1356. Plaintiffs argue, in the alternative, that section 2 — 616(b) provides an avenue by which the proposed amendment should have been allowed. Section 2 — 616(b) does not require that the amendment state the same cause of action as the original pleading, or even a substantially similar cause of action; rather, the test is whether the amended pleadings state a cause of action that grew out of the same transaction or occurrence. Zeh v. Wheeler, 111 Ill. 2d 266, 272-73, 489 N.E.2d 1342, 1345 (1986). Section 2 — 616(b) aims to limit the danger of prejudice to the nonmoving party in a motion for leave to amend the complaint while still providing claimants an opportunity to fully present their cause or causes of action: a defendant will not be “ ‘prejudiced so long as his attention [is] directed, within the [statute-of-limitations period], to the facts that form the basis of the claim asserted against him.’ ” Zeh, 111 Ill. 2d at 273, 489 N.E.2d at 1345, quoting Simmons v. Hendricks, 32 Ill. 2d 489, 495, 207 N.E.2d 440, 443 (1965). The true inquiry, in this careful balance of interests, is whether the plaintiff is “ ‘attempting to slip in an entirely distinct claim in violation of the [statute] of *** limitations act.’ ” Simmons, 32 Ill. 2d at 497, 207 N.E.2d at 444, quoting O. McCaskill, Illinois Civil Practice Act Annotated 126-27 (Supp. 1936). Defendant Carle Foundation Hospital argues that it is prejudiced because the original complaint did not focus on the actions of Green-berg but instead focused on the actions of Tender and Orcutt. The original complaint pleaded that the first surgery was performed by Dr. Greenberg on January 18, 2001, and that it was the initial occurrence for the events that led up to the infection at issue. The original complaint dates the Greenberg surgery as occurring on January 18, 2001; dates the plaintiffs hospitalization between January 18, 2001, and January 27, 2001; and dates the infection as occurring sometime between January 18, 2001, and January 27, 2001. Also, the original complaint indicated that “complications” arose during the colonoscopy performed by Dr. Greenberg and that, because things did not go as planned, “further surgery was required.” We find the facts in the instant case to be disparate from those in Figueroa relied upon by plaintiffs. Figueroa v. Illinois Masonic Medical Center, 288 Ill. App. 3d 921, 681 N.E.2d 64 (1997). In Figueroa, the original complaint alleged negligence for failure to use proper skill and treatment following plaintiffs caesarian section. Just as the original complaint in the present case noted the Greenberg colonoscopy procedure but failed to allege that this procedure fell below the standard of care, the original complaint in Figueroa noted the procedures that occurred prior to and during delivery, but did not allege that such procedures deviated from an acceptable standard of care. Figueroa, 288 Ill. App. 3d at 923, 681 N.E.2d at 65. Nearly four years after the original complaint was filed, the plaintiff filed interrogatory answers that disclosed the opinion of their expert that the defendant had acted negligently prior to and during delivery. The plaintiffs in Figueroa sought leave to file an amended complaint, alleging the defendant acted negligently prior to and during delivery. The Figueroa court found that the amended complaint related back to the original because the “defendants were made aware that plaintiffs’ claims were predicated upon the treatment that took place during [her] hospitalization.’’ Figueroa, 288 Ill. App. 3d at 925, 681 N.E.2d at 66-67. Unlike the caesarian section in Figueroa, where the original complaint was for negligence in the treatment of that triggering condition, the amendment propounded by plaintiffs in this case seeks to add a completely distinct procedure to their complaint of negligence. While it is true that but for the problematic result of the colonoscopy, no referral for emergency surgery would have been required, two separate and distinct surgical procedures are at issue. In McCorry v. Gooneratne, 332 Ill. App. 3d 935, 775 N.E.2d 591 (2002), the plaintiff was first treated at the defendant hospital during a neurosurgery consultation in which the hospital’s agents performed a preoperative MRI. The plaintiff then underwent surgery to alleviate pain from disc herniations at two locations. When the plaintiff woke from surgery, plaintiff was unable to move his legs. Agents of the defendant hospital then performed a postoperative MRI. McCorry, 332 Ill. App. 3d at 938, 775 N.E.2d at 594. The plaintiff sued the hospital for negligence under a theory of respondeat superior. McCorry, 332 Ill. App. 3d at 938, 775 N.E.2d at 595. The original complaint referenced only the preoperative MRI and alleged that it had been misread and misinterpreted. McCorry, 332 Ill. App. 3d at 938, 775 N.E.2d at 594. After the statute of limitations had passed, the plaintiff moved to file an amended complaint, which added a new count for direct liability against the hospital for failure to have certain policies regarding transmittal of postoperative MRI evaluations and for failure to timely perform and interpret the plaintiffs postoperative MRI. McCorry, 332 Ill. App. 3d at 938, 775 N.E.2d at 598. In holding that the amended complaint did not relate back to the original complaint, the MeCorry court noted that the original complaint did not even assert that the plaintiff had a postoperative MRI. McCorry, 332 Ill. App. 3d at 944, 775 N.E.2d at 599. As in MeCorry, the claim arising from Dr. Green-berg’s colonoscopy and the subsequent surgery by Dr. Tender and Dr. Orcutt are not of the same causative and interrelated nature. The plaintiff in MeCorry was already paralyzed before the postoperative MRI took place. Defendants next cite Bailey v. Petroff, 170 Ill. App. 3d 791, 797, 525 N.E.2d 278, 282 (1988), in which the original complaint alleged negligence for the prescription of a certain drug during the plaintiffs pregnancy. The amended complaint alleged negligence for a failure to recommend prenatal testing and a failure to diagnose the baby’s genetic disorder. Bailey, 170 Ill. App. 3d at 793-94, 525 N.E.2d at 280. The original complaint did not assert alleged acts or omissions regarding prenatal testing, let alone assert that anything had gone wrong during prenatal testing. Bailey, 170 Ill. App. 3d at 793-94, 525 N.E.2d at 279. Further, the amended complaint dropped all references to the alleged negligence in prescribing the drug. Bailey, 170 Ill. App. 3d at 794, 525 N.E.2d at 280. The court found that the amendment did not relate back and that the nature of the incidents of the alleged malpractice was “quite different” from that alleged in the original complaint. Bailey, 170 Ill. App. 3d at 797-98, 525 N.E.2d at 282. While all of the claims stemmed from the plaintiffs prenatal treatment, the original claim did not provide the defendant notice of the facts underlying the later claim. Bailey, 170 Ill. App. 3d at 798, 525 N.E.2d at 282. The amended complaint in Bailey dropped all references to the original claim of negligence in prescribing the drug and replaced it with a completely different allegation. Bailey, 170 Ill. App. 3d at 794, 525 N.E.2d at 280. The amended complaint in the instant case did not drop any of the substantive allegations of the original; rather, the amended complaint alleged that acts or omissions already described in the original complaint did in fact constitute negligence. The reference in the original complaint to the colonoscopy performed by Dr. Greenberg serves only to set out a historical fact. It does not establish a single cause of ongoing treatment for which defendant Carle was put on notice as to its potential liability. III. CONCLUSION For the forgoing reasons, the order of the trial court denying leave to file their amended complaint pursuant to the relation-back exception to the statute of limitations is affirmed. Affirmed.

=== CASE 9739551 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:17:25.488968+00 ===

JUSTICE STEIGMANN, specially concurring: After extensive (and respectful) discussion of the issues this case presents, my colleagues and I have been unable to reach agreement. On the merits, they disagree over whether this court should affirm the trial court’s order denying plaintiffs’ motion to amend their complaint. My preference is to dismiss this appeal and not reach the merits because I do not believe we have jurisdiction under Rule 304(a). However, (1) because a 1-1-1 decision of this court is untenable and (2) affirming the trial court’s judgment is closer to my preference of dismissing this appeal, I join Justice Appleton’s decision to affirm. Justice Appleton’s decision quotes Rule 304(a), makes reference to Rice, Hull, and Brown, and then states the following: “[W]e recognize that [the statement of] a single claim of negligence in several ways, by multiple subparagraphs, does not warrant separate appeal upon dismissal of less than all of the subparagraphs.” 364 Ill. App. 3d at 416-17. Justice Appleton’s decision (joined on this point by Justice Cook) then goes on to explain why this analysis of Rule 304(a) does not apply to the present case. However, I disagree with the effort to distinguish the above three cases. In my judgment, those cases fully apply to this one and, based upon their holdings, we should dismiss this appeal. Rule 304(a) provides that if multiple parties or multiple claims for relief are involved in an action, an appeal may be taken from a final judgment as to one or more but fewer than all of the parties or claims only if the trial court has made an explicit written finding that no just reason exists for declining enforcement on appeal. 134 Ill. 2d R. 304(a). At issue here is whether this case presents multiple claims or a single claim, as that term is used in Rule 304(a). For the reasons that follow, I believe this case presents a single claim of negligence, albeit pleaded in different ways. In Hull, the plaintiff sued the city of Chicago for negligence regarding its maintenance and repair of the roadway where an automobile accident occurred. Paragraph 7 of count I of the complaint described the city’s negligent acts or omissions in 12 separate subparagraphs. Hull, 165 Ill. App. 3d at 733, 520 N.E.2d at 721. On the defendant’s motion, the trial court dismissed all but one of those subparagraphs, leaving only the subparagraph that alleged that the defendant was negligent in permitting a chunk or block of concrete to remain on the roadway’s driving lanes. The trial court then made a Rule 304(a) finding, and the plaintiff appealed. Hull, 165 Ill. App. 3d at 733, 520 N.E.2d at 721. The appellate court dismissed the appeal, explaining as follows: “Plaintiffs action involves a single claim of negligence against one defendant. Although paragraph 7 of plaintiffs complaint alleged various negligent acts or omissions, only one theory of recovery was advanced — negligence. The statement of a single claim in several ways, by multiple subparagraphs, does not warrant a separate appeal upon dismissal of less than all of those subparagraphs. [Citation.] Thus, the dismissal of subparagraphs (b) through (1), which left subparagraph (a) standing, did not determine the merits of a separate cause of action or terminate any litigation between the parties. The order of dismissal merely determined which allegations of negligence would be allowed to remain. The order was not final and appealable. [Citation.] The Rule 304(a) [citation] finding *** is intended to apply only where multiple claims or parties are involved. It is not designed to permit appeals from orders that dispose of less than all of the issues in an action involving a single party and a single claim.” Hull, 165 Ill. App. 3d at 733-34, 520 N.E.2d at 721. In Rice, the First District Appellate Court followed its earlier decision in Hull and similarly dismissed an appeal that had been brought purportedly on the basis of Rule 304(a). The Rice court explained as follows: “As in Hull, the plaintiff here has advanced only one theory of recovery — negligence. *** While the dismissed counts and the remaining counts deal with different acts or omissions, they advance the same theory of recovery — namely, negligence — and accordingly we conclude that the dismissal of counts VII and VIII did not determine the merits of a separate claim, and therefore is not a final order.” Rice, 230 Ill. App. 3d at 992, 596 N.E.2d at 108. In Brown, the Second District Appellate Court also followed the reasoning in Hull and dismissed the appeal purportedly brought pursuant to Rule 304(a), explaining as follows: “Plaintiffs single-count, second amended complaint did not involve multiple claims, but only a single claim of negligence, as does the third amended complaint. While plaintiffs second amended complaint alleged various sources of a duty owed by defendant to plaintiff, it only advanced one theory of recovery, negligence. [Citing Hull, 165 Ill. App. 3d at 733, 520 N.E.2d at 721.] It is well established that the statement of a single claim in several ways, even by multiple counts, does not warrant a separate appeal.” Brown, 189 Ill. App. 3d at 770-71, 545 N.E.2d at 556. As in the foregoing cases, this case presents a single claim of negligence couched in different terms. In December 2004, when plaintiffs sought to amend their complaint against the hospital, the complaint already alleged the hospital was responsible (under a theory of respondeat superior) for the negligent conduct of Orcutt and Tender. The proposed amendment did not change plaintiffs’ claim of negligence; instead, it merely sought to add a third actor, Greenberg, for whose negligent conduct the hospital was also supposedly responsible, again under the theory of respondeat superior. Because the complaint at issue, whether amended or not, presents a single claim of negligence, Rule 304(a) does not apply. My distinguished colleagues conclude that Hull, Rice, and Brown are distinguishable because they do not “speak either to the facts of the instant case, the liberality with which amendments should be allowed, or the policy behind Rule 304(a).” 364 Ill. App. 3d at 417. I disagree with each of these alleged distinctions. First, while it is true that the facts in this case differ from those in Hull, Rice, and Brown, that observation does nothing to defeat the precedential effect of those cases regarding the meaning and application of Rule 304(a) to this case. The complaint at issue here, whether amended or not, presented a single claim against the hospital — namely, negligence based upon respondeat superior. That being so, the holdings in Hull and its progeny — that the statement of a single claim does not warrant a separate appeal under Rule 304(a) when some aspect of that single claim has been dismissed — apply fully to this case. Second, whatever “liberality” governs in amending complaints is irrelevant to whether this appeal meets the requirements of Rule 304(a), thereby permitting us to exercise jurisdiction. This court is not permitted to consider in any way the merits of the issue that a given appeal would present to us when deciding whether we have jurisdiction to hear that appeal. To hold otherwise would mean that although a given appeal does not technically meet the standards for appeal-ability set by our supreme court, we can nonetheless hear that appeal if we think the trial court judgment sought to be appealed is really, really wrong. Such a rule is not what the supreme court had in mind when it promulgated the rules governing when the Illinois Appellate Court may exercise jurisdiction. Last, the policy considerations underlying Rule 304(a) are for the supreme court, not this court, to address. Just a few months ago, the supreme court emphasized how this court must strictly abide by its rules, writing as follows: “As this court has repeatedly stated, *** the appellate and circuit courts of this state must enforce and abide by the rules of this court. The appellate court’s power ‘attaches only upon compliance with the rules governing appeals.’ [Citation.] ‘[N]either the trial court nor the appellate court has the “authority to excuse compliance with the filing requirements of the supreme court rules governing appeals.” ’ [Citation.] *** *** The appellate court’s jurisdiction turns on litigants’ compliance with our rules ***.” (Emphasis in original.) People v. Lyles, 217 Ill. 2d 210, 216-17, 840 N.E.2d 1187, 1191 (2005). Lyles should serve as a reminder that when deciding whether we have jurisdiction, we must strictly enforce and abide by the “policy considerations” the supreme court took into account when it promulgated its rules governing appellate court jurisdiction. My colleagues may be correct that hearing this appeal now would be good policy and further the ends of justice. However, until such time as the Supreme Court of Illinois amends supreme court rules accordingly, our personal views about policy in this area simply do not matter.

=== CASE 9739552 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:17:25.492747+00 ===

JUSTICE COOK, dissenting: I respectfully dissent. I would reverse the trial court’s decision and direct that the amendment be allowed. I. JURISDICTION UNDER RULE 304(a) I agree with Justice Appleton’s opinion that we have jurisdiction under Rule 304(a) because the trial court treated the proposed amendment as a separate claim. 364 111. App. 3d at 418. Whether the same claim is involved is also an issue on the merits: whether the amendment should be allowed under section 2 — 616(b) because it “grew out of the same transaction or occurrence.” 735 ILCS 5/2 — 616(b) (West 2004). It would be intolerable if we had jurisdiction to affirm (because there was a separate claim) but had no jurisdiction to reverse (because there was then not a separate claim). Once it is determined that the court has jurisdiction to determine the merits of the controversy, “its jurisdiction will not be destroyed by its exercise.” Nelson v. Miller, 11 Ill. 2d 378, 392, 143 N.E.2d 673, 680 (1957) (considering long-arm jurisdiction if a person has committed a tortious act within the state); 3 R. Michael, Illinois Practice § 6.5, at 68 (1989) (Civil Procedure Before Trial). I disagree with Justice Steigmann’s special concurrence that we do not have jurisdiction under Rule 304(a) because only a single claim, only counts advancing the same theory of recovery, is involved here. Rule 304(a) is limited to cases where there is “a final judgment.” 155 111. 2d R. 304(a). The rule does not apply to evidentiary rulings, or other interlocutory orders, where there is no final judgment. The striking of a pleading with a denial of leave to amend, as here, is a final judgment. Many cases have allowed an appeal under Rule 304(a) and gone on to hold that amendment should be allowed under section 2 — 616(b) because it grew out of the same transaction or occurrence. See, e.g., Castro, 338 Ill. App. 3d at 396, 789 N.E.2d at 792 (only difference between vicarious liability complaints is identity of doctor); Avakian, 328 Ill. App. 3d at 157-58, 766 N.E.2d at 291 (same). When do we have the “multiple claims for relief” required for a Rule 304(a) final judgment? Do we look to the res judicata definition of “claim”? “Claim” is defined very broadly for res judicata purposes: “all rights of the plaintiff to remedies against the defendant with respect to all or any part of the transaction, or series of connected transactions, out of which the action arose.” Restatement (Second) of Judgments § 24(1), at 196 & Comment c (1982). That broad definition comports with the goal of res judicata to require a plaintiff to seek all relief in a single action. For res judicata purposes, almost every case involves only a single claim; if that is the test for Rule 304(a), it is difficult to imagine any appeal that could be taken under Rule 304(a). For res judicata purposes, even separate theories do not give rise to separate claims. There is a single transaction, a single claim, despite different harms, substantive theories, measures, or kinds of relief. Restatement (Second) of Judgments § 24, Comment c (1982); Torcasso v. Standard Outdoor Sales, Inc., 157 Ill. 2d 484, 491, 626 N.E.2d 225, 228 (1993). “Claim” must have a different meaning for purposes of Rule 304(a) than it does for res judicata. The supreme court has taken a broad view of what constitutes a “claim” under Rule 304(a). “[Rule 304(a)] was intended to apply wherever a final judgment determines fewer than all the rights and liabilities in issue.” Cunningham v. Brown, 22 Ill. 2d 23, 25, 174 N.E.2d 153, 154 (1961) (court accepted jurisdiction and held that dramshop action was the only remedy against tavern operators). Cunningham made it clear that the res judicata definition of “claim” did not apply to Rule 304(a). “[I]t does not matter, in determining whether multiple counts allege multiple claims for relief, that recovery under one would bar recovery of additional damages under the others.” Cunningham, 22 Ill. 2d at 25, 174 N.E.2d at 154. All that is necessary for a Rule 304(a) appeal is that the bases for recovery under the counts that are dismissed be “different” than those under the counts left standing. Heinrich v. Peabody International Corp., 99 Ill. 2d 344, 348, 459 N.E.2d 935, 938 (1984). “This may occur when the grounds for recovery under the various counts derive from different statutes or common law doctrines (Cunningham v. Brown) or when the various theories of recovery require ‘different elements *** to establish a proper claim’ or involve ‘differing standards of plaintiffs conduct which will bar recovery.’ ” Heinrich, 99 Ill. 2d at 348, 459 N.E.2d at 938, quoting Freeman v. White Way Sign & Maintenance Co., 82 Ill. App. 3d 884, 891, 403 N.E.2d 495, 500 (1980). In Heinrich, the court accepted jurisdiction, holding that dismissal of a count seeking either contribution or indemnification is not rendered unappealable by survival of a count seeking the other. Under Cunningham and Heinrich, different theories of recovery were one way to show that different claims were involved, but not the only way. Later cases seem to have elevated the presence of different theories into an absolute requirement. “While the dismissed counts and the remaining counts deal with different acts or omissions, they advance the same theory of recovery — namely, negligence — and accordingly we conclude that the dismissal of counts VII and VIII did not determine the merits of a separate claim, and therefore is not a final order.” Rice, 230 Ill. App. 3d at 992, 596 N.E.2d at 108. I suggest that such rigidity is inappropriate. In the present case, the fact that the dismissed count sounded in negligence and the remaining counts sound in negligence should not bar a Rule 304(a) appeal. Where there is a final order, the discretion of the trial court under Rule 304(a) to allow immediate appeal should be recognized where the trial court concludes that immediate appeal will aid in the resolution of the case. Olympia Hotels Corp. v. Johnson Wax Development Corp., 908 E2d 1363, 1367 (7th Cir. 1990) (applying Fed. R. Civ. E 54(b), the federal counterpart to Rule 304(a)); Curtiss-Wright Corp. v. General Electric Co., 446 U.S. 1, 8 n.2, 64 L. Ed. 2d 1, 11 n.2, 100 S. Ct. 1460, 1465 n.2 (1980) (immediate appeal of certified claims would facilitate settlement of remaining claims). Immediate appeal will certainly aid in the resolution of the present case. Consider how the amendment issue would have to be presented if we did not accept jurisdiction under Rule 304(a). We would dismiss the appeal and the case would return to the circuit court for trial. After the trial was completed, the case would again be appealed, at which time we would decide whether the amendment should have been allowed. If we decided the amendment should have been allowed, the case would return to the trial court for a second trial. A great deal of time and money would have been wasted. We can easily decide the question of the amendment now, and we should proceed to do so. The trial court properly exercised its discretion to find “that there is no just reason for delaying *** appeal” (155 Ill. 2d R 304(a)) in this case. The bases for recovery under the dismissed count are “different” from those under the counts left standing. Heinrich, 99 Ill. 2d at 348, 459 N.E.2d at 938. Even if the bases for recovery are not different, the trial court believes they are and must intend for its ruling to have some consequences at trial. II. AMENDMENT UNDER SECTION 2 — 616(b) Section 2 — 616 carries forward the policy of the Code of Civil Procedure that formalism in pleadings is to be avoided, that no pleading is bad in substance that contains such information as reasonably informs the opposite party of the nature of the claim or defense that he or she is called upon to meet. 735 ILCS 5/2 — 612(b) (West 2004). Under section 2 — 616, pleadings may be amended at any time, even after judgment. Under section 2 — 616, pleadings may even be amended after the statute of limitations has expired, so long as “the cause of action asserted *** grew out of the same transaction or occurrence set up in the original pleading, even though the original pleading was defective.” 735 ILCS 5/2 — 616(b) (West 2004); Castro, 338 Ill. App. 3d at 390, 789 N.E.2d at 787 (purpose is to insure fairness, not enhance technical considerations of common-law pleadings). The concern here is whether plaintiff is “ ‘ “attempting to slip in an entirely distinct claim in violation of the spirit of the limitations act.” ’ ” Sompolski v. Miller, 239 Ill. App. 3d 1087, 1091, 608 N.E.2d 54, 57 (1992), quoting Simmons, 32 Ill. 2d at 497, 207 N.E.2d at 444, quoting O. McCaskill, Illinois Civil Practice Act Annotated 126-27 (Supp. 1936). For example, if I sue my neighbor over a boundary-line dispute, I am not at liberty to add a count against him for an earlier automobile accident on which the statute of limitations had run. There is no “entirely distinct claim” in this case. Dr. Greenberg performed the colonoscopy on January 18, 2001. Drs. Orcutt and Tender performed the emergency surgery that same day. The events in the present case occurred during a single stay in the hospital, involved only a single patient, and occurred during a relatively brief period of time. (Plaintiff left the hospital on January 27, 2001.) “Among the factors relevant to a determination whether the facts are so woven together as to constitute a single claim are their relatedness in time, space, origin, or motivation, and whether, taken together, they form a convenient unit for trial purposes.” Restatement (Second) of Judgments § 24, Comment b, at 199 (1982). The original complaint alleged negligence against the hospital for the actions of Orcutt and Tender under a theory of respondeat superior and set out acts and omissions that took place during the Greenberg surgery. The amended complaint again alleged negligence against the hospital under a theory of respondeat superior but this time added the assertion that Green-berg’s use of the wire snare was inappropriate and constituted negligence. The amendment would have been proper even if the original complaint had not named any employees. Avakian, 328 Ill. App. 3d at 158, 766 N.E.2d at 293. Section 2 — 616(b), which allows amendments so long as the cause of action asserted “grew out of the same transaction or occurrence” (735 ILCS 5/2 — 616(b) (West 2004)), anticipated the supreme court’s adoption of the more liberal transactional test for res judicata purposes. “[T]he transactional test permits claims to be considered part of the same cause of action even if there is not a substantial overlap of evidence, so long as they arise from the same transaction.” River Park, Inc. v. City of Highland Park, 184 Ill. 2d 290, 311, 703 N.E.2d 883, 893 (1998), citing Restatement (Second) of Judgments § 24, Comment b, at 199 (1982). The 1933 amendment that created the predecessor of section 2 — 616(b) shifted from the common-law requirement that the amended pleading set up the same cause of action as the original pleading to a test of identity of transaction or occurrence. Zeh, 111 Ill. 2d at 272, 489 N.E.2d at 1345 (1933 amendment omitted the words “and is substantially the same as”); Avakian, 328 Ill. App. 3d at 154, 766 N.E.2d at 290 (section no longer required that the original and amended pleadings state the same cause of action). Under River Park, transaction and cause of action are now the same thing. The two complaints here were the same cause of action. It is clear that plaintiffs could not have filed a respondeat superior action against the hospital for the actions of Orcutt and Tender and, after that action was resolved, filed a new respondeat superior action against the hospital for the actions of Greenberg. River Park, 184 Ill. 2d at 311-12, 703 N.E.2d at 893. (Plaintiffs, however, could file a subsequent action against new parties not named in the original action. See Saichek v. Lupa, 204 Ill. 2d 127, 137, 787 N.E.2d 827, 833 (2003).) The hospital’s argument that “the original complaint did not focus on the actions of Greenberg but instead focused on the actions of Tender and Orcutt” (364 Ill. App. 3d at 420), is a formalistic pleadings argument inconsistent with modern practice. The true question is whether defendant was on notice, before the expiration of the statutory time period, of the facts on which the claim set out in the amended complaint is based. Castro, 338 Ill. App. 3d at 391, 789 N.E.2d at 788; McArthur v. St. Mary’s Hospital of Decatur, 307 Ill. App. 3d 329, 335, 717 N.E.2d 501, 505 (1999). In McArthur, the allegations of respondeat superior were not made in the original complaint, but we allowed them to be made in the amended complaint after the statute of limitations had run. “Because these allegations were made against the hospital’s codefendants and were at the heart of plaintiffs’ case, the hospital was aware of them and knew the extent of the involvement of its own personnel.” McArthur, 307 Ill. App. 3d at 335, 717 N.E.2d at 505. A similar argument was addressed in Castro. “Though Family Medicine claims to have been prejudiced by the lack of focus on the actions of Dr. Belluci-Jackson, we find that it was nevertheless supplied with the essential information necessary to prepare a defense to a claim related to her part in the same occurrence ***.” Castro, 338 Ill. App. 3d at 395, 789 N.E.2d at 791. It is inconceivable that the hospital here was unaware of the actions of Greenberg, its employee, who performed the surgery in its operating room. From the very beginning, the hospital had knowledge of those actions, better knowledge than did plaintiffs. It is interesting to contrast the obligations imposed on plaintiffs to proceed with litigation despite their imperfect knowledge. There is a discovery rule that tolls the running of the statute of limitations; however, “[t]he rule does not mandate that a plaintiff know with precision the legal injury that has been suffered, but anticipates that plaintiff be possessed of sufficient information to cause plaintiff to inquire further in order to determine whether a legal wrong has occurred.” Martin v. A&M Insulation Co., 207 Ill. App. 3d 706, 710, 566 N.E.2d 375, 378 (1990). Just as precise knowledge should not be required for plaintiffs, precise knowledge should not be required for defendants. I disagree with the statements in McCorry and Bailey that the original complaint must provide the defendant “with all of the information necessary for preparation of the defense for the claim asserted later.” (Emphasis added.) McCorry, 332 Ill. App. 3d at 944, 775 N.E.2d at 599. Again, those statements take a view of pleadings that has now been discarded. “Today the function of informing an opponent of one’s position is largely accomplished through discovery, a function that was largely fulfilled by the pleadings at an earlier time.” 3 R. Michael, Illinois Practice § 23.1, at 300 (1989) (Civil Procedure Before Trial); Wolf v. Meister-Neiberg, Inc., 143 Ill. 2d 44, 46-48, 570 N.E.2d 327, 328-29 (1991) (defendants provided with notice of correct location of occurrence before expiration of statute of limitations through depositions and production requests). McCorry concedes that discovery may satisfy the notice requirement but adds a further requirement, that “the defendant must have notice not only of the operative facts, but also of the plaintiffs intention to assert a claim on the basis of those facts.” McCorry, 332 Ill. App. 3d at 946, 775 N.E.2d at 601. There is no support in the statute or the decisions of the supreme court for that additional requirement. A litigant investigating a case does not limit his investigation to his opponent’s allegations but attempts to learn everything he can about the incident. We should not encourage litigants to close their eyes to facts that are readily apparent. I disagree with the argument that if the amendment sets up a new theory or a new focus, it cannot be allowed. Illinois is a fact-pleading state. It is not necessary to plead any specific theory of recovery. “A complaint need only allege facts which establish the right to recovery; not only are allegations of law or conclusions not required, they are improper.” Illinois Graphics Co. v. Nickum, 159 Ill. 2d 469, 488-89, 639 N.E.2d 1282, 1291 (1994); 3 R. Michael, Illinois Practice § 24.2, at 340 (1989) (Civil Procedure Before Trial). “A motion to dismiss does not lie as long as a good cause of action is stated even if that cause of action is not the one intended to be asserted by the plaintiff.” Illinois Graphics, 159 Ill. 2d at 488, 639 N.E.2d at 1291. Precise pleadings are not required. Amendment may be allowed “even though the original pleading was defective.” 735 ILCS 5/2 — 616(b) (West 2004). The relation-back doctrine is predicated upon a defendant’s awareness of the occurrence or transaction that is the basis for the claim and not upon what diligence a plaintiff exerts. Avakian, 328 Ill. App. 3d at 158, 766 N.E.2d at 293. Finally, what will now happen on remand under the majority’s order? Will plaintiffs be limited in the evidence they present at trial? Will they be foreclosed from discussing the conduct of Dr. Greenberg? Will the damages be limited to that caused by the other defendants? I suggest not. The injury to Richard appears to be an indivisible one for which all defendants are jointly liable. See Burke v. 12 Rothschild’s Liquor Mart, Inc., 148 Ill. 2d 429, 438-39, 593 N.E.2d 522, 525-26 (1992). Plaintiff is entitled to present a complete picture of his injury. Evidence of Dr. Greenberg’s conduct would certainly be admissible to explain the conduct of the other defendants.

=== CASE 9739553 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:17:27.00021+00 ===

OPINION
BAKER, Judge.
Appellant-petitioner Ronald L. Shana-barger appeals from the denial of his petition for post-conviction relief, challenging the effectiveness of his trial counsel. Specifically, Shanabarger contends that his trial attorneys were ineffective because they: (1) failed to adequately respond to an instance of juror misconduct; (2) improperly permitted Shanabarger's sister and brother-in-law to visit him in jail; (8) failed to object to the modification of a tendered instruction that the trial court gave regarding Shanabarger's confessions; and (4) failed to object to a confession that he made to the police chaplain. Conelud-ing that Shanabarger has failed to establish the ineffectiveness of his trial counsel, we affirm the judgment of the post-convietion court.
FACTS
The facts, as reported in Shanabarger's direct appeal, are as follows:
On June 20, 1999, the Franklin Police Department responded to a call at Amy and Ronald Shanabarger's residence after Amy discovered that their seven-month-old son, Tyler, had died in his crib. Tyler's body was eventually transferred to the Indiana University Medical Center where an autopsy was performed the following day. The pathologist, Dr. Michael Clark, initially determined that Tyler's death was consistent with Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS).
Shortly after Tyler's funeral, however, Shanabarger admitted to Amy that he had killed the child by wrapping his head in plastic wrap and suffocating him. Shanabarger then went to the Johnson County Sheriff's Office and told several detectives that he had killed Tyler. Shanabarger explained that he killed the child as an act of revenge against Amy for refusing to return from a vacation to attend his father's funeral. On June 24, 1999, Shanabarger was formally charged with the murder. Shana-barger then gave two taped statements to the police admitting that he had killed Tyler.
Shanabarger also met with Reverend Mark Maynard, the police chaplain. Prior to their conversations, Reverend Maynard informed Shanabarger that any statements made to him would not be confidential and further stated that he would recount their conversation to the detectives. Notwithstanding such a warning, Shanabarger admitted to Reverend Maynard that he had killed Tyler by wrapping cellophane or plastic wrap around his head and suffocating him.
*706While Shanabarger was awaiting trial, his court-appointed counsel, Richard Tandy, arranged a visit between Shana-barger, his sister Benita and his brother-in-law, Larry Savage (the Savages). Tandy told Shanabarger that anything he told the Savages would not be considered privileged communication. Nonetheless, Shanabarger revealed to them that he killed Tyler. He also acknowledged that Amy was not involved and further stated that he waited until Tyler was old enough to roll over so it would appear as a SIDS death.
Shanabarger wrote a number of letters to Amy from prison admitting that he killed Tyler, and he again told his relatives that he had committed the crime as well as how he did it. In light of these confessions and statements, the police seized three pieces of cellophane wrap that were found in Shanabarger's yard. Those samples were compared with various creases and anomalies that were noted on photographs of Tyler. The State, however, did not disclose those test results to Shanabarger in accordance with the trial court's discovery order. To the contrary, the existence of the comparison was not provided to Shanabarger until after the State had presented its case-in-chief. After DNA tests had been performed on the materials, a pathologist concluded that the cause of Tyler's death was non-specific asphyxia and that the manner of death was undetermined. At the trial, Tandy testified as to some of the statements that Shanabarger had made to his sister and brother-in-law during the jail visit, including the possibility that he would plead guilty to the murder so the State would forgo seeking the death penalty. At the conclusion of a nine-day jury trial on May 8, 2002, Shanabarger was found guilty as charged.
Shanabarger v. State, 798 N.E.2d 210, 213-14 (Ind.Ct.App.2003), trans. denied.
On direct appeal, Shanabarger raised the following issues: (1) his confessions should have been suppressed because the State had failed to establish the corpus delicti of the offense; (2) the trial court erred in permitting his originally-appointed counsel to testify regarding conversations that occurred between Shanabarger and the Savages; (8) the trial court erred in allowing the testimony of Randy Maynard in violation of the clergyman privilege; (4) the trial court erred in refusing to grant his motion for a mistrial because exculpatory evidence had not been disclosed to him in a timely manner; and (5) the trial court erred in interviewing a juror outside the presence of defense counsel. We affirmed Shanabarger's conviction in all respects. Id. at 219-20.
On February 26, 2004, Shanabarger filed a pro se petition for post-conviction relief, and the State Public Defender filed an amended petition on March 28, 2004. In addition to the claims of error set forth above, Shanabarger alleged in the pro se petition that he was entitled to relief because trial counsel: (1) did not adequately prepare for trial; (2) failed to object to the introduction of Shanabarger's letters that he had written to his wife in violation of the corpus delicti rule; and (8) failed to preserve insanity and mental retardation defenses.
At the post-conviction hearing that commenced on May 2, 2005, an alternate juror-John Dalton-testified that he was involved in an exchange with the trial judge regarding an alleged claim by Shan-abarger that he had tried to plead guilty. Dalton testified that he had heard another juror-Ron Bible-state, on the first day of trial, that Shanabarger had attempted to plead guilty. Dalton responded, "That's not true." PCR Tr. p. 20. Dalton *707did not remember if any of the other jurors actually heard the comments. Additionally, Jay Hoffman and Jennifer Auger, Shanabarger's trial attorneys, both testified that they were present during the exchange between the trial judge and Dalton. Auger remembered the judge strongly admonishing Dalton for being late, and Hoffman recalled that the judge had admonished one of the male jurors. However, neither Auger nor Hoffman remembered hearing anything about a juror indicating that Shanabarger had tried to plead guilty.
Following the hearing, the post-convietion court denied Shanabarger's request for relief. In the order denying relief, the post-conviction court determined that the following issues were barred on res judica-ta grounds because they had already been decided in Shanabarger's direct appeal: (1) trial counsel failed to protect the attorney-client privilege in light of the conversations that Shanabarger had with the Savages; (2) trial counsel was ineffective for failing to object to the admission of Shanabarger's letters that he had written to his wife; and (8) trial counsel unreasonably invited a confession from Shanabar-ger in the presence of third parties.
The post-conviction court went on to address the remaining issues on their merits, concluding that Shanabarger failed to meet his burden of proof and that he "was more than adequately represented by competent counsel who spent an inordinately large amount of time in the defense of this case." Appellant's App. p. 81. Shanabar-ger now appeals.
DISCUSSON AND DECISION
I. Standards of Review
A. Post-Conviction Proceedings
The petitioner in a post-conviction proceeding bears the burden of establishing grounds for relief by a preponderance of the evidence. Ind. Post-Conviction Rule 1(5); McCarty v. State, 802 N.E.2d 959, 962 (Ind.Ct.App.2004), trams. denied. When appealing from the denial of post-conviction relief, the petitioner stands in the position of one appealing from a negative judgment. Id. On review, we will not reverse the judgment unless the evidence as a whole unerringly and unmistakably leads to a conclusion opposite that reached by the post-conviction court. Id. Post-conviction procedures do not afford petitioners with a "super appeal." Richardson v. State, 800 N.E.2d 639, 648 (Ind.Ct.App.2008), trans. denied. Rather, they create a narrow remedy for subsequent collateral challenges to convictions that must be based upon grounds enumerated in the post-conviction rules. Id.; see also PC.R. 1(1).
In general, freestanding claims of error are not available in a post-conviction proceeding because of the doctrines of waiver and res judicata. Timberlake v. State, 753 N.E.2d 591, 597 (Ind.2001). If an issue was known and available but not raised on direct appeal, it is waived by procedural default. Bunch v. State, 778 N.E.2d 1285, 1289 (Ind.2002). Similarly, if an issue was raised on appeal, but decided adversely, it is res judicata. Timberlake, 753 N.E.2d at 597. And a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel is properly presented in a post-conviction proceeding if it was not raised on direct appeal. Id.
B. Ineffective Assistance of Counsel
When evaluating Shanabarger's claims of ineffective assistance of counsel, we apply the two-part test articulated in Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 104 S.Ct. 2052, 80 L.Ed.2d 674 (1984). Pinkins v. State, 799 N.E.2d 1079, 1098 (Ind.Ct.App.2003). First, the defendant must *708show that counsel's performance was deficient. Strickland, 466 U.S. at 687, 104 S.Ct. 2052. This requires a showing that counsel's representation fell below an objective standard of reasonableness, id. at 688, 104 S.Ct. 2052 and that the errors were so serious that they resulted in a denial of the right to counsel guaranteed to the defendant by the Sixth and Fourteenth Amendments. See id. at 687, 104 S.Ct. 2052. Second, the defendant must show that the deficient performance resulted in prejudice. Id. To establish prejudice, a defendant must show that there is a reasonable probability that, but for counsel's unprofessional errors, the result of the proceeding would have been different. Id. at 694, 104 S.Ct. 2052. A reasonable probability is a probability sufficient to undermine confidence in the outcome. Id. The two prongs announced in Strickland are independent inquiries, and a claim may be disposed of on either prong. Williams v. State, 706 N.E.2d 149, 154 (Ind.1999).
We also note that counsel is afforded wide discretion in determining strategy and tactics, and therefore courts will accord these decisions deference. Timber-lake, 753 N.E.2d at 608. A strong presumption arises that counsel rendered adequate assistance and made all significant decisions in the exercise of reasonable professional judgment. Id. Isolated omissions or errors, poor strategy, or bad tactics do not necessarily render representation ineffective. Stevens v. State, 770 N.BE.2d 789, 747 (Ind.2002). We will not lightly speculate as to what may or may not have been an advantageous trial strategy as counsel should be given deference in choosing a trial strategy that, at the time and under the cireumstances, seems best. Whitener v. State, 696 N.E.2d 40, 42 (Ind.1998). When a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel is based on the failure to object, the defendant also must show that a proper objection would have been sustained. Smith v. State, 765 N.E.2d 578, 585 (Ind.2002).
IIL. Shanabarger's Claims
Before proceeding to the merits of Shanabarger's claims, we again note that the post-conviction court determined that a number of Shanabarger's alleged claims of error were barred on the grounds of res judicata. However, our review of the ree-ord reveals that the precise issues raised here were not presented on direct appeal. Moreover, inasmuch as Shanabarger has framed his arguments in terms of ineffective assistance of counsel claims and has not presented them as freestanding claims of error, we proceed to dispose of those issues on the merits. See Timberlake, 753 N.E.2d at 597 (holding that a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel is properly presented in a post-conviction proceeding if it was not presented on direct appeal).
A. Trial Counsel's Failure to Respond to Juror Misconduct
Shanabarger contends that he received the ineffective assistance of trial counsel because no motion for mistrial was made after Dalton, the alternate juror, made statements to the effect that Shana-barger had desired to plead guilty at an earlier stage of the proceedings. In essence, Shanabarger argues that the evidence presented at the post-conviction hearing proved that trial counsel's failure to request a mistrial or ask that Dalton be removed from the jury panel was so prejudicial that it placed him in a position of grave peril.
While the general rule is that a jury's verdict may not be impeached by the testimony of the jurors who returned it, an exception to this rule cccurs when there is evidence demonstrating that the jury was exposed to improper, extrinsic *709material and a substantial possibility exists that the defendant was prejudiced by that material. Ind. Evidence Rule 606(b)(2); Allen v. State, 749 N.E.2d 1158, 1164 (Ind. 2001). By the same token, trial counsel's conduct with respect to his performance at trial is assessed based on facts that are known at the time and not through hindsight. Brown v. State, 691 N.E.2d 488, 446 (Ind.1998).
In this case, both of Shanabar-ger's trial attorneys testified that while they heard the trial court admonishing Dalton, neither one of them heard anything regarding a guilty plea. PCR Tr. p. 60, 104. Specifically, Auger testified that she believed that the exchange only concerned Dalton's tardiness at the trial. Id. at 104. It was only during Dalton's testimony at the post-conviction hearing that Shanabarger's attorneys became aware of the nature of the substance of the colloquy. Hence, trial counsel's only "mistake"-if any-was the failure to listen more closely to the exchange between Dalton and the trial judge. In our view, such inaction in this instance does not amount to deficient performance on the part of trial counsel. Moreover, Dalton testified that he responded to another juror's comment about Shanabarger trying to plead guilty by stating that he did not believe such a statement was true. As a result, Shanabarger has failed to show whether any of the jurors actually believed that he had tried to plead guilty at an earlier stage of the proceedings. Therefore, Shanabarger has failed to prove that he was prejudiced by any of the jurors' comments, and his ineffective assistance of trial counsel claim fails with regard to this issue.
B. Jail Visits from Shamnabarger's Sister and Brother-in-Law
Shanabarger also argues that his trial counsel was ineffective with regard to his sister and brother-in-law's visits with Shanabarger at the jail. More specifically, Shanabarger claims that his original trial counsel, Richard Tandy, was ineffective because he was acting under the erroneous belief that any statements Shanabarger made to his relatives would not be admissible at trial because they were protected by the attorney-client privilege. Thus, Shan-abarger contends that he is entitled to post-conviction relief because the confession that he made to the Savages regarding Tyler's death was admitted at trial.
Contrary to Shanabarger's contentions, the record shows that the Savages both testified that Tandy had conveyed to Shanabarger at the beginning of their visit that anything Shanabarger told the Savages was not privileged communication, and that they could "repeat anything you say." Tr. p. 1347, 1406. Moreover, even if it could be assumed that Tandy's act of permitting Shanabarger to meet with the Savages and talk with them about the cireumstances of Tyler's death amounted to deficient performance, the record also indicates that Shanabarger admitted to the Savages on occasions other than the visits at the jail that he had killed Tyler. Tr. p. 1345, 1396. As noted above, Shanabarger also admitted that he killed Tyler in the statements that he made to the police, to the jail clergyman, and in the letters he had written to his former wife. Id. at 752, 886-39. Therefore, any error that Tandy might have committed in arranging the meeting between Shanabarger and the Savages did not prejudice Shana-barger in view of the other admissions of guilt. Hence, Shanabarger's claim of ineffective assistance of counsel with respect to this issue fails.
C. Failure to Object to Instruction
Shanabarger also argues that his trial counsel was ineffective for failing to *710properly object to a modified jury instruction regarding the effect of a defendant's confession. Specifically, Shanabarger claims that his trial counsel's objection that the modified instruction as given was a "mandatory instruction," was incorrect. Appellant's Br. p. 19. Thus, Shanabarger claims that his trial counsel should have objected for the reason that the modified instruction prevented him from presenting a defense.
In considering Shanabarger's arguments as to whether his trial counsel should have lodged an objection other than the one that was made at trial, it has been held that instructing the jury lies within the sole discretion of the trial court, and considering the instructions as a whole and in reference to each other, we will not reverse for an abuse of discretion unless the instructions as a whole mislead the jury as to the law in the case. Carter v. State, 766 N.E.2d 377, 382 (Ind.2002).
Following the presentation of evidence, Shanabarger tendered the following instruction:
Confessions, even those found to be voluntary, are not conclusive of guilt. And, as with any other part of the State's case, a confession may be shown to be insufficiently corroborated or otherwise unworthy of belief.
Appellant's App. p. 108 (emphasis added). This instruction was then modified and given to the jury as follows:
Confessions, even those found to be voluntary, may be conclusive of guilt. And, as with any other part of the State's case, a confession may be shown to be insufficiently corroborated or otherwise unworthy of belief.
Appellant's App. p. 107 (emphasis added). In addition to the modified instruction as given, the trial court also instructed the jury that it was the sole judge of the credibility of the witnesses and that it was free to believe or disbelieve a confession. Appellant's App. p. 79-80. Here, it is apparent that the jury found Shanabar-ger's confessions to be credible, inasmuch as it ultimately found Shanabarger guilty of murder. In our view, the trial court's decision to change the wording of this instruction did not affect this determination. Put another way, Shanabarger has failed to show that he would have prevailed had his trial counsel objected to the modified instruction on grounds other than those that were actually raised. And he has not demonstrated that this instruction precluded him from presenting a defense at trial. As a result, Shanabarger's claim of ineffective assistance of counsel on this issue fails.
D. Shanabarger's Confession to Jail Chaplain
Finally, Shanabarger contends that his trial counsel was ineffective for failing to object to jail chaplain Randy Maynard's testimony. Specifically, Shanabarger maintains that his attorney should have objected because the confession that Shan-abarger conveyed to Reverend Maynard amounted to a violation of the rule announced in Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436, 86 S.Ct. 1602, 16 L.Ed.2d 694 (1966).
In Miranda, the United States Supreme Court held that a defendant's statements stemming from custodial interrogation may not be used against him at trial unless the State demonstrates that, prior to any questioning, the defendant was warned "that he has a right to remain silent, that any statement he does make may be used as evidence against him, and that he has a right to the presence of an attorney, either retained or appointed." 384 U.S. at 445, 86 S.Ct. 1602. Our Supreme Court has determined that a waiver of the rights afforded under Miranda occurs when the defendant, after being advised of those *711rights and acknowledging that he understands them, proceeds to make a statement without taking advantage of those rights. Ringo v. State, 736 N.E.2d 1209, 1211-12 (Ind.2000). Additionally, a re-advisement of the Miranda warnings is only necessary when the interruption deprived the suspect of an opportunity to make an informed and intelligent assessment of his interests. Ogle v. State, 698 N.E.2d 1146, 1149 (Ind.1998).
In this case, the record demonstrates that Reverend Maynard spoke with Shanabarger shortly after he had been informed of the Miranda rights by police officers. Specifically, three days after the murder, Shanabarger and his wife went to the Johnson County Sheriff's Office and informed the individual at the front desk that "he killed [his] son." Tr. p. 752. Shanabarger repeated this statement after a detective had been summoned. Tr. p. 836, 838-89. Another detective was brought in, and Shanabarger stated that he placed plastic wrap on his son's face and smothered him to death to avenge his wife's failure to attend his father's funeral. Id. at 840. Shanabarger then signed two waiver of rights forms and provided two taped statements to the police admitting that he had killed Tyler with plastic wrap to make it appear as though the boy died of SIDS. State's Ex. 11-14. Shanabarger was arrested for Tyler's murder, and shortly thereafter, he met with Reverend Maynard. Tr. p. 870, 897, 915. At the beginning of the meeting, Reverend Maynard told Shanabarger that their conversation was not confidential, and that he would tell the police what Maynard said. Tr. p. 916. Shanabarger then told Maynard that he killed Tyler by wrapping plastic around his head. Tr. p. 917-18.
Given these cireumstances, and even assuming that Maynard was acting as a state agent at the instigation of the police,1 it was not necessary for Maynard to repeat the Miranda warnings. See Ogle, 698 N.E.2d at 1149. It is apparent that Reverend Maynard spoke to Shana-barger just after Shanabarger had received two separate Miranda warnings. He waived his rights on both occasions and rendered two confessions admitting that he had killed Tyler. As a result, Shana-barger has failed to show that any interruption before speaking with Reverend Maynard deprived him of the opportunity to assess his interests before that meeting took place. Hence, Shanabarger has failed to show that an objection by his trial counsel on the grounds that the rule announced in Miranda was violated would have been sustained. Therefore, Shanabarger has failed to show that his trial counsel's performance was deficient on this basis. Moreover, Shanabarger has failed to demonstrate that he was prejudiced by the failure to object in light of the taped confessions that he had given to the police, his admissions to killing Tyler that he had made in various letters he had sent to his wife, and the admissions that he had made to the Savages that were admitted into evidence. Therefore, Shanabarger's claim of ineffective assistance of trial counsel fails.
The judgment of the post-conviction court is affirmed.
MAY, J., concurs.
SULLIVAN, J., concurs with opinion.
. It is not clear from the record whether the two met at Shanabarger's request or at the instigation of police detectives.

=== CASE 9739554 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:17:27.006592+00 ===

SULLIVAN, Judge,
concurring.
I concur as to Parts LA. and B. I also concur as to Parts II. A., B., and D. With *712respect to Part II. C., I also concur but do so with a caveat.
I agree that the instruction as given was not a mandatory instruction. It did not direct the jury to conclude that the confession or confessions were conclusive of guilt. Rather the instruction left that assessment up to the jury.
Furthermore, the instruction as given did not prevent Shanabarger from interposing his corpus delicti defense. He did in fact assert that defense and argued it in his direct appeal. Neither did the instruction preclude Shanabarger's defense that the child died of SIDS. That claim was made by Shanabarger.
Be that as it may, it is my belief that the form in which the instruction was tendered by Shanabarger was representative of his theory of the case presented to the jury. It correctly stated the applicable law in that it advised the jury that whether voluntary or not, such confessions "are not conclusive" of guilt. The thrust of the instruction, as tendered, was more favorable to the defendant's theory of the weight to be given confessions than was the instruction as given. As given, the instruction leaned a bit more to the permissible conclusion that the confessions were conclusive of guilt rather than to the contrary conclusion as contained in the tendered instruction.
Although I am of the view that the trial court would have been better advised to give Shanabarger's instruction as tendered, in light of the post-conviction arguments made against the instruction as given, I do not see cause for reversal.

=== CASE 2220274 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:38.61676+00 ===

6 N.Y.3d 404 (2006)
846 N.E.2d 457
813 N.Y.S.2d 27
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, Appellant,
v.
BAUMANN & SONS BUSES, INC., Respondent.
Court of Appeals of the State of New York.
Argued February 15, 2006.
Decided March 23, 2006.
*405 Vincent J. Messina, Jr., Town Attorney, Islip (Robert L. Cicale of counsel), for appellant.
Hamburger, Maxson, Yaffe, Wishod, Knauer & Rothberg, LLP, Melville (Richard Hamburger and William P. Caffrey, Jr. of counsel), for respondent.
Judges G.B. SMITH, CIPARICK, ROSENBLATT, GRAFFEO, READ and R.S. SMITH concur. *410
*406 OPINION OF THE COURT
Chief Judge KAYE.
Defendant was charged with violating Islip Town Code § 35-3 (D), which prohibits unreasonable engine noise. After a nonjury trial, District Court found defendant guilty, concluding that the People had proved beyond a reasonable doubt that on the date in question, defendant continuously operated approximately 50 bus engines for several hours beginning at 5:30 A.M. The court further found that the operation of these engines was audible beyond the real property where it originated and thereby disturbed the individual named complainant.
The Appellate Term reversed the judgment of conviction and dismissed the information, holding that "[i]t is well settled that anti-noise statutes are designed to prevent those noises which are of such a pitch as to constitute a public nuisance and a wrong against the community, and are therefore the proper subject of public prosecution. These statutes are reserved for situations that go beyond the concern of the individual to a point where they become a potential or an immediate public problem" (7 Misc 3d 128[A], 2005 NY Slip Op 50488[U], *1 [App Term, 2d Dept 2005] [citations omitted]).
Although the intermediate appellate courts have broad power to review questions of fact, as well as broad discretionary powers (see CPL 470.15), this Court, as a court of limited jurisdiction, may, with few exceptions, consider only questions of law (see NY Const, art VI, § 3 [a]; see also CPL 470.35). A
"question of law with respect to a ruling . . . of a criminal court during a trial or proceeding is presented when a protest thereto was registered, by the party claiming error, at the time of such ruling. . . or at any subsequent time when the court had an opportunity of effectively changing the same" (CPL 470.05 [2]).
Thus, only questions that "have been properly preserved for *407 review by appropriate motion or objection in the court of first instance[] may be brought before the Court of Appeals" (Karger, Powers of the New York Court of Appeals § 1:3, at 9 [3d ed rev]).
As both parties acknowledge, the validity of the Islip ordinance was not challenged before the trial court. Accordingly, the issue whether an anti-noise statute requires an element of public nuisance  as the Appellate Term concluded  is unpreserved for our review (see CPL 470.05 [2]). Although the Appellate Term recited that its reversal was on the law, that court necessarily decided the unpreserved issue within its interest-of-justice jurisdiction (see People v Johnson, 47 NY2d 124, 126 [1979]; CPL 470.15 [3] [c]). As the intermediate appellate court reversed the conviction on the basis of an unpreserved error, and therefore as a matter of discretion in the interest of justice, its order is not appealable to this Court (see People v Dercole, 52 NY2d 956, 957 [1981]; People v Cona, 49 NY2d 26, 33 [1979]; see also CPL 450.90 [2] [a]; 470.35 [2]).
The People correctly point out that a claim that an accusatory instrument is facially insufficient presents a jurisdictional question exempt from the requirement of preservation (see People v Alejandro, 70 NY2d 133 [1987]). Here, however, the alleged error involved not a claim that the information failed to set forth factual allegations sufficient to establish any particular element of the charged anti-noise offense as set forth in the Islip Town Code (see CPL 100.40 [1] [c]), but rather that an anti-noise statute must contain an additional element neither found in the text of the ordinance nor previously read into the statute by a construing court. The trial court was never asked to undertake any such construction.
Islip Town Code § 35-3 (D) classifies as a violation the "operation, including the stationary idling, of any engine, including, but not limited to, an automobile, truck, motorcycle, motorbike, motorboat or minibike engine, so as to create a noise disturbance." A "noise disturbance" is defined as "[t]hat level of sound which . . . [a]nnoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal auditory sensitivities" (Islip Town Code § 35-2 [A]).
The accusatory instrument here alleged that at a specific time and place, the continuous running of defendant's bus engines "annoyed and disturbed the undersigned complainant, a reasonable person of normal auditory sensitivities, i.e., a person of average tolerance, without any hearing enhancement *408 or impairment." By its plain terms, the ordinance proscribes sound that annoys or disturbs "a" reasonable person of normal auditory sensitivities. The information thus contained allegations sufficient to establish, if true, every element of the offense as defined in the Islip Town Code. "So long as the factual allegations of an information give an accused notice sufficient to prepare a defense and are adequately detailed to prevent a defendant from being tried twice for the same offense, they should be given a fair and not overly restrictive or technical reading" (People v Casey, 95 NY2d 354, 360 [2000]).
In dismissing the accusatory instrument as "defective," the Appellate Term faulted the failure of the information to allege that the noise disturbance claimed to have been caused by defendant constituted a public nuisance. However, assuming that such a requirement exists, it arises not from the ordinance as adopted by the Islip Town Board, but from this Court's precedent suggesting that an anti-noise statute proscribing merely private disputes may be unconstitutionally vague (see People v New York Trap Rock Corp., 57 NY2d 371, 380 [1982]; People v Bakolas, 59 NY2d 51, 53-54 [1983]).
A challenge to the constitutionality of a statute must be preserved (see e.g. People v Davidson, 98 NY2d 738 [2002]). This requirement is no mere formalism, but ensures that the drastic step of striking duly enacted legislation will be taken not in a vacuum but only after the lower courts have had an opportunity to address the issue and the unconstitutionality of the challenged provision has been established beyond a reasonable doubt (see e.g. Matter of Van Berkel v Power, 16 NY2d 37, 40 [1965]). Moreover, while courts must construe statutes so as to preserve their constitutionality whenever possible (see People v Epton, 19 NY2d 496, 505 [1967]), an appellate court is not required to undertake such a construction when no constitutional issue has been raised below. For this Court to consider a constitutional claim in the guise of an argument that the accusatory instrument is facially insufficient would permit an end run around the parties' obligation to preserve constitutional claims before the trial court. Thus, despite our denial of defendant's previous motion to dismiss the appeal, after full briefing and argument by the parties we conclude that dismissal is required.
*409 Accordingly, the appeal should be dismissed.
Appeal dismissed on the ground that the reversal by the Appellate Term was not "on the law alone or upon the law and such facts which, but for the determination of law, would not have led to reversal" (CPL 450.90[2] [a]).

=== CASE 9739555 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:17:28.943916+00 ===

OPINION
ROBB, Judge.
Paul Meyers ("Meyers") appeals the trial court's order granting James Meyers ("James") and Eva Meyers' ("Eva") d/b/a J. Meyers Construction, Inc. ("J. Meyers Construction") motion to dismiss his claim for retaliatory discharge and to dismiss James and Eva as defendants. We reverse and remand.
Issues
Meyers raises two issues for our review, which we restate as follows:
1. Whether the trial court properly dismissed Meyers' claim for retaliatory discharge; and
2. Whether the trial court properly dismissed James and Eva Meyers as defendants.
Facts and Procedural History
The facts, as related in Meyers' complaint, reveal that J. Meyers Construction is a corporation organized and existing under the laws of Indiana. Its principal place of business is in Westfield, Indiana, and its registered agent is James. James and Eva are the sole shareholders of J. Meyers Construction, the only members of its board of directors, and its only officers. Meyers alleges that J. Meyers Construction, James, and Eva are all "employers" as that term is defined in Indiana Code section 22-2-2-3,1 and that he was employed by each of these parties.
While employed by J. Meyers Construction, James, and Eva, Meyers was required to work in exeess of forty hours per week on numerous occasions, but was never given overtime pay. When Meyers complained to James and Eva about their failure to pay him overtime wages, they fired him.
On July 26, 2004, Meyers filed a complaint against J. Meyers Construction, James, and Eva in which he raised a claim for retaliatory discharge. Meyers also alleged that J. Meyers Construction, James, and Eva committed conversion by withholding $8,868.44 in taxes from his payroll checks for their own use instead of giving that money to the Internal Revenue Service. J. Meyers Construction, pursuant to Indiana Trial Rule 12(B)(6), filed a motion to dismiss Meyers' claim for retaliatory discharge for failure to state a claim upon which relief could be granted. The motion also argued that, pursuant to Indiana Trial Rules 12(B)(6) and 17, James and Eva should be dismissed as defendants because J. Meyers Construction was solely Hable. On October 18, 2004, the trial court issued an order dismissing Meyers' claim for retaliatory discharge and dismissing James and Eva as defendants. This appeal ensued.
Discussion and Decision
I. Standard of Review
Meyers appeals the trial court's dismissal, pursuant to Indiana Trial Rule *28312(B)(6), of his retaliatory discharge claim and the dismissal of James and Eva as defendants. Our standard of review of a trial court's grant or denial of a motion to dismiss for failure to state a claim is de novo. Cripe, Inc. v. Clark, 834 N.E.2d 731, 733 (Ind.Ct.App.2005). A Trial Rule 12(B)(6) motion to dismiss for failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted tests the legal sufficiency of a claim, not the facts supporting it. City of South Bend v. Century Indem. Co., 821 N.E.2d 5, 9 (Ind.Ct.App.2005), trans. denied. On review, we examine the complaint in the light most favorable to the non-moving party, drawing every reasonable inference in favor of that party. Id. "We stand in the shoes of the trial court and must determine if the trial court erred in its application of the law." Id. The trial court's grant of a motion to dismiss is proper only if it is apparent that the facts alleged in the complaint are incapable of supporting relief under any set of cireum-stances. Id. "In making this determination, we look only to the complaint and may not resort to any other evidence in the record." Id.
II. Retaliatory Discharge
Meyers first contends that the trial court erred in dismissing his retaliatory discharge claim. He points out that in his complaint he alleged that on several occasions he was required to work more than forty hours a week and was not given overtime pay. When he complained to James and Eva about their failure to pay his overtime wages, they fired him. Meyers asserts that he has a statutory right to overtime pay under Indiana Code section 22-2-2-4(J), which states that "no employer shall employ any employee for a workweek longer than forty (40) hours unless the employee receives compensation for employment in excess of the hours above specified at a rate not less than one and one-half (1.5) times the regular rate at which he is employed." Indiana Code seetion 22-2-2-9 states that any employer who violates the provisions of Indiana Code section 22-2-2-4 shall be liable to the employee affected in the amount of their unpaid wages. Meyers concludes that because he has a statutory right to overtime wages, and because he was terminated for exercising that right, he is entitled to bring a retaliatory discharge claim under the public policy exception to the employment-at-will doctrine established by our supreme court in Frampton v. Central Indiana Gas Co., 260 Ind. 249, 297 N.E.2d 425 (1973).
Initially, it is important to point out that Indiana follows the doctrine of employment-at-will. Wior v. Anchor Indus., Inc., 669 N.E.2d 172, 175 (Ind.1996). Under this doctrine, an employer can discharge an at-will-employee for any cause or no cause at all without incurring liability. Wilmington v. Harvest Ins. Companies, 521 N.E.2d 953, 955 (Ind.Ct.App.1988). "Absent a set term of employment, an employment relationship is at will." McGarrity v. Berlin Metals, Inc., 774 N.E.2d 71, 76 (Ind.Ct.App.2002), trans. denied. Here, Meyers was an at-will-employee because his term of employment was of an indefinite duration.
However, our supreme court has recognized some exeeptions to the employment-at-will doctrine. Id. In Frampton, our supreme court created a public policy exception to the employment-at-will doctrine when it held that an employee discharged for filing a worker's compensation claim could bring a claim for retaliatory discharge. 297 N.E.2d at 428. The court explained:
The [Worker's Compensation] Act cere-ates a duty in the employer to compensate employees for work-related injuries *284(through insurance) and a right in the employee to receive such compensation. But in order for the goals of the Act to be realized and for public policy to be effectuated, the employee must be able to exercise his right in an unfettered fashion without being subject to reprisal. If employers are permitted to penalize employees for filing workmen's compensation claims, a most important public policy will be undermined. The fear of being discharged would have a deleterious effect on the exercise of a statutory right. Employees will not file claims for justly deserved compensation-opting, instead, to continue their employment without incident. The end result, of course, is that the employer is effectively relieved of his obligation.
Id. at 427. The court concluded that although an at-will-employee may generally be discharged without cause, "when an employee is discharged solely for exercising a statutorily conferred right an exception to the general rule must be recognized." Id. at 428.
This case is analogous to the situation presented in Frampton. In that case, an employee was fired for filing a worker's compensation claim. Here, Meyers was fired after he complained about not being paid overtime wages. Indiana Code sections 22-2-2-4(J) and-9 create a duty in the employer to compensate employees with overtime pay when they have worked more than forty hours in a week and af ford employees a right to sue for unpaid overtime wages. Indiana Code section 22-2-2-11(b) imposes criminal sanctions upon employers who violate Indiana Code seetion 2222-4.2 These statutes indicate that there is a strong public policy in this state favoring the payment of overtime wages to employees who work more than forty hours per week. As the Frampton court stated, in order for the public policy enunciated in Indiana Code sections 22-2-2-4(J) and -9 to be effectuated, "the employee must be able to exercise his right in an unfettered fashion without being subject to reprisal." 297 N.E.2d at 427. If employers are permitted to penalize employees for filing suit to recover unpaid overtime wages, public policy will be undermined. As was the case in Frampton,
[tlhe fear of being discharged would have a deleterious effect on the exercise of a statutory right. Employees will not file claims for justly deserved compensation-opting, instead, to continue their employment without incident. The end result, of course, is that the employer is effectively relieved of his obligation.
Id. The similarities between this case and Frampton suggest that an employee who has been fired for exercising his statutory right to overtime pay should be allowed to bring a claim for retaliatory discharge under the public policy exception to the employment-at-will doctrine created in Frampton.
However, this case is also similar to Morgan Drive Away, Inc. v. Brant, 489 N.E.2d 983 (Ind.1986). In that case, Brant transported mobile homes, pursuant to a series of equipment contracts, for Morgan. A dispute arose between Morgan and Brant when Morgan refused to pay Brant for certain services it determined Brant had performed unsatisfactorily. Brant filed a small claims action against Morgan demanding payment, and, a short time later, Morgan fired Brant. Brant then filed a retaliatory discharge claim against Morgan. A jury returned a verdict in favor of Brant, but made no determination as to whether Brant was an employee or an independent contractor.
*285Morgan appealed, arguing that Indiana did not recognize a cause of action for the wrongful termination of an employee who has been fired in retaliation for filing a lawsuit for unpaid wages. We first noted that as an employee, Brant had a statutory right to sue Morgan for payment of his wages under Indiana Code section 22-2-4-4. Morgan Drive Away, Inc. v. Brant, 479 N.E.2d 1336, 1338 (Ind.Ct.App.1985), trans. granted. At that time, Indiana Code section 22-2-4-4 provided:
Every corporation, company, association, firm or person who shall fail for ten (10) days after demand of payment has been made to pay employees for their labor, in conformity with the provisions of this act, shall be liable to such employee for the full value of his labor, to which shall be added a penalty of one dollar ($1.00) for each succeeding day, not exceeding double the amount of wages due, and a reasonable attorney's fee, to be recovered in a civil action and collectable without relief.3
We concluded that the "termination of Brant solely for filing the small claims action, would violate the Frampton rule if Brant were an employee as opposed to an independent contractor." Brant, 479 N.E.2d at 1338 (footnote omitted). Because the jury did not determine whether Brant was an employee or an independent contractor, we concluded that it was necessary to reverse and remand the case for a new trial. Id. at 1388-39.
On transfer, our supreme court vacated our opinion. Brant, 489 N.E.2d at 984. The court noted that "the Court of Appeals ... held that termination of an employee solely for filing an action for payment of wages pursuant to Ind.Code § 22-2-4-4 would violate the rule of Frampton ...." Id. at 933. After discussing its decision in Frampton, the court stated that since Frampton "Indiana courts have refused to recognize retaliatory discharge actions in cases not involving workmen's compensation claims." Id. at 934 (citing Campbell v. Eli Lilly & Co., 413 N.E.2d 1054 (Ind.Ct.App.1980), trans. denied; McQueeney v. Glenn, 400 N.E.2d 806 (Ind.Ct.App.1980), cert. denied, 449 U.S. 1125, 101 S.Ct. 943, 67 L.Ed.2d 112 (1981); Martin v. Platt, 179 Ind.App. 688, 386 N.E.2d 1026 (1979)). The court concluded that
[tlhe employment at will doctrine has steadfastly been recognized and enforced as the public policy of this State. Revision or rejection of the doctrine is better left to the legislature. We therefore decline this opportunity to extend Frampton to the facts of the instant case.
Id. (Citations omitted and emphasis added). Noting that if Brant was an independent contractor he would be entitled to contract damages, the court remanded the case for a new trial. Id.
Although this case is similar to Brant in that Meyers is suing to recover unpaid wages and has a statutory right to sue for payment of those wages, Brant is distinguishable. The Brant court specifically stated that it only refused to extend Frampton to the facts of that case. The facts here are different from those in Brant. Here, Meyers is an employee, while it is not clear whether Brant was an employee or an independent contractor. Brant was only suing to recover unpaid wages, but Meyers is suing to recover unpaid overtime wages. Brant had a statutory right to sue for his unpaid wages under Indiana Code section 22-2-4-4, whereas Meyers has a statutory right to *286sue for his unpaid overtime wages under Indiana Code section 22-2-2-9. Based on these differences, we conclude that Brant is not controlling here.
J. Meyers Construction argues, as the Brant court pointed out, that the public policy exception created in Framp-ton is only available in cases involving workmen's compensation claims. The language in Frampton, though, indicates that our supreme court did not intend for its holding to be limited to cases involving workmen's compensation claims. The court first stated, "In summary, we hold that an employee who alleges he or she was retaliatorily discharged for filing a claim pursuant to the Indiana Workmen's Compensation Act or the Indiana Workmen's Occupational Diseases Act has stated a claim upon which relief can be granted." Id. at 428 (citations omitted). The court concluded that "when an employee is discharged solely for exercising a statutorily conferred right an exception to the general rule must be recognized." Id. Based on this language, any employee who is fired for exercising a statutory right can bring a claim for retaliatory discharge, not just those employees who were fired for filing a workmen's compensation claim. To narrow the application of the Frampton exception to only those cases involving workmen's compensation claims would seem contrary to the holding in Frampton. We drew a similar conclusion in Call v. Scott Brass, Inc., 553 N.E.2d 1225, 1228 (Ind.Ct.App.1990), trans. denied, where we stated, "Although the opinion of the Supreme Court in Frampton only addressed discharges in retaliation for the filing of a worker's compensation claim, the court did not hold that only employees discharged under the same circumstances could obtain relief."
Additionally, the courts of this state have steadily expanded the public policy exception to the employment-at-will doctrine created in Frampton. A few years after Frampton, we suggested that an employee could maintain an action for retaliatory discharge if he was terminated from his employment for exercising a statutory right or refusing to violate a statutory duty. See Campbell, 413 N.E.2d at 1061; Martin, 386 N.E.2d at 1028. The expansion of the public policy exception created in Frampton that was proposed in Martin and Campbell was confirmed in McClanahan v. Remington Freight Lines, Inc., 517 N.E.2d 390, 398 (Ind.1988), where our supreme court held that not only could an employee bring a claim for retaliatory discharge if he was fired for exercising a statutory right, but he could also bring a claim for retaliatory discharge if he was terminated for performing a statutory duty. Building upon McClanahan, in Call, we held that an employee who was fired for complying with her statutory duty to appear for jury service could bring a claim for retaliatory discharge. 553 N.E.2d at 1230. McClanahan and Call indicate that since Brant Indiana courts have recognized retaliatory discharge actions in cases that do not involve workmen's compensation claims.4
*287Since Frampton and McClanahan, our supreme court has recognized a number of exceptions to the employment-at-will doctrine. Our supreme court has stated that if an employee can establish that "adequate independent consideration" supports his employment contract, the court will generally conclude that the parties intended to establish a relationship in which the employer may terminate the employee only for good cause. Orr v. Westminster Village North, Inc., 689 N.E.2d 712, 718 (Ind.1997) (citing Romack v. Public Serv. Co., 511 N.E.2d 1024, 1026 (Ind.1987) (adopting in substantial part and incorporating Judge Conover's dissent in Romack v. Public Serv. Co., 499 N.E.2d 768, 777 (Ind.Ct.App.1986))). An employee may also avoid the harsh results of the employment-at-will doctrine by invoking the doctrine of promissory estoppel. Orr, 689 N.E.2d at 718. These cases suggest that the employment-at-will doctrine as been significantly eroded in Indiana.
In most of the cases where the courts of this state have refused to recognize a retaliatory discharge action, the basis for the court's refusal to recognize such a claim has not been the fact that the case did not involve a workmen's compensation claim, but that the plaintiff failed to identify a specific statute that served as the basis for a public policy that was violated. See Hamblen v. Danners, Inc., 478 N.E.2d 926, 929 (Ind.Ct.App.1985) ("In the absence of statutory directives, we decline to find a violation of public policy in the dismissal of an employee who refuses to take a polygraph examination."); Rice v. Grant County Bd. of Comm'rs, 472 N.E.2d 213, 215 (Ind.Ct.App.1984), trans. denied ("Although [plaintiff] alleges his conduct was reasonable under the Indiana general traffic statutes ... the general traffic laws do not confer a right or duty upon [plaintiff] to proceed outside the county line, to drive his truck in the mud, or to incur county expense for towing."); Hillenbrand v. City of Evansville, 457 N.E.2d 236, 237 (Ind.Ct.App.1983) (Plaintiff was fired because he saw something he was not supposed to see, not because he was carrying out his statutorily imposed duties); Campbell, 413 N.E.2d at 1061 ("[Plaintiff] has nowhere demonstrated a statutory source for the alleged right he claims to have exercised, nor has he demonstrated a statutory source for the duty he claims to have fulfilled."); McQueeney, 400 N.E.2d at 810 (rejected plaintiff's contention that termination of her employment because of her marriage constituted actionable retaliatory discharge); Martin, 386 N.E.2d at 1028 (denied an action for retaliatory discharge where terminated employees claimed that their discharge was in retaliation for hav*288ing reported to a company official that their immediate superior had solicited and received illegal kickbacks and that the discharge was contrary to general public policy rather than a specific public policy enunciated in a statute). But see Lawson, 551 N.E.2d at 860 (noting that although plaintiff had a statutory right to file a claim for unemployment compensation and that plaintiff was fired for filing such claim, employer's actions did not violate public policy and court refused to recognize an exception to the employment-at-will doctrine under the facts of that case); Brant, 489 N.E.2d at 934 (plaintiff had a statutory right to file a claim for unpaid wages and was fired for filing such a claim, but court refused to extend FPrampton to the facts of the case and concluded that plaintiff could not bring a claim for retaliatory discharge). Unlike these cases, Meyers had a statutory right to overtime pay, and he alleges that he was fired for exercising that right.
After considering the caselaw of this state since Frampton, the trend here seems to be an effort by the courts of this state to cautiously recognize statutory rights that provide protections to employees, while preserving employers' rights to run their businesses by upholding the basic tenants of the employment-at-will doe-trine: an employee may be terminated for good reason or no reason at all so long as it does not violate a right protected by the Indiana Constitution or by a statute. Brant stands out because it goes against this trend. Therefore, we believe we are bound to follow our supreme court's holding in Frampton.
In Frampton, our supreme court held that an employee who was terminated for exercising a statutorily conferred right could bring a claim for retaliatory discharge. 297 N.E.2d at 428. Nothing in Frampton indicates that the public policy exception created in that case is only available in cases involving workmen's compensation claims. Indiana Code sections 22-2-2-4(J) and -9 provide employees with a statutory right to overtime pay. These statutes express our state's public policy favoring the payment of overtime wages to employees who work more than forty hours per week. If we permit employers to fire employees who file suit to recover overtime pay, and prevent such employees from filing a claim for retaliatory discharge, then an employee's statutory right to overtime wages becomes a nullity. Employees will not file claims for justly deserved overtime compensation for fear that they will be fired from their job. This would effectively relieve employers of their obligation to pay overtime wages, which is contrary to public policy. Therefore, we conclude that an employee who has been fired for exercising bis statutory right to overtime pay can bring a claim for retaliatory discharge under the public policy exception to the employment-at-will doctrine created in Frampton.
Here, Meyers alleges that on several occasions he worked more than forty hours a week and was not given overtime pay. When he asked James and Eva about their failure to pay him overtime wages, they fired him. Meyers alleged sufficient facts to state a claim for retaliatory discharge. The trial court erred in granting J. Meyers Construction's motion to dismiss Meyers' retaliatory discharge claim.
III. Piercing the Corporate Veil
Meyers next argues that the trial court erred in dismissing James and Eva as defendants. The trial court dismissed James and Eva as defendants concluding that only J. Meyers Construction could be liable. Meyers contends that the corporate veil should be pierced, and James and *289Eva should be held liable for the actions of J. Meyers Construction.
In general, individual shareholders of a corporation are not personally responsible for the obligations of the corporation. Escobedo v. BHM Health Assocs., Inc., 818 N.E.2d 930, 932 (Ind.2004). One of the fundamental principles of American corporate law is that corporate shareholders sustain liability for corporate acts only to the extent of their investment and are not held personally liable for acts attributable to the corporation. Aronson v. Price, 644 N.E.2d 864, 867 (Ind.1994). The burden is on the party seeking to pierce the corporate veil to prove that the corporate form was so ignored, controlled, or manipulated that it was merely the instrumentality of another and that the misuse of the corporate form would constitute a fraud or promote injustice. Id. In deciding whether a plaintiff has carried this burden of proof, we consider whether any evidence has been presented that shows: (1) undereapitalization; (2) absence of corporate records; (8) fraudulent representation by corporation shareholders or directors; (4) use of the corporation to promote fraud, injustice, or illegal activities; (5) payment by the corporation of individual obligations; (6) commingling of assets and affairs; (7) failure to observe required corporate formalities; or (8) other shareholder acts or conduct ignoring, controlling, or manipulating the corporate form. Id.
In his complaint, Meyers alleged that James and Eva were the sole shareholders of J. Meyers Construction, the only members of its board of directors, and its only officers. None of these allegations alone would suggest that the corporate veil should be pierced. Another allegation made by Meyers was that J. Meyers Construction, James, and Eva are all employers as that term is defined in Indiana Code section 22-2-2-3, and that he was employed by each of these defendants. This allegation suggests that Meyers may have been deceived about whom his employer actually was, and that James and Eva Meyers may have ignored the corporate form. These allegations, though, are not sufficient to justify piercing the corporate veil.
Meyers makes two more significant allegations in his complaint. First, he alleged that on several occasions he worked more than forty hours in a week but was never paid overtime wages, as required by Indiana Code section 22-2-2-4(j). Indiana Code section 22-2-2-11(b) provides that an employer who violates Indiana Code section 22-2-2-4 commits a Class A infraction. Second, Meyers alleged that James and Eva committed conversion, a crime under Indiana Code seetion 35-48-4-3, when they retained $8,368.44 from his checks for their own use instead of giving this money to the Internal Revenue Service. These two allegations suggest that James and Eva used J. Meyers Construction to promote injustice or illegal activities. Therefore, Meyers has introduced sufficient evidence to survive J. Meyers Construction's motion to dismiss James and Eva as defendants. On remand, Meyers will bear the burden at an evidentiary hearing to prove that the corporate veil should be pierced, and that James and Eva should be held liable.
Conclusion
An employee who has been fired for exercising his statutory right to overtime pay can bring a claim for retaliatory discharge under the public policy exception to the employment-at-will doctrine created in Frampton. The trial court erred in granting J. Meyers Construction's motion to dismiss Meyers' retaliatory discharge claim because Meyers alleged sufficient *290facts to support such a claim. The trial court also erred in granting J. Meyers Construction's motion to dismiss James and Eva as defendants because Meyers alleged sufficient facts to survive this motion. The trial court's order granting J. Meyers Construction's motion to dismiss is therefore reversed, and we remand for further proceedings.
Reversed and remanded.
MAY, J., concurs.
KIRSCH, C.J., concurs in part and dissents in part with separate opinion.
. Indiana Code section 22-2-2-3 defines the term "employer" to mean "any individual, partnership, association, limited liability company, corporation, business trust, the state, or other governmental agency or political subdivision during any work week in which they have two (2) or more employees."
. An employer who violates Indiana Code section 22-2-2-4 commits a Class A infraction.
. In 1986, the statute was amended to substitute the word "chapter" for the word "act." The statute was again amended in 1993 to insert "limited liability company." Besides these two amendments, the statute remains the same today.
. Recently, in M.C. Welding and Machining Co., Inc. v. Kotwa, 845 N.E.2d 188, 196 (Ind.Ct.App., 2006), we affirmed a jury's verdict in a retaliatory discharge case. Kotwa alleged that "his termination was based upon his age, perceived disabilities, and the fact that he applied for unemployment benefits." Id. at 190. The jury entered a general verdict for Kotwa. On appeal, we first noted that although it was questionable whether the trial court had jurisdiction over the age and disability discrimination claims, the general verdict was sustainable if there was sufficient evidence to support Kotwa's retaliatory discharge claim. Id. at 191. M.C. Welding argued that the evidence was insufficient to sustain a judgment for retaliatory discharge based upon our holding in Lawson v. Haven *287Hubbard Homes, Inc., 551 N.E.2d 855 (Ind.Ct.App.1990). In Lawson, an employee was fired for filing a claim for unemployment compensation. We affirmed the trial court's grant of summary judgment in favor of the employer on the employee's retaliatory discharge claim. Id. at 860. We noted that although the employee had a statutory right to file a claim for unemployment compensation, the employer's termination of the employee did not violate public policy. Id. However, we concluded that Lawson was factually distinguishable because, unlike in Lawson, Kotwa was only temporarily laid off from work. Kotwa, at 195. Even if Lawson was applicable, we concluded that M.C. Welding waived any argument that Lawson prevents an employee from claiming retaliatory discharge after being terminated for applying for unemployment benefits because M.C. Welding never objected to the jury being instructed, contrary to the holding in Lawson, that an employer who retaliates against an employee who has filed for unemployment benefits commits unlawful retaliation. Id. at 195. Kotwa indicates, like Call and McClanahan, that Indiana courts have recognized retaliatory discharge actions in cases that do not involve workmen's compensation claims. It also suggests that the courts of this state are becoming more receptive to such actions allowing them to proceed to trial.

=== CASE 9739556 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:17:28.948467+00 ===

KIRSCH, Chief Judge,
concurring in part and dissenting in part.
Our Supreme Court in Morgan Drive Away, Inc. v. Brant, 489 N.E.2d 933 (Ind.1986) stated the "employment at will doe-trine has steadfastly been recognized and enforced as the public policy of this State" and observed that the "[rlevision or rejection of the doctrine is better left to the legislature." Id. at 984. The Court declined the opportunity to extend the exception carved out in Frampton v. Central Indiana Gas Co., 260 Ind. 249, 297 N.E.2d 425 (1973) to a claim for retaliatory discharge for filing a claim for unpaid wages. I am unable to draw meaningful distinctions between the facts before the Court in Morgan Drive Away and those presented here. Accordingly, I believe our decision, like that of the trial court, is controlled by that precedent. I respectfully dissent from the opinion of the majority and would affirm the trial court's dismissal of the plaintiff's retaliatory discharge claim.
On the issue of piercing the corporate veil, I coneur with the decision of my colleagues.

=== CASE 2220281 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:38.815971+00 ===

846 N.E.2d 1048 (2006)
Calvin BANKHEAD, Appellant,
v.
Robert D. WALKER, Successor to Fire Chief Richard Gilliam; and the Gary Fire Civil Service Commission, Appellees.
No. 45A03-0506-CV-248.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
May 9, 2006.
*1050 Frank R. Martinez, III, Highland, for Appellant.
R. Timothy Fletcher, Hodges & Davis, P.C., Shana D. Levinson, Levinson & Levinson, Merrillville, for Appellee.
OPINION
RILEY, Judge.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
Appellant-Respondent, Calvin Bankhead (Bankhead), appeals the trial court's determination that disciplinary actions taken against him by Appellants-Petitioners, former Gary Fire Chief, Richard Gilliam (Chief Gilliam), and the Gary Fire Civil Service Commission (the Commission), were in good faith.
We affirm.[1]
ISSUES
Bankhead raises two issues on appeal, which we restate as follows:
(1) Whether the trial court erred in affirming the Commission's decision to admit into evidence certain documents showing the results of Bankhead's random drug test at the Commission's hearing; and
(2) Whether the trial court erred in affirming the Commission's denial of Bankhead's Motion for Judgment on the Evidence.
FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
On November 26, 2001, pursuant to the policies and procedures of his employer, the City of Gary Fire Department (the Gary Fire Department) in Lake County, Indiana, Bankhead was selected at random and tested for controlled substance use. The results indicated that Bankhead, who had been employed by the Gary Fire Department for twenty-five years, tested positive for marijuana metabolites. Consequently, on November 29, 2001, Bankhead was suspended from duty without pay for violating Rule IV-4 of the Rules and Regulations of the Commission and the City of Gary Drug-Free Workplace Policy and Procedures. Thereafter, Chief Gilliam, Gary's Fire Chief at the time, filed a verified complaint with the Commission that alleged Bankhead had tested positive for marijuana use.
On February 13, 2002, the Commission held a hearing on the matter, where Chief Gilliam introduced into evidence a set of documents, labeled Group Exhibit No. 2, which included the results of Bankhead's drug test, as well as a certification intended to establish the chain of custody for Bankhead's urine sample that was used as the basis of the test. The documents within Group Exhibit No. 2 were admitted over Bankhead's objection. In addition, at the close of Gilliam's case, Bankhead moved for the Commission to make a judgment on the evidence, which the Commission denied.
On April 23, 2002, the Commission issued an Order that included Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law. In its Order, the Commission found that Bankhead had violated the Rules and Regulations of the *1051 Commission, as well as the Drug-Free Work Place Policy and Procedures of the City of Gary. As a result, the Commission suspended Bankhead for nine months and subjected him to additional random drug tests. The Commission also demoted Bankhead from the rank of Captain to that of Lieutenant, and prohibited him from taking any promotional exams for one year following the issuance of the Order.
Following the Order's issuance, Bankhead gave timely notice of his appeal. On December 9, 2004, a hearing was held before the trial court. At the close of the hearing, Bankhead filed a motion for Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law under Ind. Trial Rule 52, which was granted. Subsequently, the trial court affirmed the Order of the Commission. In its findings, the trial court stated, in part:
13. [At the Commission's hearing], Bankhead's attorney objected to [Group Exhibit No. 2] on the grounds of hearsay and because the hospital record custodian's certification which was stapled to the top of the [] accompanying medical records did not fully comply with Ind.Code § 34-43-1-7.[].
14. [The Commission] examined both I.C. § 34-43-1-7 and the certification attached to Bankhead's records. []. It also considered [the Commission's] Rules and Regulations Part IV, Rule IV-13, which enables [the Commission] to use a less stringent standard for the admission of evidence during Commission hearings.
(Appellant's App. p. 15).
Additionally, in its Conclusions and Rulings, the trial court stated:
1. The Certification that accompanied [Gilliam's] Group Exhibit No. 2 substantially complies with Indiana Evidence Rule 803(6).
2. The Certification that accompanied [Gilliam's] Group Exhibit No. 2 substantially complies with Indiana Code § []XX-XX-X-X.
3. Notwithstanding the fact that the certification authenticating the drug tests complied in large part with Indiana Evidence Rule 803(6), [the Commission] does operate under a less stringent standard for the admission of evidence.
4. [The Commission] reasonably found the drug tests received by [Gilliam] were inherently reliable and were properly admitted into evidence. Therefore, because [Gilliam's] Group Exhibit No. 2 was properly admitted into evidence by [the Commission], Bankhead's motion for Judgment on the Evidence was properly denied.
(Appellant's App. p. 16).
Bankhead now appeals. Additional facts will be provided as necessary.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
I. Standard of Review
Typically, in cases involving public employment hearings, our review is limited to the trial court's consideration of whether or not the Commission adhered to proper legal procedure, made findings based on substantial evidence, and violated any constitutional or statutory provisions in doing so. See Aguilera v. City of East Chicago Fire Civil Service Com'n, 768 N.E.2d 978 (Ind.Ct.App.2002), reh'g denied, trans. denied. However, here, because the trial court entered findings of fact and conclusions of law, we will review whether the evidence supports the findings and whether the findings support the judgment. Lake County Trust Co. v. Jones, 821 N.E.2d 1, 3 (Ind.Ct.App.2004), reh'g denied. In doing so, we will set aside the trial court's findings and conclusions only if they are clearly erroneous, that is, if the record contains no facts or inferences supporting them. Id. A judgment is clearly *1052 erroneous when a review of the record leaves us with the firm conviction that a mistake has been made. Id. Upon such review, we neither reweigh the evidence nor assess the credibility of witnesses, but consider only the evidence most favorable to the judgment. Id. at 3-4.
II. Admission of Certification and Drug Test Results
First, Bankhead asserts that the Commission erred in admitting into evidence Group Exhibit No. 2, which contained a certification of his drug test results and the actual drug test results. Specifically, Bankhead contends that procedural due process required this set of documents to comport with I.C. § 34-43-1-7, which sets out the requirements for certifying hospital medical records in the absence of a personal appearance by a hospital employee. In the present case, no one from the hospital or the laboratory personally appeared at the Commission's hearing to verify the records admitted in Group Exhibit No. 2; thus, without a proper certification, Bankhead argues that Group Exhibit No. 2 was inadmissible hearsay.
Therefore, the crux of the issue here is what evidentiary standards the Commission was required to follow in conducting Bankhead's suspension hearing. First, we note that the Commission's Rules and Regulations, in relevant part, state the following regarding the suspension of an employee:
SECTION 7. REMOVAL, DISCHARGE, SUSPENSION OR DEMOTION OF PERSONS IN CLASSIFIED SERVICE; PROCEDURES; APPEAL. No person in the classified civil service who shall have been permanently appointed or inducted into civil service under provisions of this chapter shall be removed, suspended, demoted or discharged except for cause, and only upon the written accusation of the appointing power . . . a written statement of which accusation, in general terms, shall be served upon the accused, and a duplicate filed with the [C]ommission . . . Any person so removed, suspended, demoted or discharged may, within ten (10) days from the time of his removal, suspension, demotion or discharge, file with the [C]ommission a written demand for an investigation, whereupon the [C]ommission shall conduct such investigation. The investigation shall be confined to the determination of the question of whether such removal, suspension, demotion or discharge was or was not made for political or religious reasons, and was or was not made in good faith for [cause].
(Appellant's App. p. 95).
We also note, as referenced by the trial court in its findings in this case, that Rule IV-13 of the Commission's Rules and Regulations provides:
IV-13 CONDUCT OF HEARING
The hearing shall be conducted in an informal manner and without recourse to the technical common law rules of evidence required in judicial courts. The Commission shall as a matter of policy provide for exclusion of irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence. Every person who is a party to such a proceeding shall have the right to submit relevant evidence in open hearing and shall have the right of cross examination.
(Appellee's App. p. 1). Despite this provision, Bankhead argues that he has a statutorily created property interest in his continued employment with the Gary Fire Department, and thus the Commission's less stringent standard for admitting evidence at its hearings is violative of his due process rights.
*1053 The Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution prohibits any state from depriving a person of life, liberty, or property without due process of law. Austin v. Vanderburgh County Sheriff Merit Com'n, 761 N.E.2d 875, 879 (Ind. Ct.App.2002). The requirements of procedural due process apply only to the deprivation of interests encompassed by the Fourteenth Amendment's protection of liberty and property. Id. The United States Supreme Court has defined constitutionally protected "property" in this context as "a legitimate claim of entitlement." Id. The source of such entitlements is not to be found in the Constitution, but generally arises from a statute, ordinance, or contract. Id. We have previously found that a property interest arises by an express or implied agreement with a governmental entity for continued employment. See id.; see also Aguilera, 768 N.E.2d at 986.
Accordingly, Bankhead contends that procedural due process required the Commission to follow I.C. § 34-43-1-7, which states in order to admit hospital records in the absence of a personal appearance by a hospital employee:
The hospital employee's certification of the hospital medical records under section 5 of this chapter must:
(1) be signed by the hospital employee with custody of the hospital medical records; and
(2) include:
(A) the full name of the patient;
(B) the patient's medical record number:
(C) the number of pages in the hospital medical record; and
(D) a statement in substantially the following form:
"The copies of records for which this certification is made are true and complete reproductions of the original or microfilmed hospital medical records that are housed in ____ (name of hospital). The original records were made in the regular course of business, and it was the regular course of ____ (name of hospital) to make the records at or near the time of the matter recorded. This certification is given under [I.C. § ] XX-XX-X-X by the custodian of the records instead of the custodian's personal appearance."
Here, the certification admitted into evidence at Bankhead's hearing did not contain any name or medical record number, but did state that the attached records were kept in the ordinary course of hospital business and made at or near the time of the occurrence of the matters set forth therein. However, two documents attached to the certification bear Bankhead's name and indicate a positive test result; furthermore, one of these two additional documents includes a patient identification number.
While we agree that Bankhead has a statutorily created property interest in his continued employment with the Gary Fire Department and that his employment cannot be terminated or suspended without adherence to basic due process procedures, we fail to find that the Commission's admission of Group Exhibit No. 2 violated this right. See Aguilera, 768 N.E.2d at 986; See also Jones v. City of Gary, Ind., 57 F.3d 1435, 1440 (7th Cir. 1995). A basic principle of due process is that a deprivation of property "be preceded by notice and opportunity for hearing appropriate to the nature of the case." Aguilera, 768 N.E.2d at 987. However, these requirements "need not be elaborate." Id. As the Supreme Court has stated:
The essential requirements of due process. . . are notice and an opportunity *1054 to respond. The opportunity to present reasons, either in person or in writing, why proposed action should not be taken is a fundamental due process requirement. The tenured public employee is entitled to oral or written notice of the charges against him, an explanation of the employer's evidence, and an opportunity to present his side of the story. To require more than this prior to termination would intrude to an unwarranted extent on the government's interest in quickly removing an unsatisfactory employee.
Id. (quoting Cleveland Bd. of Education v. Loudermill, 470 U.S. 532, 546, 105 S.Ct. 1487, 84 L.Ed.2d 494 (1985)).
Additionally, in a similar case disputing evidence admitted at a police merit board hearing, this court held that such employment proceedings "are administrative actions which allow for less formality than in civil proceedings before a court." Sullivan v. City of Evansville, 728 N.E.2d 182, 193 (Ind.Ct.App.2000). As such, we announced that we would "not disturb the [merit board's] decision for the lack of promulgated rules of evidence as long as the hearing was full and fair, before an impartial body and conducted in good faith." Id. at 193-94. Our state's supreme court has also stated, in relation to evidentiary matters at such hearings, that due process does not mandate full discovery rights. Board of School Com'rs of City of Indianapolis v. Walpole, 801 N.E.2d 622, 625 (Ind.2004).
We fail to find in the case before us that Bankhead's due process rights were violated. Rather, our review of the record indicates that Bankhead was given notice and an opportunity to respond to the Commission's accusation that he tested positive for marijuana use. Specifically, the Commission held a hearing where Bankhead had the opportunity to present his side of the story. See Aguilera, 768 N.E.2d at 987. Further, the record shows no evidence that the hearing was not conducted in good faith before an impartial body. See Sullivan, 728 N.E.2d at 193-94. Accordingly, where a fair and full hearing was carried out, we decline to set any precedent that would require more formality in such employment proceedings. Moreover, as previously mentioned, our review of Group Exhibit No. 2 reveals two documents with Bankhead's name and evidence of a positive test result. Therefore, although the certification attached to those records does not include Bankhead's name, we find that Rule IV-13 of the Commission's Rules and Regulations specifically states that its hearings do not require adherence to the technical rules of evidence required in judicial courts. Therefore, we agree with the trial court that it was unnecessary for the Commission to follow I.C. § 34-43-1-7 in admitting the hospital records containing Bankhead's drug test results.
III. Motion for Judgment on the Evidence
Additionally, Bankhead asserts that the Commission erred in denying his Motion for Judgment on the Evidence. Specifically, Bankhead contends that due to the unreliability of the documents in Group Exhibit No. 2, there was no substantial or credible evidence to support the conclusion that he actually tested positive for marijuana use. In particular, Bankhead disputes the sufficiency of the foundation laid for and the lack of an interpretation of his drug test results. Thus, in essence here, Bankhead offers an expansion of his original argument that the Commission failed to follow proper evidentiary procedures in introducing the results of his drug test.
In this argument, Bankhead points to Amendment No. 2001-3 of the Commission's Rules and Regulations, which states that "whenever an employee's urine sample *1055 tests positive for the presence of drugs or alcohol (1st test), the sample shall be subjected to a more scientifically accurate confirmatory test (2nd test)." (Appellant's App. p. 102). Bankhead subsequently argues that because Chief Gilliam, in his testimony at the hearing, could not verify that a second, confirmatory test had been performed, the Commission failed to follow its own procedure and therefore could not rightfully find that Bankhead tested positive for marijuana. However, in our review of Group Exhibit No. 2, we find a document, albeit a very poor copy, indicating an initial level of marijuana metabolites, and a confirmed level of marijuana metabolites. While there appears to be a discrepancy in the two figures, the end result indicates that the confirmed test level was "outside [the] reference range" for marijuana metabolites. (Appellant's App. p. 80). In addition, we note that Amendment No. 2001-3 further provides that "[i]f the confirmatory test (2nd test) is also positive, the donor shall be notified within a reasonable time." Thus, from this additional language of Amendment No. 2001-3, it can be inferred that the 2nd test is automatically performed by the hospital before any results are communicated to the donor employee.
Under this argument, Bankhead also points to Chief Gilliam's inability to interpret the drug test results in his testimony at the hearing; as a result, Bankhead argues he was denied the opportunity to cross-examine the person responsible for performing the drug test. Consequently, Bankhead goes on to argue that the Commission should have introduced expert scientific testimony, by way of Ind. Rule of Evid. 702, to assist in its understanding of the numeric figures printed in the drug test results. Again, in light of the informal nature of public service employment proceedings, we decline to set a precedent requiring expert testimony at such hearings. Also, we note that Ind. Rule of Evid. 702 allows expert testimony if "scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge will assist the trier of fact to understand the evidence." Here, we find it unlikely that the Commission needed expert assistance in interpreting that the word "positive" preceded by the term "marijuana metabolites" indicates the presence of marijuana metabolites in Bankhead's blood stream. As repeatedly stated, it is not necessary that a full evidentiary hearing be held as long as the requirements of procedural due process, i.e. notice and an opportunity to be heard, are satisfied. Aguilera, 768 N.E.2d at 987-88. Therefore, we conclude that the trial court appropriately affirmed the Commission's decision to deny Bankhead's Motion for a Judgment on the Evidence.
CONCLUSION
Based on the foregoing, we conclude that the trial court did not err in finding that Bankhead's drug test results were properly admitted at the Commission's hearing; in addition, we conclude that the trial court did not err in affirming the Commission's denial of Bankhead's Motion for Judgment on the Evidence.
Affirmed.
SHARPNACK, J., and BARNES, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  We heard oral argument in this case on March 6, 2006 in the Court of Appeals court-room. We hereby commend counsel for their presentations.